ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
The City of Sacramento recognizes the importance
of increasing individual wealth and creating
employment opportunities while at the same time
generating sufficient revenues for the City to develop
facilities and provide services and community
amenities. The growth provided for in Sacramento’s
2035 General Plan presents an important opportunity
to improve the city’s quality of life, reshape its
economy, and enhance its role as a great place to work
and do business. The city’s economic development
activities must focus within this context.
The Economic Development Element responds
to current business trends and future changes in
economic conditions as the City takes actions to
achieve its vision as America’s most livable city. The
policies in the Economic Development Element
provide for the retention and expansion of existing
businesses and attraction of new businesses
to increase investment and job opportunities
for Sacramento. The policies also address the
development of an educated and skilled workforce
through training opportunities for existing residents
and the attraction of new talent to the city.
                                                       Page 2-145

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-146                       Adopted March 3, 2015
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : Business Climate
                                                                                                             ED 1
Business Climate
GOAL ED 1.1
Business Climate. Maintain a supportive business climate that increases the
City’s ability to retain and expand existing businesses and attract businesses.
Policies
ED 1.1.1	             Economic Development Strategy. The City shall
                      maintain and implement the Economic Development
                      Strategy to identify priorities, support prosperity, and
                      improve long-term fiscal competitiveness. (MPSP)
ED 1.1.2	             City Image. The City shall continue to promote
                      Sacramento among its citizens and the wider business
                      community as a livable community and an excellent place
                      to do business. (PI)
ED 1.1.3	             Economic Development Partnerships. The City
                      shall partner with economic development organizations
                      and businesses to improve and advance Sacramento’s
                      economic development climate. (JP)
ED 1.1.4	             Small and Startup Business Assistance. The City shall
                      assist small and startup businesses with resource referrals
                                                                                  The City’s Economic Development
                      and financial and technical assistance to facilitate their  Strategy is a framework that sets
                      expansion and job creation. (SO)                            out new market-driven directions,
                                                                                  engages all stakeholders, acts locally
ED 1.1.5	             Tourism and Related Businesses. The City shall              and thinks regionally, and creates new
                      continue to work with the Sacramento Convention             complementary advantages.
                      and Visitors Bureau (SCVB), the Metro Chamber, and
                      interested stakeholders to expand local amenities and to
                      market Sacramento as a tourist destination and convention
                      venue. (JP/PI)
ED 1.1.6	             Environmentally Sustainable, Green Technology,
                      and Clean Technology Businesses . The City shall
                      attract and retain environmentally conscious businesses
                      that contribute to the long-term, economic and
                      environmental sustainability of Sacramento. (JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-147

                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Hotel located near Old Sacramento and ED 1.1.7	 Sustainable Business Program . The City shall
the State Capitol that accommodates
tourists and business travelers.
                                                support ongoing efforts of the Business Environmental
                                                Resource Center (BERC) efforts to advance sustainable
                                                business programs. (JP)
 Page 2-148                                                                          Adopted March 3, 2015

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : Business Climate
                                                                  ED 1
                                    page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                              Page 2-149
                                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Photograph courtesy of Steve McKay, Sacramento State
Page 2-150                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : Workforce
                                                                                                             ED 2
Workforce
Policies in this section seek to facilitate workforce skill development by
coordinating with educators, workforce development agencies, and leaders
from the business community to meet the workforce demand of the region.
In a knowledge-based economy, the skills of the local workforce are a
region’s greatest competitive resource and advantage.
GOAL ED 2.1
Workforce. Link workforce training programs to Sacramento businesses
and support new training initiatives that meet the local employment needs
of businesses.
Policies
ED 2.1.1	            Higher Education and Local Economy. The City
                     shall work with local organizations, (e.g. Sacramento
                     Employment and Training Agency (SETA) and NextEd
                     and higher education institutions) to develop links between
                     public and private providers of primary, secondary, and
                     post-secondary education, and local businesses and
                     industries to promote educational programs relevant to
                     the needs of the local economy. (JP/PI)
ED 2.1.2	            Attraction of Key Technical Institutions. The City
                     shall identify and seek to attract public and private
                     technical institutions, such as those with specialized
                     training programs in arts, trade, and technical subjects
                     that meet the workforce requirements of Sacramento
                     businesses. (JP)
ED 2.1.3	            Attract and Retain Skilled Workers. The City shall
                     work to improve the quality of life in the city to retain
                     existing skilled workers and attract skilled workers from
                     beyond the region. (MPSP)
                                                                                 Sacramento State provides access to
                                                                                 quality education and produces college
                                                                                 graduates that are ready to join the
                                                                                 workforce.
                                                                                 Photograph courtesy of
                                                                                 Mary Weikert, Sacramento State
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-151

                                                                           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Twelve story office building located in South Natomas along Interstate 5.
Page 2-152                                                                                       Adopted March 3, 2015
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : Place
                                                                                                                  ED 3
Place
Policies in this section ensure that there are suitable areas and sites with
adequate infrastructure throughout the city for new and expanding businesses
including technology and sustainable businesses. This includes proactively
identifying and marketing areas of the city for economic growth and ensuring
adequate infrastructure is in place to facilitate economic growth.
GOAL ED 3.1
                                                                                       See the Land Use and Urban Design
Land, Sites, and Opportunity Areas. Retain, attract, expand, and develop
                                                                                       Element for additional policies related to
businesses by providing readily available and suitable sites with appropriate          growth and development.
zoning and access.
Policies
ED 3.1.1	            Land Supply Inventory. The City shall maintain
                     adequate developable sites to meet projected employment
                     needs, including land to satisfy retail, office, and industrial
                     demands. (MPSP/SO)
ED 3.1.2	            Land Readiness. The City shall work with property
                     owners to remove obstacles to development on identified
                     opportunity areas. (MPSP)	
ED 3.1.3	            Key Infill and Opportunity Areas. The City shall
                     facilitate and promote economic development projects in
                     key infill and opportunity areas. (MPSP)
                                                                                     Manufacturing and receiving warehouse
                                                                                     use in Robla area in northern
                                                                                     Sacramento.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                               Page 2-153

                                                    Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
UC Davis Medical Center. ED 3.1.4	 University Research Parks. The City shall work with
                                   public and private universities to explore development
                                   of a technology/research park with ties to educational
                                   institutions. (IGC/JP)
                         ED 3.1.5	 Businesses Working in Key Industry Sectors. The City
                                   shall work with universities, Sacramento Area Commerce
                                   and Trade Organization (SACTO), and other groups
                                   to encourage businesses identified in the Economic
                                   Development Strategy to locate in Sacramento. (IGC/JP)
                         ED 3.1.6	 Business Improvement Districts and Commercial
                                   Corridors. The City shall support business improvement
                                   districts (PBIDs and BIDs) in attracting private investment
                                   and resolving public service issues. (SO)
                         ED 3.1.7	 Infrastructure and Public Facilities. The City shall
                                   continue to identify, construct, and maintain infrastructure
                                   systems and facilities required to attract and sustain
                                   businesses. (MPSP/SO)
 Page 2-154                                                                Adopted March 3, 2015

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : Place
                                                                                                         ED 3
                                                                               The Florin Road Partnership was the
                                                                               first business improvement district on a
                                                                               commercial corridor in California.
ED 3.1.8	            Streamline Development Process. The City shall
                     continue to identify, develop, and implement strategies,
                     and programs, and processes that streamline its
                     development review process. (MPSP)
ED 3.1.9	            Tech Businesses . The City shall recruit technology
                     businesses (e.g., green technology and research and
                     development) in key target industries. (MPSP/PSR)
ED 3.1.10	           Civic Amenities. The City shall support and encourage
                     the development of civic amenities, entertainment venues,
                     and convention opportunities that increase visitation,
                     spending and tourism in Sacramento. (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                      Page 2-155

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-156                       Adopted March 3, 2015
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : Participation and Leadership
                                                                               ED 4
Participation and
Leadership
Policies in this section seek to leverage resources of entities throughout the
city and region to support and implement the goals of the 2035 General
Plan and Economic Development Element. This includes the integration of
City departments to meet Sacramento’s economic goals, as well as the City’s
assumption of a prominent leadership role in implementing key regional
initiatives.
GOAL ED 4.1
Leadership. Provide leadership locally and regionally to achieve the region’s
economic goals.
Policies
ED 4.1.1	            City Role in Economic Initiatives. The City shall
                     actively participate in regional economic development
                     initiatives such as the Next Economy, the Metro
                     Chamber’s Economic Development Committee, Civic
                     Amenities Strategy, and Metro Pulse Program. (IGC/JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                           Page 2-157

                                                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 The City of Sacramento is committed to
 providing accountable, transparent, fair,
 and streamlined services to our customers.
 This move toward improved customer service
 is built upon the goals of streamlining
 programs and processes for efficiency,
 planning for and promoting appropriate
 economic     development,     encouraging
 employees to become problem solvers rather
 than regulators, and improving internal
 organizational structures.
                                            ED 4.1.2	 Strong City and Business Relationship. The City
                                                      shall project a helpful, positive, and courteous customer
                                                      service attitude and approach toward businesses. (SO)
                                            ED 4.1.3	 Public/Private Partnerships. The City shall support
                                                      and encourage public/private partnerships and other
                                                      efforts to implement the key development projects that
                                                      meet the City’s economic development goals. (IGC/JP)
                                            ED 4.1.4	 Regional Marketing Activities. The City shall actively
                                                      participate in regional marketing activities by coordinating
                                                      its efforts with economic development agencies in the
                                                      region. (IGC/JP)
                                            ED 4.1.5	 Regional Transportation Facilities. The City shall
                                                      work with the Sacramento International Airport, Port
                                                      of Sacramento, Regional Transit, Caltrans, and railroad
                                                      companies to market and support continued improvement
                                                      of major transportation facilities serving Sacramento
                                                      businesses. (IGC)
                      Port of Sacramento.
Page 2-158                                                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : Participation and Leadership
                                                                    ED 4
                                      page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                Page 2-159
EDUCATION, RECREATION,
AND CULTURE
The City of Sacramento recognizes the importance
of providing quality education, cultural services, and
recreation and parks in making Sacramento a great
place to live and do business. Access to education,
good jobs, active recreational opportunities, and
participation in the arts enhances the city’s livability
for residents. In addition, a skilled workforce and
an engaging cultural environment are important in
attracting new industries to the community to keep
the city’s economy healthy.
                                                         Page 2-253

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-254                       Adopted March 3, 2015
EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Education
                                                                                                                ERC 1
Education
Policies in this section provide for the development of new schools
commensurate with population growth that are accessible from every
neighborhood. Opportunities for life-long learning are encouraged, enabling
Sacramento’s residents to obtain skills to meet the needs of evolving business
sectors. Schools are encouraged to be located and designed to serve as a
centerpiece of neighborhood identity and activity.
GOAL ERC 1.1
Efficient and Equitable Distribution of Facilities. Provide efficient
and equitable distribution of quality educational facilities for life-long
learning and development of a highly skilled workforce that will strengthen
Sacramento’s economic prosperity.                                                 Sacramento City College Learning
                                                                                  Resource Center.
Policies
ERC 1.1.1	           School Locations. The City shall work with school
                                                                                    See LU    8, Public/Quasi-Public and
                     districts at the earliest possible opportunity to provide
                                                                                    Special Uses for additional policies on
                     school sites and facilities that are located in the            schools and school locations.
                     neighborhoods they serve. (IGC)
ERC 1.1.2	           Locational Criteria. The City shall continue to assist
                     in reserving school sites based on each school district’s
                     criteria and the school siting guidelines of the California
                     Department of Education and on the City’s following
                     location criteria:
                     ■■  Locate elementary schools on sites that are safely and
                         conveniently accessible, and away from heavy traffic,
                         excessive noise, and incompatible land uses.
                     ■■  Locate school sites centrally with respect to their      Elementary school in the Tahoe Park
                         planned attendance areas.                                neighborhood.
                     ■■  Locate schools in areas where established and/or
                         planned walkways, bicycle paths, or greenways link
                         schools with surrounding uses.
                     ■■  Locate, plan, and design new schools to be compatible
                         with adjacent uses. (RDR/IGC)
ERC 1.1.3	           Schools in Urban Areas. The City shall work with school
                     districts in urban areas to explore the use of existing
                     smaller sites to accommodate lower enrollments, and/
                     or higher intensity facilities (e.g., multi-story buildings,
                     underground parking, and playgrounds on roofs). (IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-255

                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           ERC 1.1.4	       Joint-Use Development. The City shall work with
                            school districts and institutions of higher education to
                            explore opportunities for joint-use development that
                            integrates uses for recreation, cultural, and non-school-
                            related activities at new and existing facilities. (IGC)
           ERC 1.1.5	       Higher Education. The City shall encourage and
                            support the development, expansion, and upgrade of
                            higher education facilities such as community colleges,
                            California State University, and private universities. (IGC)
           ERC 1.1.6	       Higher Education and K–12 School Districts. The
                            City shall encourage higher education institutions to
                            strengthen their links with local K–12 school districts to
                            facilitate the transfer of students into these institutions.
                            (IGC)
           Cosumnes River Community College opened in 1970.
Page 2-256                                                           Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Education
                                                                                ERC 1
ERC 1.1.7	           Multi-University Campus. The City shall cooperate
                     with systems of higher education to explore the future
                     possibility of a multi-university campus. (IGC)
ERC 1.1.8	           Research and Development Parks with Universities.
                     The City shall support the growth of research and
                     development businesses and organizations associated
                     with universities that enhance the education and diversity
                     of the Sacramento population. (IGC)
ERC 1.1.9	           School Financing Plans. The City shall assist school
                     districts with school financing plans and methods
                     to provide permanent schools in existing and newly
                     developing areas in the City. (IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                            Page 2-257

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-258                       Adopted March 3, 2015
EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                             ERC 2
Parks and Recreation
Policies in this section provide for the maintenance of existing facilities and
for the development of new parkland, facilities, and programs throughout
the city to enable access from neighborhoods. In higher density areas,
such as downtown, small public places will be developed to support the
lifestyle and needs of residents. In addition, Sacramento’s riverfronts and
natural open spaces will be linked to enhance opportunities for walking,
bicycling, picnicking, participating in water sports, and appreciating natural
open spaces and conservation areas. Access to a broad range of recreational
activities is important to improving public health through exercise. The
location of schools and their recreational facilities can serve as a focal point
of neighborhood identity and activity. Parklands also help to sustain natural
environmental resources by providing landscapes that absorb greenhouse
gases, produce oxygen, and filter pollutants into the groundwater basin.
GOAL ERC 2.1
Integrated Parks and Recreation System. Provide an integrated system of          See LU 9, Open Space, Parks, and
                                                                                 Recreation, for additional policies on parks
parks, open space areas, and recreational facilities that are safe and connect
                                                                                 and recreation facilities and locations.
the diverse communities of Sacramento.
Policies
ERC 2.1.1	           Complete System. The City shall develop and maintain
                     a complete system of parks and open space areas
                     throughout Sacramento that provide opportunities for
                     both passive and active recreation. (MPSP/SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-259

                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                           ERC 2.1.2	        Connected Network. The City shall connect all parts
                                                             of Sacramento through integration of recreation and
                                                             community facilities with other public spaces and rights-
                                                             of-way (e.g., buffers, medians, bikeways, sidewalks, trails,
                                                             bridges, and transit routes) that are easily accessible by
                                                             alternative modes of transportation. (MPSP)
                                           GOAL ERC 2.2
                                           Parks, Community and Recreation Facilities and Services. Plan
                                           and develop parks, community and recreation facilities, and services that
A pedestrian walkway connects
                                           enhance community livability; improve public health and safety; are equitably
the Sacramento State campus to
surrounding businesses and residences.     distributed throughout the city; and are responsive to the needs and interests
                                           of residents, employees, and visitors.
     Universal playground, accessible to   Policies
         people of all ages and abilities.
                                           ERC 2.2.1	        Parks and Recreation Master Plan. The City shall
                                                             maintain and implement a Parks and Recreation Master
                                                             Plan to carry out the goals and policies of this General
                                                             Plan. All new development will be consistent with the
                                                             applicable provisions of the Parks and Recreation Master
                                                             Plan. (MPSP)
                                           ERC 2.2.2	        Timing of Services. The City shall ensure that the
                                                             development of parks and community and recreation
                                                             facilities and services keeps pace with development and
                                                             growth within the city. (MPSP/SO)
 Page 2-260                                                                                           Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Parks and Recreation
                                                                                   ERC 2
ERC 2.2.3	           Service Level Radius. The City shall strive to provide
                     accessible public park or recreational open space within
                     one-half mile of all residences. (MPSP/SO)
ERC 2.2.4	           Park Acreage Service Level Goal. The City shall strive
                     to develop and maintain 5 acres of neighborhood and
                     community parks and other recreational facilities/sites
                     per 1,000 population. (MPSP/SO)
ERC 2.2.5	           Meeting Service Level Goal. The City shall require
                     new residential development to meet its fair share of the
                     park acreage service level goal by either dedicating land
                     for new parks, paying a fair share of the costs for new
                     parks and recreation facilities or renovation of existing
                     parks and recreation facilities. For new development
                     in urban areas where land dedication or acquisition is
                     constrained by a lack of available suitable properties (e.g.,
                     the Central City), new development shall either construct
                     improvements or pay fees for existing park and recreation
                     enhancements to address increased use. Additionally, the
                     City shall identify and pursue the best possible options
                     for park development, such as joint use, regional park
                     partnerships, private open space, acquisition of parkland,
                     and use of grant funding. (RDR/MPSP/FB)
ERC 2.2.6	           Urban Park Facility Improvements. In urban areas
                     where land dedication is not reasonably feasible (e.g., the
                     Central City), the City shall explore creative solutions to
                     provide neighborhood park and recreation facilities (e.g.,
                     provision of community-serving recreational facilities in
                     regional parks) that reflect the unique character of the
                     area. (MPSP)
ERC 2.2.7	           Public Parkland Preservation. The City shall ensure
                     that any public parkland converted to nonrecreational
                     uses is replaced to serve the same community, consistent
                     with California’s Public Park Preservation Act of 1971
                     (Public Resources Code Section 5401). (RDR/MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                               Page 2-261

                                                                          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                               ERC 2.2.8	 Capital Investment Priorities. The City shall give
                                                          priority to the following parks and recreation capital
                                                          investments:
                                                          ■■ Acquiring land for or constructing parks and recreation
                                                             facilities where adopted Service Level Goals are not
                                                             being met
                                                          ■■ Acquiring, restoring and preserving large natural areas
                                                             for habitat protection and passive recreation use such
                                                             as walking, hiking, and nature study
                                                          ■■ Acquiring and developing areas for recreation use and
                                                             public access along the banks of the American and
                                                             Sacramento Rivers
                                                          ■■ Building and improving parks and facilities to ensure
                                                             safety for users and adjacent properties (MPSP/FB)
  As land becomes scarce in developed
             areas, traditional park space
         that is larger in size will become
  increasingly difficult to provide for infill
developments; thus, small public places
   will need to be provided to help meet
            future recreational demands.
                                               ERC 2.2.9	 Small Public Places for New Development. The City
                                                          shall allow new development to provide small plazas,
                                                          pocket parks, civic spaces, and other gathering places that
                                                          are available to the public, particularly in infill areas, to
                                                          help meet recreational demands. (RDR)
 Page 2-262                                                                                       Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                          ERC 2
ERC 2.2.10	          Range of Experience. The City shall provide a range
                     of small to large parks and recreational facilities. Larger
                     parks and complexes should be provided at the city’s
                     edges and along the rivers as a complement to smaller
                     sites provided in areas of denser development. (MPSP)
ERC 2.2.11	          On-Site Facilities. The City shall promote and provide
                     incentives such as density bonuses or increases in building
                     height for large-scale development projects to provide
                     on-site recreational amenities and gathering places that
                     are available to the public. (RDR)
ERC 2.2.12	          Compatibility with Adjoining Uses. The City shall
                     ensure that the location and design of all parks, recreation,
                     and community centers are compatible with existing
                     adjoining uses. (RDR)
ERC 2.2.13	          Surplus or Underutilized Land. The City shall consider
                     acquiring or using surplus, vacant, or underutilized
                     parcels or abandoned buildings for public recreational
                     use. (MPSP/FB)
ERC 2.2.14	          Youth “Friendliness.” The City shall provide parks
                     and facilities for youth between the ages of 10 and 18 to
                     ensure safe gathering places for their recreation. (RDR/
                     MPSP)
ERC 2.2.15	          Aging Friendly Community. The City shall develop
                     facilities that support continuing engagement, foster the
                     personal enrichment and independence of older residents,
                     and reflect the needs of Sacramento’s aging population
                     within the community. (SO)
ERC 2.2.16	          Organized Sports Facilities. The City shall develop           Youth basketball camp.
                     facilities (e.g., multi-field complexes) for a variety of
                     organized sports. (MPSP)
ERC 2.2.17	          Joint-Use Facilities Co-located. The City shall support
                     the development of parks and recreation facilities co-
                     located with public and private facilities (e.g., schools,
                     libraries, and detention basins). (IGC/JP)
ERC 2.2.18	          Private Commercial Recreational Facilities. The City
                     shall encourage the development of private commercial
                     recreational facilities to help meet recreational interests
                     of Sacramento’s residents, workforce, and visitors. (RDR/
                     JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                      Page 2-263

                                                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
              Located in the South Area,
          the Bing Maloney Golf Course
           Complex provides an 18-hole
         municipal course with a driving
     range and practice putting greens.
                                          ERC 2.2.19	 Municipal Golf Courses. The City shall support the
                                                      maintenance of and reinvestment in municipal golf
                                                      courses, to foster a sense of community pride, ensure the
                                                      City’s courses remain competitive in the marketplace, and
                                                      encourage play. (SO/FB)
                                          ERC 2.2.20	 Responsiveness to Community. The City shall work
                                                      with affected neighborhoods in the design of parks
                                                      and recreational facilities to meet the unique needs and
                                                      interests of residents (e.g., providing for cultural heritage
                                                      gardens and teen centers). (PI)
A Sacramento area YMCA offers youth
and teen activities; fitness and aquatics
      classes; day, summer, and sports
       camps; and childcare programs.
 Page 2-264                                                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                          ERC 2
GOAL ERC 2.3
Recreational Programs. Support recreation and community service
programs that promote wellness, fun, lifelong learning, skill development,
personal enrichment, and positive relationships.
Policies
ERC 2.3.1	           Interpretation and Celebration. The City shall provide
                     recreation programming, special events and venues, and
                     educational opportunities that honor, interpret, and
                     celebrate the diversity, history, cultural heritage, and
                     traditions of Sacramento. (MPSP/SO/PI)
GOAL ERC 2.4
                                                                                A baseball diamond with specialized
Rivers, Creeks, and Natural Resource Areas. Provide positive recreational       surface that enables people of all
                                                                                abilities access to play.
experiences and enjoyment of nature through the development, maintenance,
patrol, and preservation of the rivers, creeks, and natural resource areas,
while maximizing the use of these areas through partnerships with other
agencies.
Policies
ERC 2.4.1	           Service Levels. The City shall provide 0.5 linear mile of
                     parks/parkways and trails/bikeways per 1,000 population.
                     (MPSP/SO)
ERC 2.4.2	           Waterway Recreation and Access. The City shall
                     work with regional partners, State agencies, private land
                     owners, and developers to manage, preserve, and enhance
                     the Sacramento and American River Parkways and urban
                     waterways and riparian corridors to increase public access
                     for active and passive recreation. (IGC/JP)
ERC 2.4.3	           Connections to Other Trails. The City shall maintain
                     existing and pursue new connections to local, regional,
                     and state trails. (MPSP/IGC)
                                                                                The Two Rivers Bike Trail provides a
                                                                                bike route along the south side of the
                                                                                American River within the Richards
                                                                                Boulevard area and connections to
                                                                                other local and regional trails.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-265

                                                                         Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                       ERC 2.4.4	        Setbacks from Rivers and Creeks. The City shall
                                                         ensure adequate building setbacks from rivers and
                                                         creeks, increasing them where possible to protect natural
                                                         resources. (RDR)
                                       GOAL ERC 2.5
                                       Funding. Secure adequate and reliable funding for the acquisition,
                                       development, rehabilitation, programming, and maintenance of parks,
                                       community facilities, recreation facilities, trails, parkways, and open space
                                       areas.
                                       Policies
                                       ERC 2.5.1	        Multiple Tools. The City shall use a broad range of
                                                         funding and economic development tools to ensure high-
                                                         quality development, maintenance, and programming of
                                                         the City parks and recreation system. (FB)
                                       ERC 2.5.2	        River Parkways. The City shall coordinate with
                                                         Sacramento County and other agencies and organizations
                                                         to secure funding to patrol, maintain, and enhance the
                                                         American River and Sacramento River Parkways. (FB/
                                                         IGC/JP)
 Recreational multi-use path along the
                    Sacramento River.
Page 2-266                                                                                         Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Parks and Recreation
                                                                               ERC 2
ERC 2.5.3	           Property Acquisition. The City shall secure funding
                     for property acquisitions that can be accessed quickly to
                     respond to opportunities. (FB)
ERC 2.5.4	           Capital Funding. The City shall fund the costs of
                     acquisition and development of City neighborhood and
                     community parks, and community and recreation facilities
                     through land dedication, in lieu fees, and/or development
                     impact fees. (FB)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                           Page 2-267

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-268                       Adopted March 3, 2015
EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Libraries
                                                                                                                 ERC 3
Libraries
Policies in this section provide for the expansion of library resources and
new facilities commensurate with population growth, which creates a civic
environment with vast opportunities for learning and cultural and academic
enrichment. In addition to providing books, music, ebooks, computer access
and other resources, they also can serve as multi-functional facilities, gathering
places for programs, and cultural centers for performances and community
events. In new development, they can be co-located with schools, parks and
community centers to function as a centerpiece of neighborhood identity.
                                                                                   The Colonial Heights Public Library,
                                                                                   located in the Fruitridge Broadway
                                                                                   Area, includes a homework center,
                                                                                   college and career center, and a
                                                                                   community room for community group
                                                                                   meetings and activities.
GOAL ERC 3.1
Adequate Library Facilities. Provide adequate library facilities that                See LU     8, Public/Quasi-Public and
                                                                                     Special Uses for additional policies on
enhance Sacramento’s quality of life and create a civic environment with
                                                                                     libraries and library locations.
vast opportunities for self-learning and cultural and academic enrichment.
Policies
ERC 3.1.1	           Adequate Services and Facilities. The City shall ensure
                     adequate library services and facilities are maintained for
                     all residents. (MPSP/SO)
ERC 3.1.2	           Library Siting. The City shall promote the siting of
                     libraries in higher-density and infill areas along major
                     arterials and transit service routes to provide convenient
                     access to Sacramento residents. (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                Page 2-269

                                                                     Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
   The Martin Luther King Jr. Regional
     Public Library, located in the South
    Area, includes a special Samuel C.
   Pannell African American Collection
       established in memory of the late
  Sacramento City Councilman, which
   contains adult fiction and non-fiction
 written by or about African Americans.
                                          ERC 3.1.3	 Under-Served Areas. The City shall give priority to the
                                                     construction of new libraries in communities that are
                                                     deficient in library services, including East Sacramento
                                                     near 65th Street and Folsom Boulevard, North
                                                     Sacramento, and the South Area Community Plan area.
                                                     (RDR/MPSP)
                                          ERC 3.1.4	 Joint Use. The City shall encourage the development
                                                     and use of multi-functional library facilities by public and
                                                     private agencies at locations such as schools, community
                                                     centers, and public-private partnership venues. (MPSP/
                                                     SO/IGC/JP)
Page 2-270                                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Libraries
                                                                                                          ERC 3
                                                                               The Downtown Sacramento Central
                                                                               Public Library & Galleria is a multi-
                                                                               functional facility incorporating meeting
                                                                               space with traditional library uses.
ERC 3.1.5	           Digital Literacy and Access. The City shall encourage
                     access to digital resources and information tools and the
                     development of 21st Century literacy skills. (IGC/PI)
ERC 3.1.6	           Educational Awareness. The City shall promote public
                     awareness of library facilities and services. (PI)
ERC 3.1.7	           Funding. The City, in conjunction with the Sacramento
                     Library Authority, shall explore methods of financing new
                     library facilities and expanding and upgrading existing
                     facilities. (IGC/FB)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-271

                                                                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Fortune Festival, a celebration of Asian and Pacific Islander culture and business.
Page 2-272                                                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015
EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Arts and Culture
                                                                                                                ERC 4
Arts and Culture
Policies in this section support the diversity of arts and cultural facilities
located in Sacramento. Art programs and exhibitions, musical and dramatic
performances, and similar events provide opportunities for the attendance
of residents and visitors, as well as their participation and appreciation. The
inclusion of art in public places broadens the exposure and awareness of
city residents and visitors, and enhances and enriches the community culture
and quality of life.
GOAL ERC 4.1
Diversity of Arts and Cultural Facilities and Programs. Provide a                    See LU    8, Public/Quasi-Public and
                                                                                     Special Uses and ED           1, Business
diversity of arts and cultural facilities and programs for people of all ages
                                                                                     Climate, for additional policies on tourism
to improve knowledge of Sacramento’s history, enhance quality of life, and           and cultural and entertainment uses.
enrich community culture.
Policies
ERC 4.1.1	           Sacramento as the Region’s Cultural Center. The City
                     shall partner with universities and educational institutions,
                     libraries, arts and cultural organizations, and creative
                     individuals and supporters to strengthen the region’s
                     network of cultural resources. (IGC/JP)
ERC 4.1.2	           Accessible Facilities and Programs. The City shall
                     encourage the development of arts and cultural facilities
                     and programs that are accessible to all residents (e.g.,
                     affordable fees and accessible by various travel modes).
                     (MPSP/IGC/JP)
ERC 4.1.3	           City-Owned Resources. The City shall enhance the
                     quality of existing City-owned arts and cultural resources
                     and facilities through reinvestment, communications and
                     marketing. (SO/FB)
ERC 4.1.4	           Downtown Venues for the Region. The City shall explore
                     opportunities to collaborate with other jurisdictions in
                     the region to enhance the visitor experience and support
                     the development and expansion of regional performing
                     arts venues in downtown Sacramento. (IGC)
ERC 4.1.5	           Convention Center. The City shall support renovation          The Sacramento Theatre Company
                     and expansion of Convention Center facilities and             in downtown Sacramento, opened in
                     adjacent supportive infrastructure, including hotels, to      1942, presents public performances
                     attract top-tier national and international events. (SO/FB)   of classical and modern plays in
                                                                                   two theatres with more than 300
                                                                                   performances per year.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                               Page 2-273

                                                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                          ERC 4.1.6	  City Archives. The City shall maintain and enhance
                                                      the City Archives as a unique cultural resource for
                                                      documenting the human experience in Sacramento. (SO)
                                          ERC 4.1.7	  Community Center Theater. The City shall support the
                                                      Community Center Theater, and renovate it into a vibrant,
                                                      attractive facility that provides first class programming.
                                                      (SO)
                                          ERC 4.1.8	  Conservation of Resources. The City shall fund the
                                                      conservation of its art and archival collection and official
                                                      records. (FB)
                          Crest Theater.
       Friday Night Concert in the Park
  event at Cesar Chavez Plaza Park in
                                          ERC 4.1.9	  Citywide Expansion of Resources. The City shall
               downtown Sacramento.                   encourage and support expansion of art and cultural
                                                      events, festivals, activities, and performances throughout
                                                      the city. (SO/IGC/JP)
                                          ERC 4.1.10	 Partnerships to Increase Programs. The City shall
                                                      encourage partnerships among arts and cultural groups,
                                                      community organizations, and the business community
                                                      to develop arts and cultural educational activities and
                                                      programming for all ages. (IGC/JP/PI)
                                          ERC 4.1.11	 Programs for Children. The City shall support programs
                                                      and events that introduce children to the arts and provide
                                                      positive outlets to explore their own talents and creativity
                                                      for self-expression. (MPSP/PI)
     The Oak Park Community Center
 provides arts and activities for youths,
                    adults, and seniors.
Page 2-274                                                                                     Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Arts and Culture
                                                                                                          ERC 4
ERC 4.1.12	          Retention of Artists. The City shall encourage artists to
                     live and work in Sacramento. (JP)
ERC 4.1.13	          Maintenance of City-Owned Facilities. The City shall
                     allocate funding to the maintenance of City-owned arts
                     and cultural facilities. (FB)
ERC 4.1.14	          Assistance for Non-City-Owned Facilities. The City
                     shall support efforts to stabilize private and nonprofit
                     arts and cultural organizations so they can maintain and
                     expand their facilities, program, and events. (FB/JP)
ERC 4.1.15	          Grants and Donations. The City shall support the
                     efforts of nonprofit, private, and community-based
                     organizations to apply for public and private grants and
                     encourage donations for arts and cultural activities. (JP)
ERC 4.1.16	          Cultural Institutions. The City shall promote funding
                     for integrated marketing opportunities and partnerships
                     for cultural institutions. (IGC/JP)
ERC 4.1.17	          Contributions to Art in Public Places Program. The
                     City shall encourage private commercial development
                                                                                The B Street Theatre in midtown
                     to contribute at least two percent of a project’s total    Sacramento provides live theater to
                     construction budget to the City’s Art in Public Places     general audiences, families, and school
                     program. (RDR/JP)                                          children.
ERC 4.1.18	          Public Art in New Developments. The City shall
                     encourage private commercial development to include
                     public art in all new buildings. (RDR/JP)
                                                                                Public art at the west entrance of the
                                                                                Sacramento Convention Center.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-275

                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Sacramento Zoo exhibits over 400 animals on 14 acres in William Land Park.
Page 2-276                                                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015
EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Museums, Zoos, and Other Major Destination Attractions
                                                                                                              ERC 5
Museums, Zoos, and
Other Major Destination
Attractions
Policies in this section facilitate the continued operation and new development
of diverse facilities and programs that are accessible to residents and visitors
alike and maintain and strengthen Sacramento’s role as the primary center of
culture in the region. These major destination attractions provide important
local opportunities for residents and school children to learn about history,
science, art, culture, wildlife species, and the environment.
                                                                                 Aerial view of Sutter’s Fort State
                                                                                 Historic Park.
                                                                                 Photograph courtesy of
                                                                                 California State Parks Department
GOAL ERC 5.1
Major Destination Attractions. Maintain and strengthen Sacramento’s
traditional role as the regional center for major destination attractions.
Policies
ERC 5.1.1	            Development and Expansion of Attractions. The
                      City shall support the development and expansion of
                      destination attractions throughout Sacramento including
                      museums, zoos, historic sites, and the Sacramento River
                      and American River waterfronts. (RDR)
ERC 5.1.2	            Zoo. The City shall support renovation and enhancement
                      of the Sacramento Zoo in its current location. (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-277

                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                   ERC 5.1.3	 Educational Activities. The City shall support expanded
                                              educational activities at the city’s cultural facilities (e.g.,
The Sacramento Historic City
                                              Fairytale Town, Sacramento Zoo, Sacramento History
Cemetery, established in 1849, was            Museum, Crocker Art Museum, Powerhouse Science
designed to resemble a Victorian              Center, Old Sacramento, and performing arts venues).
garden and is the oldest existing             (MPSP/JP)
cemetery in Sacramento.
                                   ERC 5.1.4	 Historic City Cemetery. The City shall maintain and
                                              protect the Historic City Cemetery and support its use as
                                              a cultural and educational site. (MPSP)
 Page 2-278                                                                           Adopted March 3, 2015

EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND CULTURE : Museums, Zoos, and Other Major Destination Attractions
                                                                                                          ERC 5
                                                                               The California State Railroad Museum
                                                                               is within the Old Sacramento Historic
                                                                               District and offers railroad heritage
                                                                               experiences and tours to Sacramento
                                                                               residents and visitors.
ERC 5.1.5	           Old Sacramento Historic District. The City shall
                     maintain and protect the Old Sacramento Historic
                     District, as defined in the 1967 Redevelopment Plan,
                     while recognizing its importance for tourism and its role
                     as a commercial district. (RDR/MPSP)
ERC 5.1.6	           Sacramento Marina. The City shall support the
                     enhancement of the Sacramento Marina as a recreational
                     connection to the Sacramento River waterfront. (MPSP/
                     IGC/JP)
ERC 5.1.7	           Funding. The City shall allocate funding for the on-
                     going maintenance, renovation, and programming of
                     City-owned museums, zoos, and other major destination
                     attractions. (SO/FB)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-279

ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSTRAINTS
The City of Sacramento is committed to the
protection of life and property from the risks of
natural and man-made hazards. A safe environment
enhances residents’ quality of life, contributes to
a city’s livability, and is important for attracting
and retaining businesses that help to sustain a
thriving economy. Additional policies that address
response and disaster preparedness for potential
environmental constraints can be found in PHS 4,
Emergency Response and Disaster Preparedness.
                                                     Page 2-339

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-340                       Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS : Seismic and Geologic Hazards
                                                                                                               EC 1
Seismic and Geologic
Hazards
Policies in this section protect the public from seismic and geologic hazards
by requiring enforcement of safety standards, state-of-the-art site design
and construction methods, and mitigation to minimize the impacts of
new development. These policies also require that emergency and post-
disaster response plans be regularly updated and implemented to ensure the
continued safety of Sacramentans.
GOAL EC 1.1
                                                                                See PHS 4, Emergency Response and
Hazards Risk Reduction. Protect lives and property from seismic and
                                                                                Disaster Preparedness, for additional
geologic hazards and adverse soil conditions.
                                                                                policies addressing emergency response
                                                                                and disaster preparedness for potential
Policies                                                                        environmental constraints.
EC 1.1.1	            Review Standards. The City shall regularly review and
                     enforce all seismic and geologic safety standards and
                     require the use of best management practices (BMPs) in
                     site design and building construction methods. (RDR)
EC 1.1.2	            Geotechnical Investigations. The City shall require
                     geotechnical investigations to determine the potential for
                     ground rupture, ground-shaking, and liquefaction due to
                     seismic events, as well as expansive soils and subsidence
                     problems on sites where these hazards are potentially
                     present. (RDR)
                                                                                See LU     8, Public/Quasi-Public and
                                                                                Special Uses, PHS1, Police Service; and
                                                                                PHS 2, Fire Services, for additional
                                                                                policies addressing critical facilities.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-341

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-342                       Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS : Flooding Hazards
                                                                                                                EC 2
Flooding Hazards
Policies in this section protect Sacramento residents by requiring maintenance
of existing natural channel floodplain storage areas and by supporting the
Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency (SAFCA) in implementing projects
that will ultimately provide a 200-year level of flood protection or greater.
New development will be evaluated for potential flood hazards prior to
approval and will be set back a minimum distance from levees to minimize
flooding risk and to allow for future modifications of the system. Flooding
evacuation and rescue maps will be updated regularly. In addition, flooding
hazard policies provide for protection from dam failure.
The General Plan Background Report provides the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), which shows the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) flood zones, for the city of Sacramento and the definition of each
flood zone. The City also maintains a Floodplain Management Ordinance
(Ordinance 2011-046).
                                                                                H Street Bridge during the 1986
                                                                                flood event.
                                                                                Photograph courtesy of
                                                                                Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency
GOAL EC 2.1                                                                        See U   4, Stormwater Drainage, for
                                                                                   additional policies addressing flood control
Flood Protection. Protect life and property from flooding.                         measures.
Policies
EC 2.1.1	             Interagency Flood Management. The City shall
                      work with local, regional, State, and Federal agencies
                      to maintain an adequate information base, prepare risk
                      assessments, and identify strategies to mitigate flooding
                      impacts. (MPSP/IGC)
                                                                                Landside toe of the levee along the
                                                                                American River.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-343

                                                                  Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                      EC 2.1.2	  Regional Flood Management Planning Efforts	. The
                                                 City shall participate in the California Department of
                                                 Water Resources (DWR) Regional Flood Management
                                                 Planning effort for the Lower Sacramento/Delta North
                                                 region. (IGC)
                                      EC 2.1.3	  Interagency Levee Management. The City shall work
                                                 with local, regional, State, and Federal agencies to ensure
                                                 new and existing levees are adequate in providing flood
                                                 protection. (IGC)
Improvements to levee infrastructure.
Photograph courtesy of                EC 2.1.4	  200-year Flood Protection. The City shall work with
Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency
                                                 local, regional, State, and Federal agencies to achieve by
                                                 2025 at least 200-year flood protection for all areas of the
                                                 city. (RDR, MPSP)
                                      EC 2.1.5	  Funding for 200-year Flood Protection. The City
                                                 shall continue to cooperate with local, regional, State,
                                                 and Federal agencies in securing funding to obtain the
                                                 maximum level of flood protection that is practical, with
                                                 a minimum goal of achieving at least 200-year flood
                                                 protection as quickly as possible. (FB/IGC)
                                      EC 2.1.6	  Floodplain Capacity. The City shall preserve urban
                                                 creeks and rivers to maintain existing floodplain capacity.
                                                 (IGC)
                                      EC 2.1.7	  Reservoir Storage Capacity. The City shall partner with
                                                 the Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency to advocate
                                                 for reservoir management practices and reservoir
                                                 improvements that will increase Sacramento’s level of
                                                 flood protection. (IGC)
                                      EC 2.1.8	  Floodplain Requirements. The City shall regulate
                                                 development within floodplains in accordance with
                                                 State and Federal requirements and maintain the City’s
                                                 eligibility under the National Flood Insurance Program.
                                                 (RDR)
                                      EC 2.1.9	  Community Rating System. The City shall maintain
                                                 eligibility in FEMA’s Community Rating System program,
                                                 which gives property owners discounts on flood insurance.
                                                 (MPSP)
                                      EC 2.1.10	 Planned Land Use. The City shall update, as necessary,
                                                 the Land Use and Urban Form Element to reflect current
                                                 floodplain mapping data. (MPSP)
 Page 2-344                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS : Flooding Hazards
                                                                                                                      EC 2
EC 2.1.11	           New Development. The City shall require evaluation of
                     potential flood hazards prior to approval of development
                     projects and shall regulate development in urban and
                     urbanizing areas per state law addressing 200-year level
                     of flood protection. (RDR)
EC 2.1.12	           New Development Design. The City shall require new
                     development located within a special (100-year) flood
                     hazard area to be designed to minimize the risk of damage
                     in the event of a flood. (RDR)                                   See LU 1, Growth and Change, for
                                                                                      additional policies promoting infill
EC 2.1.13	           Levee Certification. The City shall work with SAFCA to           development.
                     achieve by 2025 local-certification of levees for 200-year
                     flood protection. (IGC)
EC 2.1.14	           Levee and Floodway Encroachment Permit. The City
                     shall require applicants to secure an encroachment permit
                     from the Central Valley Flood Protection Board for any
                     project that falls within the jurisdiction regulated by the
                     Board (e.g., levees, designated floodways). (RDR)
EC 2.1.15	           Levee Setbacks for New Development. The City                     See U 4, Stormwater Drainage, for
                     shall require adequate setbacks from flood control levees        additional flood hazard policies addressing
                     consistent with local, regional, State, and Federal design       requirements for new development.
                     and management standards. (RDR/MPSP)
EC 2.1.16	           Levee Trees. The City shall recognize the value of trees
                     on levees for habitat and as carbon sinks and support
                     Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency efforts to
                     develop a levee vegetation policy with the State and U.S.
                     Army Corps of Engineers. (MPSP/IGC)
EC 2.1.17	           Levees for Infill Development. The City shall support
                     the construction of levees that can increase levee stability
                     and improve site characteristics, recreation, and river
                     access where infill development and redevelopment
                     occurs next to a levee. (MPSP/IGC)
EC 2.1.18	           Design and Operation of Critical Facilities. The
                     City shall require that critical facilities (e.g., emergency
                                                                                    Folsom Lake Reservoir and dam facility.
                     command centers, communication facilities, fire and            Photograph courtesy of Sacramento Area
                     police stations) and large public assembly facilities          Flood Control Agency
                     be designed to mitigate potential flood risk to ensure
                     operation during a flood event. The City shall encourage
                     non-City critical facilities (e.g., schools and County, State,   See LU     8, Public/Quasi-Public and
                     and Federal buildings) be designed in a similar fashion.         Special Uses for additional policies
                     (RDR/SO/IGC/JP)                                                  addressing critical facilities.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                 Page 2-345

                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           EC 2.1.19	 Levees Used to Access Developments. The City shall
                      prohibit new development from using levees as a primary
                      access point. (RDR)
           EC 2.1.20	 Roadway Systems as Escape Routes. The City shall
                      require that areas protected from flooding by levees be
                      designed to provide multiple escape routes for residents
                      and access for emergency services in the event of a levee
                      or dam failure. (RDR/MPSP)
           EC 2.1.21	 Unobstructed Access to Levees. The City shall provide
                      unobstructed access, whenever feasible, on City-owned
                      land to levees for maintenance and emergencies and
                      require setbacks and easements for access to levees from
                      private property. (RDR/IGC)
           EC 2.1.22	 Comprehensive Flood Management, Emergency,
                      and Evacuation Plans. The City shall maintain,
                      implement, update, and make available to the public
                      the local Comprehensive Flood Management Plan,
                      Emergency Plans, and Evacuation Plans, which address
                      emergency preparedness, evacuation, hazardous materials,
                      protection of critical facilities, development guidelines,
                      and flood insurance outreach to better protect citizens in
                      the event of a major flood event. (MPSP/IGC)
           EC 2.1.23	 Flooding Evacuation and Rescue Maps. The City
                      shall maintain, update, and make available to the public,
                      as appropriate, current flood evacuation and rescue maps.
                      (MPSP)
           EC 2.1.24	 Flood Risk Notification. The City shall annually notify
                      owners of residential development protected from
                      flooding by a levee and/or subject to inundation in the
                      event of levee failure of the risk. (PI)
           EC 2.1.25	 Deed Notification. The City shall require, for areas
                      protected by levees, all new developments to include a
                      notice within the deed that the property is protected by
                      flooding from a levee and that the property can be subject
                      to flooding if the levee fails or is overwhelmed. (RDR/PI)
           EC 2.1.26	 Flood Insurance. The City shall encourage all residents
                      to purchase flood insurance. (PI)
Page 2-346                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS : Flooding Hazards
                                                                           EC 2
EC 2.1.27	           Climate Change-related Flood Risks . The City
                     shall continue to partner with relevant organizations
                     and agencies when updating FEMA and California
                     Department of Water Resources flood hazard maps
                     and the City’s Comprehensive Flood Management Plan
                     and the County-wide Local Hazard Mitigation Plan to
                     consider of the impacts of urbanization and climate
                     change on long-term flood safety and long-term flood
                     event probabilities. (IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                      Page 2-347

                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Executive Airport in the South Area.
Page 2-348                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS : Noise
                                                                                                             EC 3
Noise
Policies in this section protect residents, businesses, and visitors from noise
hazards by establishing exterior and interior noise standards. Higher exterior
noise standards are allowed for residential infill projects and mixed-use
developments, as long as the interior noise standard is maintained. Mixed-
use projects will be required to mitigate for on-site noise sources to ensure
compatibility of uses. These policies also require construction noise impacts
to be mitigated and require the reduction of noise from vehicles and aircrafts
to protect residents, businesses, and visitors.
Existing noise contours for major sources in Sacramento, which include
motor vehicles on roadways, aircraft at Sacramento International Airport and
Executive Airport, light rail and heavy rail are included in the Background
Report. Future noise contours for roadways, based on projected development
under the 2035 General Plan, are shown in Appendix C.
                                                                                Photograph courtesy of Michael Zwahlen
GOAL EC 3.1
Noise Reduction. Minimize noise impacts on human activity to ensure the
health and safety of the community.
Policies
EC 3.1.1	            Exterior Noise Standards. The City shall require noise
                     mitigation for all development where the projected
                     exterior noise levels exceed those shown in Table EC 1,
                     to the extent feasible. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                          Page 2-349

                                                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Table EC 1	               Exterior Noise Compatibility Standards for Various Land Uses
                                                                                                                     Highest Level of Noise Exposure That Is
                                             Land Use Type                                                             Regarded as “Normally Acceptable” a
                                                                                                                                  (Ldnb or CNELc)
Residential—Low Density Single Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes                                                                          60 dBAd,e
Residential—Multi-familyg                                                                                                             65 dBA
Urban Residential Infill and Mixed-Use Projects
                             h                             i,j
                                                                                                                                      70 dBA
Transient Lodging—Motels, Hotels                                                                                                      65 dBA
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes                                                                                70 dBA
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                                                                           Mitigation based on site-specific study
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports                                                                              Mitigation based on site-specific study
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                                                                                       70 dBA
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries                                                                            75 dBA
Office Buildings—Business, Commercial and Professional                                                                                70 dBA
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture                                                                                     75 dBA
SOURCE: Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, State of California General Plan Guidelines 2003, October 2003
a.	As defined in the Guidelines, “Normally Acceptable” means that the “specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any building involved is of
    normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.”
b.	Ldn or Day Night Average Level is an average 24-hour noise measurement that factors in day and night noise levels.
c.	CNEL or Community Noise Equivalent Level measurements are a weighted average of sound levels gathered throughout a 24-hour period.
d. Applies to the primary open space area of a detached single-family home, duplex, or mobile home, which is typically the backyard or fenced side yard, as measured
    from the center of the primary open space area (not the property line). This standard does not apply to secondary open space areas, such as front yards, balconies,
    stoops, and porches.
e.	dBA or A-weighted decibel scale is a measurement of noise levels.
f.	 The exterior noise standard for the residential area west of McClellan Airport known as McClellan Heights/Parker Homes is 65 dBA.
g. Applies to the primary open space areas of townhomes and multi-family apartments or condominiums (private year yards for townhomes; common courtyards,
    roof gardens, or gathering spaces for multi-family developments).These standards shall not apply to balconies or small attached patios in multistoried multi-family
    structures.
h.	With land use designations of Central Business District, Urban Neighborhood (Low, Medium, or High) Urban Center (Low or High), Urban Corridor (Low or High).
i.	 All mixed-use projects located anywhere in the City of Sacramento
j. See notes d and g above for definition of primary open space areas for single-family and multi-family developments.
                                                             EC 3.1.2	                  Exterior Incremental Noise Standards. The City shall
                                                                                        require noise mitigation for all development that increases
                                                                                        existing noise levels by more than the allowable increment
                                                                                        shown in Table EC 2, to the extent feasible. (RDR)
Page 2-350                                                                                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS : Noise
                                                                                                                                                 EC 3
 Table EC 2	              Exterior Incremental Noise Impact Standards for                                         NOISE TERMINOLOGY
                          Noise-Sensitive Uses (dBA)
    Residences and buildings where people                  Institutional land uses with primarily daytime and
                                                                                                                  Community Noise Equivalent
                  normally sleepa                                             evening usesb                       Level (CNEL). An Ldn with an
                                                                                                                  additional 5 dBA “penalty” for the evening
   Existing Ldn        Allowable Noise Increment         Existing Peak Hour Leq      Allowable Noise Increment
                                                                                                                  hours between 7:00 P.M. and 10:00 P.M.
         45                         8                               45                             12             This is essentially a measure of ambient
         50                         5                               50                              9             noise.
         55                         3                               55                              6
                                                                                                                  Day-Night Average Noise Level
         60                         2                               60                              5             (Ldn). A 24-hour average Leq with a 10
         65                         1                               65                              3             dBA “penalty” added to noise levels during
                                                                                                                  the hours of 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. to
         70                         1                               70                              3             account for increased sensitivity that people
         75                         0                               75                              1             tend to have to nighttime noise. Because
         80                         0                               80                              0
                                                                                                                  of this penalty, the Ldn would always be
                                                                                                                  higher than its corresponding 24-hour Leq
 SOURCE: Federal Transit Administration, Transit Noise Impact and Vibration Assessment, May 2006                  (e.g., a constant 60 dBA noise over 24
 a.	This category includes homes, hospitals, and hotels where a nighttime sensitivity to noise is assumed to be   hours would have a 60 dBA Leq, but a
    of utmost importance.                                                                                         66.4 dBA Ldn).
 b.	This category includes schools, libraries, theaters, and churches where it is important to avoid interference
    with such activities as speech, meditation, and concentration on reading material.
                                                                                                                  dBA. Measurement unit for “a-weighted
                                                                                                                  decibels,” which are commonly used for
EC 3.1.3	                     Interior Noise Standards. The City shall require                                    measuring environmental and industrial
                                                                                                                  noise and the potential hearing damage
                              new development to include noise mitigation to assure
                                                                                                                  associated noise health effects.
                              acceptable interior noise levels appropriate to the land use
                              type: 45 dBA Ldn (with windows closed) for residential,                             Equivalent Energy Noise Level
                              transient lodgings, hospitals, nursing homes and other                              (Leq). Constant noise level that would
                              uses where people normally sleep; and 45 dBA Leq (peak                              deliver the same acoustic energy to the ear
                              hour with windows closed) for office buildings and similar                          of a listener as the actual time-varying
                              uses. (RDR)                                                                         noise would deliver over the same exposure
                                                                                                                  time. No “penalties” are added to any
EC 3.1.4	                     Interior Noise Review for Multiple, Loud Short-Term                                 noise levels during the exposure time; Leq
                              Events. In cases where new development is proposed                                  would be the same regardless of the time of
                              in areas subject to frequent, high-noise events (such as                            day during which the noise occurs.
                              aircraft over-flights, or train and truck pass-bys), the City
                              shall evaluate substantiated noise impacts on any sensitive                         Sound Exposure Level or Single
                                                                                                                  Event Level (SEL). A descriptor
                              receptors from such events when considering whether to
                                                                                                                  used to characterize the severity of short-
                              approve the development proposal, taking into account                               duration sound events. SEL is the time-
                              potential for sleep disturbance, undue annoyance, and                               averaged, constant intensity, A-weighted
                              interruption in conversation, to ensure that the proposed                           sound level over a one-second reference
                              development is compatible within the context of its                                 time that would produce the same sound
                              surroundings. (RDR)                                                                 exposure as the actual time-varying sound
                                                                                                                  over the actual exposure time. In practice,
                                                                                                                  SEL is usually applied in situations were
                                                                                                                  there are multiple sound events, each one
                                                                                                                  having its own characteristic SEL.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                                              Page 2-351

                                                                   Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                      EC 3.1.5	  Interior Vibration Standards. The City shall require
                                                 construction projects anticipated to generate a significant
                                                 amount of vibration to ensure acceptable interior vibration
                                                 levels at nearby residential and commercial uses based on
                                                 the current City or Federal Transit Administration (FTA)
                                                 criteria. (RDR)
                                      EC 3.1.6	  Effects of Vibration. The City shall consider potential
                                                 effects of vibration when reviewing new residential and
                                                 commercial projects that are proposed in the vicinity of
                                                 rail lines or light rail lines. (RDR)
                                      EC 3.1.7	  Vibration. The City shall require an assessment of the
                                                 damage potential of vibration-induced construction
                                                 activities, highways, and rail lines in close proximity to
                                                 historic buildings and archaeological sites and require all
                                                 feasible measures be implemented to ensure no damage
                                                 would occur. (RDR)
                                      EC 3.1.8	  Operational Noise. The City shall require mixed-use,
                                                 commercial, and industrial projects to mitigate operational
                                                 noise impacts to adjoining sensitive uses when operational
                                                 noise thresholds are exceeded. (RDR)
 See ERC 2, Parks and Recreation,
                                      EC 3.1.9	  Compatibility with Park and Recreation Uses. The
 for additional policies on parks and            City shall limit the hours of operation of parks and
 recreation.                                     active recreation areas in residential areas to minimize
                                                 disturbance to residences. (RDR/SO)
                                      EC 3.1.10	 Construction Noise. The City shall require development
                                                 projects subject to discretionary approval to assess
                                                 potential construction noise impacts on nearby sensitive
                                                 uses and to minimize impacts on these uses, to the extent
                                                 feasible. (RDR)
                                      EC 3.1.11	 Alternatives to Sound Walls. The City shall encourage
                                                 the use of design strategies and other noise reduction
                                                 methods along transportation corridors in lieu of sound
                                                 walls to mitigate noise impacts and enhance aesthetics.
                                                 (RDR)
Page 2-352                                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS : Noise
                                                                                                          EC 3
GOAL EC 3.2
Airport Noise. Minimize exposure to high noise levels in areas of the city
affected by Mather, Executive, McClellan, and Sacramento International
Airports.
Policies
EC 3.2.1	            Land Use Compatibility. The City shall restrict new        See LU 4, Neighborhoods, and M 4,
                     residential development within the 65 dBA CNEL airport     Roadways, for additional policies on
                     noise contour, or in accordance with plans prepared by the residential streets, connectivity, and
                     Airport Land Use Commission, and shall only approve        roadways.
                     noise-compatible land uses. (RDR)
EC 3.2.2	            Hazardous Noise Protection. The City shall discourage
                     outdoor activities or uses in areas outside the 70 dBA
                     CNEL airport noise contour where people could be
                     exposed to hazardous noise levels. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                       Page 2-353

                                         Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           page left intentionally blank
Page 2-354                                                     Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL
RESOURCES
The City of Sacramento values environmental
resources and is committed to the protection of its
water, biological species and habitat, urban forest,
agricultural land, mineral resources, air, and scenic
amenities. Preservation of these environmental
resources and maintenance of their quality is not
only beneficial to current residents but is crucial to
the welfare of future generations.
                                                       Page 2-309
                                                                                  Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  A bioswale in a parking lot that is designed to remove silt and pollution from surface water runoff.
Page 2-310                                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Water Resources
                                                                                                       ER 1
Water Resources
Policies in this section guide development and infrastructure practices to
ensure protection of surface water and groundwater quality from runoff
and pollution. Clean water is essential in sustaining present and future
generations, as well as, fisheries, plants, and animals that are a part of the
ecosystem.
                                                                               The confluence of the American River
                                                                               and Sacramento River.
GOAL ER 1.1
Water Quality Protection. Protect local watersheds, water bodies and
groundwater resources, including creeks, reservoirs, the Sacramento and
American Rivers, and their shorelines.
Policies
ER 1.1.1	            Conservation of Open Space Areas . The City shall
                     conserve and where feasible create or restore areas that
                     provide important water quality benefits such as riparian
                     corridors, buffer zones, wetlands, undeveloped open
                     space areas, levees, and drainage canals for the purpose
                     of protecting water resources in the city’s watershed,
                     creeks, and the Sacramento and American rivers. (RDR/
                     MPSP)
ER 1.1.2	            Regional Planning. The City shall continue to work with
                     local, State, and Federal agencies and private watershed
                     organizations to improve water quality. (IGC/JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                    Page 2-311

                                                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                               ER 1.1.3	 Stormwater Quality. The City shall control sources
  See U   4, Stormwater Drainage, for
  additional policies on stormwater collection
                                                         of pollutants and improve and maintain urban runoff
  and conveyance.                                        water quality through storm water protection measures
                                                         consistent with the City’s National Pollution Discharge
                                                         Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. (RDR/MPSP)
                                               ER 1.1.4	 New Development. The City shall require new
                                                         development to protect the quality of water bodies and
                                                         natural drainage systems through site design (e.g., cluster
                                                         development), source controls, storm water treatment,
                                                         runoff reduction measures, best management practices
                                                         (BMPs) and Low Impact Development (LID), and
                                                         hydromodification strategies consistent with the city’s
                                                         NPDES Permit. (RDR/MPSP/SO)
                                               ER 1.1.5	 Limit Stormwater Peak Flows. The City shall require
                                                         all new development to contribute no net increase in
                                                         stormwater runoff peak flows over existing conditions
                                                         associated with a 100-year storm event. (RDR)
                                               ER 1.1.6	 Post-Development Runoff. The City shall impose
                                                         requirements to control the volume, frequency, duration,
Stream habitat.
                                                         and peak flow rates and velocities of runoff from
                                                         development projects to prevent or reduce downstream
                                                         erosion and protect stream habitat. (RDR/MPSP)
 Page 2-312                                                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Water Resources
                                                                               ER 1
ER 1.1.7	            Construction Site Impacts. The City shall minimize
                     disturbances of natural water bodies and natural drainage
                     systems caused by development, implement measures
                     to protect areas from erosion and sediment loss, and
                     continue to require construction contractors to comply
                     with the City’s erosion and sediment control ordinance
                     and stormwater management and discharge control
                     ordinance. (RDR/MPSP)
ER 1.1.8	            Clean Watershed . The City shall continue ongoing
                     Sacramento and American River source water protection
                     efforts (e.g., Keep Our Waters Clean), based on watershed
                     sanitary survey recommendations. (MPSP/SO)
ER 1.1.9	            Groundwater Recharge . The City shall protect
                     open space areas that are currently used for recharging
                     groundwater basins, have the potential to be used for
                     recharge, or may accommodate floodwater or stormwater.
                     (RDR/MPSP)
ER 1.1.10	           Watershed Education. The City shall implement
                     watershed awareness and water quality educational
                     programs for City staff, community groups, the public,
                     and other appropriate groups. (PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                           Page 2-313

                                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Photograph courtesy of The Natomas Basin Conservancy
Page 2-314                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Biological Resources
                                                                                                                ER 2
Biological Resources
Policies in this section guide the location, design, and quality of development
to protect important biological resources such as wildlife habitat, open
space corridors, and ecosystems. Conservation and protection of important
biological resources are integral to a healthy human population and contribute
to regional economic advantages such as quality of life.
GOAL ER 2.1
Natural and Open Space Protection. Protect and enhance open space,
natural areas, and significant wildlife and vegetation in the city as integral
parts of a sustainable environment within a larger regional ecosystem.
Policies
ER 2.1.1	            Resource Preservation . The City shall encourage new
                     development to preserve on-site natural elements that
                     contribute to the community’s native plant and wildlife
                     species value and to its aesthetic character. (RDR/MPSP)
ER 2.1.2	            Conservation of Open Space . The City shall
                     continue to preserve, protect, and provide appropriate
                     access to designated open space areas along the American
                     and Sacramento Rivers, floodways, and undevelopable
                     floodplains, provided access would not disturb sensitive
                     habitats or species. (MPSP/IGC)
ER 2.1.3	            Natural Lands Management . The City shall promote
                     the preservation and restoration of contiguous areas of
                     natural habitat throughout the city and support their
                     integration with existing and future regional preserves.
                     (RDR/IGC)
ER 2.1.4	            Retain Habitat Areas . The City shall retain plant
                     and wildlife habitat areas where there are known sensitive
                     resources (e.g., sensitive habitats, special-status, threatened,
                     endangered, candidate species, and species of concern).
                     Particular attention shall be focused on retaining habitat
                     areas that are contiguous with other existing natural areas
                     and/or wildlife movement corridors. (RDR/IGC)
                                                                                      Retention of wetland habitat within a
                                                                                      residential neighborhood.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-315

                                                                 Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                       ER 2.1.5	 Riparian Habitat Integrity . The City shall preserve
                                                 the ecological integrity of creek corridors, canals, and
                                                 drainage ditches that support riparian resources by
                                                 preserving native plants and, to the extent feasible,
                                                 removing invasive nonnative plants. If not feasible,
                                                 adverse impacts on riparian habitat shall be mitigated
                                                 by the preservation and/or restoration of this habitat
                                                 in compliance with State and Federal regulations or at a
                                                 minimum 1:1 ratio, in perpetuity. (RDR/IGC)
      American River riparian habitat.
                                       ER 2.1.6	 Wetland Protection . The City shall preserve and
                                                 protect wetland resources including creeks, rivers, ponds,
                                                 marshes, vernal pools, and other seasonal wetlands, to
                                                 the extent feasible. If not feasible, the mitigation of all
                                                 adverse impacts on wetland resources shall be required in
                                                 compliance with State and Federal regulations protecting
                                                 wetland resources, and if applicable, threatened or
                                                 endangered species. Additionally, the City shall require
                                                 either on- or off-site permanent preservation of an
                                                 equivalent amount of wetland habitat to ensure no-net-
                                                 loss of value and/or function. (RDR/IGC)
                                       ER 2.1.7	 Annual Grasslands . The City shall preserve and
                                                 protect native grasslands and vernal pools that provide
                                                 habitat for rare and endangered species. If not feasible,
                                                 the mitigation of all adverse impacts on annual grasslands
                                                 shall comply with State and Federal regulations protecting
                                                 foraging habitat for those species known to utilize this
                                                 habitat. (RDR/IGC)
Page 2-316                                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Biological Resources
                                                                                    ER 2
ER 2.1.8	            Oak Woodlands . The City shall preserve and protect
                     oak woodlands, heritage oaks, and/or significant stands
                     of oak trees in the city that provide habitat for common
                     native, and special-status wildlife species, and shall address
                     all adverse impacts on oak woodlands in accordance with
                     the City’s Heritage Tree Ordinance. (RDR)
ER 2.1.9	            Wildlife Corridors . The City shall preserve, protect,
                     and avoid impacts to natural, undisturbed habitats that
                     provides movement corridors for sensitive wildlife species.
                     If corridors are adversely affected, damaged habitat shall,
                     be replaced with habitat of equivalent value or enhanced
                     to enable the continued movement of species. (RDR/
                     MPSP)
ER 2.1.10	           Habitat Assessments. The City shall consider the
                     potential impact on sensitive plants and wildlife for
                     each project requiring discretionary approval. If site
                     conditions are such that potential habitat for sensitive
                     plant and/or wildlife species may be present, the City
                     shall require habitat assessments, prepared by a qualified
                     biologist, for sensitive plant and wildlife species. If the
                     habitat assessment determines that suitable habitat for
                     sensitive plant and/or wildlife species is present, then
                     either (1) protocol-level surveys shall be conducted
                     (where survey protocol has been established by a
                     resource agency), or, in the absence of established survey
                     protocol, a focused survey shall be conducted consistent
                     with industry-recognized best practices; or (2) suitable
                     habitat and presence of the species shall be assumed to
                     occur within all potential habitat locations identified on
                     the project site. Survey Reports shall be prepared and
                     submitted to the City and the California Department of
                     Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) or the United States Fish and
                     Wildlife Service (USFWS) (depending on the species) for
                     further consultation and development of avoidance and/
                     or mitigation measures consistent with state and federal
                     law. (RDR)
ER 2.1.11	           Agency Coordination. The City shall coordinate with
                     State and Federal resource agencies (e.g., California
                     Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW), U.S. Army
                     Corps of Engineers, and United States Fish and Wildlife
                     Service (USFWS) to protect areas containing rare or
                     endangered species of plants and animals. (IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                Page 2-317

                                                                     Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                         ER 2.1.12	 Natomas Basin Habitat Conservation Plan. The City
                                                    shall continue to participate in and support the policies
                                                    of the Natomas Basin Habitat Conservation Plan for the
                                                    protection of biological resources in the Natomas Basin.
                                                    (RDR/IGC)
                                         ER 2.1.13	 Support Habitat Conservation Plan Efforts. The City
                                                    shall encourage and support regional habitat conservation
                                                    planning efforts to conserve and manage habitat for special-
                                                    status species. New or amended Habitat Conservation
                                                    Plans should provide a robust adaptive management
                                                    component sufficient to ensure that habitat preserves
                                                    are resilient to climate change effects/impacts and to
                                                    ensure their mitigation value over time. Provisions should
                                                    include, but are not limited to: greater habitat ranges and
  Natomas Basin habitat conservation
                                  area.
                                                    diversity; corridors and transition zones to accommodate
                                                    retreat or spatial shifts in natural areas; redundant water
                  Photograph courtesy of
         The Natomas Basin Conservancy              supply; elevated topography to accommodate extreme
                                                    flooding; and flexible management and fee structure.
                                                    (RDR/IGC)
                                         ER 2.1.14	 Climate Change-related Habitat Shifts . The
                                                    City shall support the efforts of The Natomas Basin
                                                    Conservancy and other habitat preserve managers to
                                                    adaptively manage wildlife preserves to ensure adequate
                                                    connectivity, habitat range, and diversity of topographic
                                                    and climatic conditions are provided for species to move
                                                    as climate shifts. (IGC)
                                         ER 2.1.15	 Climate Change-related Habitat Restoration and
                                                    Enhancement . The City shall support active habitat
                                                    restoration and enhancement to reduce impact of climate
                                                    change stressors and improve overall resilience of habitat
                                                    within existing parks and open space in the city. The
                                                    City shall support the efforts of Sacramento County to
                                                    improve the resilience of habitat areas in the American
                                                    River Parkway.
                                         ER 2.1.16	 Public Education. The City shall support educational
                                                    programs for residents and visitors about the uniqueness
                                                    and value of the natural resources, plants, and wildlife
                                                    in the region, and how to manage development to
                                                    preserve native wildlife populations, to the extent they are
                                                    consistent with habitat protection requirements. (PI)
Page 2-318                                                                                   Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Biological Resources
                                                                            ER 2
ER 2.1.17	           Community Involvement. The City shall encourage
                     community volunteerism and stewardship to help protect
                     and rehabilitate the area’s natural resources. (JP/PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                        Page 2-319

                                   Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Photograph courtesy of
 Pictometry International, © 2006.
Page 2-320                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Urban Forest
                                                                                                            ER 3
Urban Forest
Policies in this section sustain and enhance the city’s urban forest, a valuable
environmental resource that distinguishes Sacramento as a “City of Trees”
and greatly benefits city residents. Extensive tree canopies reduce the urban
heat island effect and make streets and sidewalks more pleasant places to
walk. Trees also absorb carbon dioxide and pollution and produce oxygen,
which contributes to improved air quality and human health.
GOAL ER 3.1
                                                                                 See the Land Use and Urban Design
Urban Forest . Manage the city’s urban forest as an environmental,
                                                                                 Element and ERC         2, Parks and
economic, and aesthetic resource to improve Sacramento residents’ quality
                                                                                 Recreation, for additional policies on
of life.                                                                         expansion, preservation, and maintenance
                                                                                 of the urban forest.
Policies
ER 3.1.1	            Urban Forest Management Plan . The City shall
                     maintain and implement an Urban Forest Management
                     Plan. (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-321

                                                                   Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Volunteers plant new trees in a park.
                                        ER 3.1.2	 Manage and Enhance the City’s Tree Canopy .
                                                  The City shall continue to plant new trees, ensure new
                                                  developments have sufficient right-of-way width for tree
                                                  plantings, manage and care for all publicly owned trees,
                                                  and work to retain healthy trees. The City shall monitor,
                                                  evaluate and report, by community plan area and city
                                                  wide, on the entire tree canopy in order to maintain
                                                  and enhance trees throughout the City and to identify
                                                  opportunities for new plantings. (RDR/MPSP/SO)
                                        ER 3.1.3	 Trees of Significance . The City shall require the
                                                  retention of City trees and Heritage Trees by promoting
                                                  stewardship of such trees and ensuring that the design
                                                  of development projects provides for the retention of
                                                  these trees wherever possible. Where tree removal cannot
                                                  be avoided, the City shall require tree replacement or
                                                  appropriate remediation. (RDR/MPSP)
                                        ER 3.1.4	 Visibility of Commercial Corridors . The City shall
                                                  balance the tree canopy of the urban forest with the need
                                                  for visibility along commercial corridors, including the
                                                  selection of tree species with elevated canopies. (RDR)
                                        ER 3.1.5	 Solar Access . The City shall promote plantings and
                                                  tree placement recognizing solar access for alternative
                                                  energy systems may be limited. (RDR/PI)
Page 2-322                                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Urban Forest
                                                                                    ER 3
ER 3.1.6	            Urban Heat Island Effects . The City shall continue
                     to promote planting shade trees with substantial canopies,
                     and require, where feasible, site design that uses trees
                     to shade rooftops, parking facilities, streets, and other
                     facilities to minimize heat island effects. (RDR/PI)
ER 3.1.7	            Shade Tree Planting Program . The City shall
                     continue to provide shade trees along street frontages
                     within the city. (MSPS)
ER 3.1.8	            Public Education . The City shall promote the
                     importance and benefits of trees and of the urban forest
                     through awareness, partnerships, and efforts that educate
                     residents on the best methods of planting and maintaining
                     trees. (IGC/JP/PI)
ER 3.1.9	            Funding . The City shall provide adequate funding
                     to manage and maintain the city’s urban forest on City
                     property, including tree planting, training, maintenance,
                     removal, and replacement. (SO/FB)
View of the California State Capitol through the tree canopy at 18th and Capitol in
midtown Sacramento.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                Page 2-323

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-324                       Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Agriculture
                                                                                                            ER 4
Agriculture
Policies in this section promote access to locally grown and organic food
through urban agriculture, the creation and continuation of Sacramento’s
community and rooftop gardens, and the City’s collaboration with
surrounding jurisdictions and agencies to protect and preserve agricultural
lands and operations outside of the city. Urban agriculture within the city
can make use of vacant land, reconnect residents with the land, and improve
access to fresh healthy foods. Viable local food sources contribute to the
long-term sustainability of Sacramento by supporting local farms, improving
public health, and providing food security in a future challenged by global
climate change and uncertain energy supplies. Agricultural land also provides
other benefits such as habitat, open space, and flood protection as well as
aesthetic value.
GOAL ER 4.1
Urban Agriculture and Access to Locally Grown Foods . Expand
                                                                                  See LU 8, Open Space, Parks, and
urban agriculture and food production and increase the distribution and sale      Recreation, for additional policies on
of locally grown fresh food.                                                      urban agriculture.
Policies
ER 4.1.1	            Community and Rooftop Gardens . The City shall
                     provide incentives for developers to include community
                     gardens and rooftop gardens in new development
                     projects. (RDR/PI)
ER 4.1.2	            Local Food Production, Distribution, and Sale.
                     The City shall promote urban agriculture with zoning
                     provisions that support means for production,
                     distribution, and sale of locally grown foods, such as
                     market gardens, farmer’s markets, community markets,
                     and farm stands, particularly in areas that have vacant or
                     underutilized land.
                                                                                Fremont Community Garden is an
                                                                                example of urban agriculture in
                                                                                downtown Sacramento.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-325

                                                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           Agricultural operations.
                                    GOAL ER 4.2
                                    Growth and Agriculture . Support preservation and protection of
                                    agricultural lands and operations outside of the city for their value for open
                                    space, habitat, flood protection, aesthetics, and food security by working
                                    with surrounding jurisdictions.
                                    Policies
                                    ER 4.2.1	           Protect Agricultural Lands . The City shall encourage
                                                        infill development and compact new development within
                                                        the existing urban areas of the city in order to minimize
                                                        the pressure for premature conversion of productive
                                                        agricultural lands for urban uses. (RDR)
                                    ER 4.2.2	           Permanent Preservation . The City shall work with
                                                        the County, Natomas Basin Conservancy, and other
                                                        entities to protect and permanently preserve a one-mile
                                                        buffer outside of the 2009 City Limits to preserve viable
                                                        agricultural activities and as a community separator
                                                        between Sutter and Sacramento Counties and along the
                                                        Sacramento River. (IGC/JP)
Page 2-326                                                                                     Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Agriculture
                                                                                 ER 4
ER 4.2.3	            Coordinate to Protect Farmland . The City shall
                     continue to work with the County and other adjacent
                     jurisdictions to implement existing conservation plans to
                     preserve prime farmland and critical habitat outside the
                     city. (RDR/IGC)
ER 4.2.4	            Development Adjacent to Agriculture. The City shall
                     require open space or other appropriate buffers for
                     new development abutting productive agricultural areas
                     to protect the viability of active agricultural operations
                     outside of the city and ensure compatibility of uses with
                     residents in adjacent areas. (RDR)
ER 4.2.5	            Homeowner Notification. The City shall require that
                     purchasers of homes located in the vicinity of agricultural
                     operations be provided notification of such activities by
                     way of their deeds and/or escrow documentation. (RDR/
                     PI)
Compatible residential development adjacent to active agriculture lands.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                             Page 2-327

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-328                       Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Mineral Resources
                                                                                                           ER 5
Mineral Resources
Policies in this section provide for the protection of mineral resource zones,
require that ongoing mineral resource extraction activities are compatible
with and minimize impacts on adjoining uses, and support mineral extraction
activities within the city until these resources are depleted or extraction is no
longer economically viable.
GOAL ER 5.1
Conservation and Compatibility. Conserve existing and newly discovered
aggregate deposits for environmentally and community-sensitive extraction
and reclamation, while ensuring compatibility between extraction activity
and surrounding uses.
Policies
ER 5.1.1	            Mineral Resource Zones. The City shall protect
                     lands designated MRZ-2, as mapped by the California
                     Geological Survey, and continue to regulate activities
                     consistent with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act,
                     mineral land classification information, and the California
                     Environmental Quality Act. (RDR)
ER 5.1.2	            Compatible Operations. The City shall require that
                     current and future mineral extraction operations in areas
                     designated MRZ2 be compatible with and minimize
                     impacts on adjoining uses. (RDR)
ER 5.1.3	            Ongoing Extraction Activities. The City shall continue
                     to support ongoing environmentally sensitive mineral
                     extraction activities within the city until these resources
                     are depleted or extraction is no longer economically
                     viable. (RDR)                                                Aggregate mining extraction operations.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                       Page 2-329

                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Photograph courtesy of Michael Zwahlen
Page 2-330                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Air Quality
                                                                                                                ER 6
Air Quality and Climate
Change
Policies in this section provide for air quality improvements and the reduction
of greenhouse gases, which are fundamental objectives that underlie policies      Sacramento recognizes the importance of
throughout the 2035 General Plan. These policies provide land use, mobility,      reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The
energy conservation, and similar strategies that reduce automobile trips,         implementation of policies in ER 6, and
energy consumption, and pollution. Air quality policies provide for the           throughout this Plan will help minimize
management of commercial and industrial uses as well as human activities          the City’s contribution to global climate
to reduce emissions and pollution, while improving human health.                  change.
GOAL ER 6.1
Improved Air Quality . Improve the health and sustainability of the
community through improved regional air quality and reduced greenhouse
gas emissions that contribute to climate change.
Policies
ER 6.1.1	             Maintain Ambient Air Quality Standards . The City
                      shall work with the California Air Resources Board and
                      the Sacramento Metropolitan Air Quality Management
                      District (SMAQMD) to meet State and Federal ambient air
                      quality standards in order to protect residents, regardless
                      of age, culture, ethnicity, gender, race, socioeconomic
                      status, or geographic location, from the health effects of
                      air pollution. (RDR/IGC)
ER 6.1.2	             New Development . The City shall review proposed
                                                                                  See Appendix B, 2035 General Plan:
                      development projects to ensure projects incorporate
                                                                                  Addressing Climate Change, for policies
                      feasible measures that reduce construction and operational  that reduce greenhouse gas emission from
                      emissions for reactive organic gases, nitrogen oxides, and  new development.
                      particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5) through project
                      design. (RDR)
ER 6.1.3	             Emissions Reduction . The City shall require
                                                                                  See the Mobility Element for additional
                      development projects that exceed SMAQMD ROG
                                                                                  policies that reduce emissions and air
                      and NOX operational thresholds to incorporate design        pollution.
                      or operational features that reduce emissions equal to
                      15 percent from the level that would be produced by an
                      unmitigated project. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-331

                                                                 Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                      ER 6.1.4	 Sensitive Uses. The City shall coordinate with SMAQMD
                                                in evaluating exposure of sensitive receptors to toxic air
                                                contaminants, and will impose appropriate conditions on
                                                projects to protect public health and safety. (RDR)
                                      ER 6.1.5	 Community Greenhouse Gas Reductions . The City
                                                shall reduce community GHG emissions by 15 percent
                                                below 2005 baseline levels by 2020, and strive to reduce
                                                community emissions by 49% percent and 83% percent
                                                by 2035 and 2050, respectively. (RDR)
                                      ER 6.1.6	 Municipal Greenhouse Gas Reductions . The City
                                                shall maintain and implement its Phase 1 Climate Action
Mixed-use urban infill development in
                                                Plan to reduce municipal GHG emissions by 22 percent
midtown Sacramento at 18th and L                below 2005 baseline level by 2020, and strive to reduce
Streets.                                        municipal emissions by 49 percent and 83 percent by
                                                2035 and 2050, respectively. (SO)
                                      ER 6.1.7	 Greenhouse Gas Reduction in New Development .
                                                The City shall reduce greenhouse gas emissions from new
                                                development by discouraging auto-dependent sprawl and
                                                dependence on the private automobile; promoting water
                                                conservation and recycling; promoting development that
                                                is compact, mixed use, pedestrian friendly, and transit
                                                oriented; promoting energy-efficient building design and
                                                site planning; improving the jobs/housing ratio in each
                                                community; and other methods of reducing emissions.
                                                (RDR)
                                      ER 6.1.8	 Additional GHG Emission Programs . The City
                                                shall continue to evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness
                                                of new policies, programs, and regulations that contribute
                                                to achieving the City’s long-term GHG emissions
                                                reduction goals. (MPSP)
                                      ER 6.1.9	 Climate Change Assessment and Monitoring . The
                                                City shall continue to assess and monitor performance of
                                                GHG emissions reduction efforts beyond 2020, progress
                                                toward meeting long-term GHG emission reduction
                                                goals, the effects of climate change, and the levels of risk
                                                in order to plan a community that can adapt to changing
                                                climate conditions and be resilient to negative changes
                                                and impacts. (PSR)
 Page 2-332                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Air Quality
                                                                                                              ER 6
ER 6.1.10	           Coordination with SMAQMD . The City shall
                     coordinate with SMAQMD to ensure projects incorporate
                     feasible mitigation measures to reduce GHG emissions
                     and air pollution if not already provided for through
                     project design. (RDR/IGC)
ER 6.1.11	           Reduced Emissions for City Operations . The
                     City shall promote reduced idling, trip reduction, routing
                     for efficiency, and the use of public transportation,
                     carpooling, and alternate modes of transportation for
                     City operations. (SO)
ER 6.1.12	           Fleet Operations . The City shall continue to
                     purchase low-emission vehicles for the City’s fleet and
                     to use available clean fuel sources for trucks and heavy
                     equipment. (SO)
ER 6.1.13	           Zero-Emission and Low-Emission Vehicle Use .
                     The City shall encourage the use of zero-emission vehicles,
                     low-emission vehicles, bicycles and other non-motorized
                     vehicles, and car-sharing programs by requiring sufficient
                     and convenient infrastructure and parking facilities in
                     residential developments and employment centers to
                     accommodate these vehicles. (RDR/PI)
ER 6.1.14	           Preference for Reduced-Emission Equipment . The
                     City shall give preference to contractors using reduced-
                     emission equipment for City construction projects and
                     contracts for services (e.g., garbage collection), as well as
                     businesses that practice sustainable operations. (SO/JP)
ER 6.1.15	           Air Quality Education . The City shall educate the
                     public about air quality standards, health effects, and
                     efforts they can make to improve air quality and reduce
                     greenhouse gas emissions in the Sacramento region. (PI)
                                                                                   Zero emission electric vehicle plugged
                                                                                   into an electrical recharge outlet at a
                                                                                   City of Sacramento parking garage.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-333

                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Spanning the Sacramento River, the Tower Bridge serves as a visual landmark and gateway into the City of Sacramento.
Page 2-334                                                                                           Adopted March 3, 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Aesthetic Resources
                                                                                                      ER 7
Aesthetic Resources
Policies in this section provide for the maintenance and protection of
significant visual and aesthetic resources, which contribute to the identity
and character of Sacramento through sensitive planning and design,
maintenance, and code enforcement efforts.
                                                                             Scenic view from the Jibboom Street
                                                                             Bridge of the American River and
                                                                             Discovery Park.
GOAL ER 7.1
Visual Resource Preservation. Maintain and protect significant visual
resources and aesthetics that define Sacramento.
Policies
ER 7.1.1	            Protect Scenic Views. The City shall avoid or reduce
                     substantial adverse effects of new development on views
                     from public places to the Sacramento and American
                     Rivers and adjacent greenways, landmarks, and the State
                     Capitol along Capitol Mall. (RDR)
ER 7.1.2	            Visually Complimentary Development. The City
                     shall require new development be located and designed
                     to visually complement the natural environment/setting
                     when near the Sacramento and American Rivers, and
                     along streams. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                   Page 2-335

                                                                    Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
          Preservation of existing palm
       trees in right-of-way adjacent to
                       construction site.
                                          ER 7.1.3	 Lighting. The City shall minimize obtrusive light by
                                                    limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive, or
                                                    unnecessary, and requiring light for development to be
                                                    directed downward to minimize spill-over onto adjacent
                                                    properties and reduce vertical glare. (RDR)
                                          ER 7.1.4	 Reflective Glass. The City shall prohibit new development
                                                    from (1) using reflective glass that exceeds 50 percent
                                                    of any building surface and on the bottom three floors,
                                                    (2) using mirrored glass, (3) using black glass that exceeds
                                                    25 percent of any surface of a building, (4) using metal
                                                    building materials that exceed 50 percent of any street-
                                                    facing surface of a primarily residential building, and
                                                    (5) using exposed concrete that exceeds 50 percent of
                                                    any building. (RDR)
Page 2-336                                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES : Aesthetic Resources
                                                                                                              ER 7
ER 7.1.5	            Scenic Resources at River Crossings. The City shall
                     require the style, scale, massing, color, and lighting of new
                     bridges to complement the natural and/or community
                     setting. Design considerations for river crossings will
                     include the degree to which bridges minimize obstruction
                     of scenic views of the river and riparian areas from
                     publically accessible open space areas, including from
                     the river, and enhance the scenic setting by incorporating
                     design features that complement the surrounding area
                     and/or provide high quality and visually interesting
                     design. (RDR)
                                                                                   26-story building at 9th and J Streets in
                                                                                   downtown Sacramento with windows
                                                                                   that are designed to have reduced glare
                                                                                   and reflection.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                          Page 2-337

HISTORIC AND
CULTURAL RESOURCES
The City of Sacramento recognizes the importance
of its historic and cultural resources, which create a
distinct sense of place for residents and visitors, as
well as tell the story that differentiates Sacramento
from other cities. These resources, some over
8,000 years old, reflect the prehistoric and historic
settlement along the Sacramento and American
Rivers. The city played a significant role as a catalyst
for the Gold Rush, as a key center of the railroads
and their role in the western expansion of the United
States, the establishment of the city as California’s
state capital, and the subsequent growth of the state
government. The city was one of the busiest centers
for packing and shipping produce from California’s
Central Valley to the rest of the country. Finally, the
city experienced significant expansion during World
War II and the country’s post-war economic growth.
Preservation of historic and cultural resources
is important to promote understanding between
cultures and because cities with distinctly identifiable
places and history are generally more livable for
residents and more attractive to new businesses that
sustain the economy. Preservation and adaptive re-
use of historic structures also promote sustainability
by reducing the need for new construction materials.
                                                         Page 2-133

                                                                                Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Built in 1914, this prominent building along Broadway in the heart of Oak Park was renovated in 1997 to house U.S. Bank.
Page 2-134                                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015
HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES : Citywide Historic and Cultural Preservation
                                                                                                         HCR 1
Citywide Historic and
Cultural Preservation
Policies in this section provide for identification, protection, and assistance
in the preservation of historic and cultural resources. The policies maintain
a citywide program consistent with the State and Federal Certified Local
Government program and State laws and regulations related to historic and
cultural resources.
GOAL HCR 1.1
Comprehensive City Preservation Program. Maintain a comprehensive,
citywide preservation program to identify, protect, and assist in the
preservation of Sacramento’s historic and cultural resources.
Policies
HCR 1.1.1	           Certified Local Government. The City shall maintain
                     its status as a Certified Local Government (CLG) and
                     use CLG practices as the key components of the City’s
                     preservation program. (RDR/SO)
HCR 1.1.2	           Preservation Office, Commission, and Program. The
                     City shall maintain a Preservation Office, Commission,
                     and program to administer the City’s preservation
                     functions and programs. (RDR/SO)
HCR 1.1.3	           Certified Local Government Requirements. The City
                     shall maintain provisions in the Sacramento City Code for
                     a preservation program consistent with the Federal and
                     State Certified Local Government requirements. (RDR/
                     SO)
                                                                                Built in 1938, the Tower Theater has
                                                                                been preserved and is a Sacramento
                                                                                historical landmark.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                       Page 2-135

                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Memorial Auditorium, opened in 1927, is built in the style best termed Mediterranean Revival. The Auditorium continues to
  be one of the city’s architectural centerpieces.
Page 2-136                                                                                             Adopted March 3, 2015

HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES : Identification and Preservation
                                                                                                            HCR 2
Identification and
Preservation
Policies in this section provide for the identification of historic and cultural
resources and ensure that City, State, and Federal historic preservation laws,
regulations, and codes are implemented. Policies support the City actively
pursuing the identification, protection, and maintenance of historic and
cultural resources, including consultation with appropriate organizations
and individuals early in the planning and development process to identify
opportunities and minimize potential impacts to historic and cultural
resources.
GOAL HCR 2.1
                                                                                  Sacramento Archives & Museum
Identification and Preservation of Historic and Cultural Resources. Identify      Collection Center is the repository and
and preserve the city’s historic and cultural resources to enrich our sense of    research center for the City and County
                                                                                  historic collections and serves the
place and our understanding of the city’s prehistory and history.                 community by acquiring, preserving,
                                                                                  exhibiting, and providing access to the
Policies                                                                          documentary and material culture of the
                                                                                  area.
HCR 2.1.1	           Identification. The City shall identify historic and
                     cultural resources, including individual properties,
                     districts, and sites (e.g., archaeological sites), to ensure
                     adequate protection of these resources. (PSR)
HCR 2.1.2	           Applicable Laws and Regulations. The City shall
                     ensure compliance with City, State, and Federal historic
                     preservation laws, regulations, and codes to protect and
                     assist in the preservation of historic and archaeological    Craftsman style fourplex.
                     resources, including the use of the California Historical
                     Building Code as applicable. Unless listed in the              See Appendix E, Glossary & Acronyms,
                     Sacramento, California, or National registers, the City        for definitions and terminology in
                     shall require discretionary projects involving resources 50    the Historic and Cultural Resources
                                                                                    Element.
                     years and older to evaluate their eligibility for inclusion
                     on the California or Sacramento registers for compliance
                     with the California Environmental Quality Act. (RDR)
HCR 2.1.3	           Consultation. The City shall consult with appropriate
                     organizations and individuals (e.g., California Historical
                     Resources Information System (CHRIS) Information
                     Centers, the Native American Heritage Commission
                     (NAHC), the CA Office of Planning and Research (OPR)
                     “Tribal Consultation Guidelines”, etc.,) and shall establish
                     a public outreach policy to minimize potential impacts to
                     historic and cultural resources. (IGC/JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                          Page 2-137

                                                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                          HCR 2.1.4	  Incentives and Enforcement. The City shall develop
                                                      and support regulatory (e.g., appropriate development and
                                                      zoning standards), technical, and financial incentives (e.g.,
                                                      City, State, Federal, and private grants, loans, easements,
                                                      and tax credits) and enforcement programs to promote
                                                      the maintenance, rehabilitation, preservation, and
                                                      interpretation of the city’s historic and cultural resources.
                                                      (RDR/FB/SO)
                                          HCR 2.1.5	  National, California, and Sacramento Registers.
                                                      The City shall support efforts to pursue eligibility and
                                                      listing for qualified resources including historic districts
                                                      and individual resources under the appropriate National,
                                                      California, or Sacramento registers. (RDR/IGC/JP)
                                          HCR 2.1.6	  Planning þ. The City shall take historical and cultural
                                                      resources into consideration in the development of
                                                      planning studies and documents. (MPSP/PSR)
                                          HCR 2.1.7	  Historic Resource Property Maintenance þ. The
                                                      City shall encourage maintenance and upkeep of historic
                                                      resources to avoid the need for major rehabilitation and
                                                      to reduce the risks of demolition, loss through fire or
                                                      neglect, or impacts from natural disasters. (RDR/PI)
                                          HCR 2.1.8	  Historic Preservation Enforcement. The City shall
The Downtown Sacramento Central
                                                      ensure that City enforcement procedures and activities
Public Library is compatible as an add-               comply with local, State, and Federal historic and cultural
on structure to the adjacent historic                 preservation requirements. (SO)
building.
                                          HCR 2.1.9	  City-Owned Resources. The City shall maintain all
                                                      City-owned historic and cultural resources in a manner
                                                      that is consistent with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s
                                                      Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties. (SO)
                                          HCR 2.1.10	 Early Project Consultation þ. The City shall
                                                      minimize potential impacts to historic and cultural
                                                      resources by consulting with property owners, land
                                                      developers, and the building industry early in the
                                                      development review process. (RDR/JP/PI)
                                          HCR 2.1.11	 Compatibility with Historic Context þ. The City
                                                      shall review proposed new development, alterations,
                                                      and rehabilitation/remodels for compatibility with
                                                      the surrounding historic context. The City shall pay
The Elliot building (left) was designed               special attention to the scale, massing, and relationship
to be compatible in scale and massing
with the historic East End Lofts building             of proposed new development to surrounding historic
(right).                                              resources. (RDR)
 Page 2-138                                                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES : Identification and Preservation
                                                                                                               HCR 2
                                                                                    Adaptive reuse of a former automobile
                                                                                    dealership, now converted to a
                                                                                    restaurant.
HCR 2.1.12	          Contextual Features þ. The City shall promote
                                                                                      See LU 2, Citywide Land Use and
                     the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, and/or            Urban Design, for additional policies on
                     reconstruction, as appropriate, of contextual features           development context.
                     (e.g., structures, landscapes, street lamps, signs) related to
                     historic resources. (RDR)
HCR 2.1.13	          Historic Surveys and Context Statements. Where
                     historic resource surveys may no longer be valid, or for
                     areas that have not been surveyed, the City shall seek
                     funding to prepare new historic context surveys. In these
                     surveys, the potential eligibility of all properties 45 years
                     and older for listing in National, California or Sacramento
                     registers shall be evaluated. (RDR)                            The former Van Voorhies Mansion, built
                                                                                    in the Italianate architectural style, has
HCR 2.1.14	          Adaptive Reuse þ. The City shall encourage adaptive            undergone historic restoration and is
                                                                                    now used as office space.
                     reuse of historic resources when the original use of the
                     resource is no longer feasible. (RDR/SO)
HCR 2.1.15	          Demolition þ. The City shall consider demolition of
                     historic resources as a last resort, to be permitted only if
                     rehabilitation of the resource is not feasible, demolition is
                     necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its
                     residents, or the public benefits outweigh the loss of the
                     historic resource. (RDR)
HCR 2.1.16	          Archaeological & Cultural Resources. The City
                     shall develop or ensure compliance with protocols that
                     protect or mitigate impacts to archaeological and cultural
                     resources including prehistoric resources. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-139

                                     Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           HCR 2.1.17	 Preservation Project Review þ. The City shall
                       review and evaluate proposed development projects
                       to minimize impacts on identified historic and
                       cultural resources, including projects on Landmark
                       parcels and parcels within Historic Districts, based
                       on applicable adopted criteria and standards. (RDR)
Page 2-140                                                 Adopted March 3, 2015

HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES : Identification and Preservation
                                                                  HCR 2
                                   page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                              Page 2-141
                                                                                                   Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  The historic 1885 Llewellyn Williams Mansion is built in the Italianate-Stick architectural style, and after considerable remodeling and restoration,
  the Mansion was reopened in 1995 as the Sacramento International Hostel.
Page 2-142                                                                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015
HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES : Public Awareness and Appreciation
                                                                                                               HCR 3
Public Awareness and
Appreciation
Policies in this section support and provide for public education
and appreciation of the value of Sacramento’s historic and cultural
resources, as well as City coordination with other entities to help
                                                                                The Old Sacramento Historic District is
develop and promote the preservation of Sacramento’s historic and
                                                                                an example of Heritage Tourism and is
cultural resources.                                                             listed as a National Historic Landmark
                                                                                by the National Park Service.
GOAL HCR 3.1
Public Awareness and Appreciation. Foster public awareness and
appreciation of Sacramento’s historic and cultural resources.
Policies
HCR 3.1.1	           Heritage Tourism. The City shall work with agencies,
                     organizations, property owners, and business interests to
                     develop and promote Heritage Tourism opportunities, in
                     part as an economic development strategy. (IGC/JP)            See LU    8, Public/Quasi-Public and
                                                                                   Special Uses, ED 1, Business Climate,
HCR 3.1.2	           Coordination with Other Entities. The City shall              and ERC 5, Museums, Zoos, and Other
                     coordinate with and support public quasi-public, and          Major Destination Attractions, for
                     private (e.g., SHRA, CADA, Native American Tribes),           additional policies on tourism and cultural
                     entities in their preservation programs and efforts. (IGC/    and entertainment uses.
                     JP)
HCR 3.1.3	           Public/Private Partnerships. The City shall explore
                     public/private partnerships in its preservation program
                     efforts, including partnerships with business and
                     education interests, and expansion of shared missions
                     with Sacramento Heritage, Inc. (IGC/JP)
HCR 3.1.4	           Education. The City shall act as a conduit for and provide
                     information to the public on Sacramento’s historic and
                     cultural resources and preservation programs through the
                     region’s cultural resources survey repository at the North
                     Central Information Center, educational institutions,
                     the City’s Center for Sacramento History, and the City’s
                     website in order to promote the appreciation, maintenance,
                                                                                Sutter’s Fort has been furnished
                     rehabilitation, and preservation of Sacramento’s historic
                                                                                and reconstructed to reflect its 1846
                     and cultural resources. (PI)                               appearance and stands as the oldest
                                                                                restored Fort in the United States.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-143

City of
Sacramento
2013-2021 Housing Element
                          Adopted December 17, 2013
Cover photo credits: Gelfand Partners Architects, Mintier Harnish, and Affordable Housing Design Adviso
HOUSING ELEMENT: Table of Contents
                                                                                                                                 H-T
Table of Contents
H-E EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.......................................................... H ES-1
       Sacramento’s Housing Challenges .............................................................. H ES-1
       The City’s Housing Strategy ........................................................................ H ES-2
       Meeting Our City’s Housing Needs ........................................................... H ES-4
H-1    INTRODUCTION ........................................................................ H 1-1
       1.0 Purpose .................................................................................................. H 1-1
       1.1 State Law Requirements ...................................................................... H 1-1
       1.2 Regional Housing Needs Allocation ................................................. H 1-1
       1.3 Public Participation .............................................................................. H 1-2
       1.4 Organization of the Housing Element.............................................. H 1-3
       1.5 General Plan Consistency ................................................................... H 1-5
H-2    EVALUATION OF PAST PERFORMANCE .............................. H 2-1
       2.0 Key Findings ......................................................................................... H 2-1
       2.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... H 2-1
       2.2 Housing Production ............................................................................. H 2-2
       2.3 Housing Preservation and Rehabilitation ......................................... H 2-3
       2.4 Other Accomplishments ..................................................................... H 2-5
H-3    COMMUNITY PROFILE............................................................. H 3-1
       3.0 Purpose .................................................................................................. H 3-1
       3.1 Population and Household Characteristics ...................................... H 3-2
       3.2 Income and Employment ................................................................. H 3-11
       3.3 Housing Characteristics ..................................................................... H 3-20
       3.4 Housing Cost and Affordability ....................................................... H 3-29
       3.5 New Housing Needs, Special Housing Needs, and At-Risk
             Housing ................................................................................................ H 3-46
H-4    HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
       PROGRAM .................................................................................... H 4-1
       4.0 Key Findings ......................................................................................... H 4-1
       4.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... H 4-1
       4.2 Community Outreach .......................................................................... H 4-1
       4.3 Distribution Methods of Draft Housing Element .......................... H 4-3
       4.4 Summary of Public Comments .......................................................... H 4-3
H-5    LAND INVENTORY .................................................................... H 5-1
       5.0 Key Findings ......................................................................................... H 5-1
       5.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... H 5-1
       5.2 Legal Requirements .............................................................................. H 5-1
       5.3 Regional Housing Need Allocation ................................................... H 5-2
       5.4 Land Inventory ..................................................................................... H 5-2
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                    | Page H T-i

                                                                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
                   H-6............................................ HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES
                    ........................................................................................................ H 6-1
                   6.0 Key Findings ......................................................................................... H 6-1
                   6.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... H 6-1
                   6.2 Funding Sources ................................................................................... H 6-3
                   6.3 Institutional Resources ........................................................................ H 6-8
              H-7  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CONSERVING ENERGY RESOURCES
                   IN THE RESIDENTIAL SECTOR ............................................. H 7-1
                   7.0 Key Findings ......................................................................................... H 7-1
                   7.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... H 7-1
                   7.2 Strategies and Policies for Conserving Energy Resources ............. H 7-2
                   7.3 Programs and Implementation Measures ......................................... H 7-5
              H-8  CONSTRAINTS ............................................................................ H 8-1
                   8.0 Key Findings ......................................................................................... H 8-1
                   8.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... H 8-2
                   8.2 Nongovernmental Constraints ........................................................... H 8-2
                   8.3 Governmental Constraints .................................................................. H 8-8
              H-9  GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS ...................................... H 9-1
                   9.1 Sustainable, Stable and Integrated Communities ............................ H 9-1
                   9.2 Production ............................................................................................. H 9-3
                   9.3 Extremely Low-Income and Special Needs ..................................... H 9-6
                   9.4 Rehabilitation ....................................................................................... H 9-7
                   9.5 Accessibility ........................................................................................... H 9-8
                   9.6 Modest Income Homeownership ...................................................... H 9-9
                   9.7 Quantified Objectives ........................................................................ H 9-10
              APPENDICES
              Appendix H-A Program Evaluation
              Appendix H-B Public Participation Notes
              Appendix H-C Land Inventory Table and Map
              Appendix H-D Glossary
              Appendix H-E References
              Appendix H-F SACOG Data Approval Letter
              Appendix H-G Regulated Affordable Housing Units Created of Preserved
Page H T-ii |                                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Table of Contents
                                                                                                                                      H-T
Figures
Number/Title                                                                                                                Page
H 3-1   Existing Population and Population Projections for the City of
        Sacramento ...................................................................................................... H 3-4
H 3-2   Community Plan Areas ................................................................................. H 3-7
H 3-3   Age Distribution in 2010 ............................................................................... H 3-9
H 3-4   2009 Income Distribution .......................................................................... H 3-14
H 3-5   Employment Projections for the Sacramento Policy Area.................... H 3-15
H 3-6   Estimated and Projected Employment Growth by Sector.................... H 3-17
H 3-7   Projected Job Openings in the Top 10 Occupations by Income
        Category ......................................................................................................... H 3-18
H 3-8   Housing Type by Community Plan Area ................................................. H 3-22
H 3-9   Residential Vacancy Rates by Community Plan Area ............................ H 3-24
H 3-10  Residential Vacancy Rate ............................................................................ H 3-26
H 3-11  Rate of Subprime Mortgages, 2004-2007 ................................................. H 3-39
H 3-12  Total Number of Foreclosures 2006-2012 by Percentage Black
        and/or Hispanic ........................................................................................... H 3-40
H 3-13  Foreclosures 2006-2012 .............................................................................. H 3-41
H 3-14  Foreclosure Rate, 2006-2012 ...................................................................... H 3-42
H 3-15  REO or Short Sales as a Percentage of Total 2012 Home Sales by
        Community Plan Area ................................................................................. H 3-43
H 3-16  Percentage of ELI Households by Population Group .......................... H 3-54
Tables
Number/Title                                                                                                                Page
H 3-1   Population Change 1990-2010 ..................................................................... H 3-4
H 3-2   Population 2000-2010 ................................................................................... H 3-5
H 3-3   Population Projections 2012-2035 .............................................................. H 3-6
H 3-4   Age Distribution 2000 and 2010.................................................................. H 3-8
H 3-5   2000 and 2010 City and County Comparison of Race and Ethnicity .. H 3-10
H 3-6   Household Change 1990-2010 ................................................................... H 3-11
H 3-7   City and County Median Income 1989, 1999, and 2009........................ H 3-12
H 3-8   2009 Estimated Number of Households by Income Level .................. H 3-13
H 3-9   Employment Projections 2012-2035 ........................................................ H 3-16
H 3-10  Fastest Growing Occupations 2008–2018 (Sacramento-Arden
        Arcade-Roseville Metropolitan Statistical Area)...................................... H 3-19
H 3-11  Housing Type (1990–2010) ........................................................................ H 3-21
H 3-12  Vacancy Rate Excluding Units Not Available to Occupy 1990-2010 . H 3-23
H 3-13  Overall Vacancy Rate in Sacramento 2000-2012 .................................... H 3-24
H 3-14  Age of Housing Stock ................................................................................. H 3-27
H 3-15  Residential Vacant Building Cases by Community Plan Area .............. H 3-28
H 3-16  Median Sales Price 2007-2012 .................................................................... H 3-31
H 3-17  Rental Rates by Number of Bedrooms City of Sacramento ................. H 3-32
H 3-18  Sacramento Area Affordability Index for Select Years .......................... H 3-33
H 3-19  Fair Market Rents, Sacramento Metropolitan Area ................................ H 3-34
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                         | Page H T-iii

                                                                                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
              H 3-20 HUD Income Limits based on Persons per Household, 2012............. H 3-35
              H 3-21 Ability to Pay for Housing based on HUD Income Limits, 2012 ....... H 3-36
              H 3-22 2009 City of Sacramento Monthly Housing Costs of Households
                     by Percentage of Income ............................................................................ H 3-43
              H 3-23 2009 City of Sacramento Lower Income Households Overpaying
                     for Housing ................................................................................................... H 3-44
              H 3-24 New Construction Needs (January 1, 2013–October 31, 2021).......... H 3-47
              H 3-25 Units in Projects at Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing ....... H 3-49
              H 3-26 Estimated Acquisition/Rehabilitation Cost ............................................. H 3-51
              H 3-27 Potential Rent Subsidies .............................................................................. H 3-52
              H 3-28 Estimated Replacement Cost ..................................................................... H 3-52
              H 3-29 Qualified Entities in Sacramento County ................................................. H 3-53
              H 3-30 Group Quarters Populations 2000-2010 .................................................. H 3-56
              H 3-31 Single Female-headed Households with Own Children Under 18
                     Years ............................................................................................................... H 3-56
              H 3-32 2013 Homeless Subpopulations................................................................. H 3-62
              H 3-33 2011 Countywide Needs of Homeless Individuals ................................. H 3-63
              H 3-34 Emergency Shelter Facilities and Beds for the Homeless ..................... H 3-63
              H 3-35 Transitional Housing Opportunities for the Homeless ......................... H 3-65
              H 3-36 Permanent Housing Opportunities Targeted to the Very Low-
                     Income and/or Formerly Homeless Individuals and Families ............. H 3-66
              H 5-1 City of Sacramento Regional Housing Needs Allocation, January 1,
                     2013, to October 31, 2021 ............................................................................ H 5-2
              H 5-2 Built, Planned, and Approved Projects with Affordable Units .............. H 5-4
              H 5-3 Affordable Housing Projects Developed on Less than an Acre ............ H 5-8
              H 5-4 Realistic Unit Capacity Assumed for Each Zone ................................... H 5-10
              H 5-5 Summary of Vacant Land Capacity by Zone and Income Category ... H 5-11
              H 5-6 Estimated Residential Capacity Compared to RHNA by Income,
                     City of Sacramento, January 1, 2013 to October 31, 2021 .................... H 5-11
              H 5-7 Average Year Water Supply and Demand Comparison (Acre-Feet) ... H 5-13
              H 6-1 SHRA Budgeted Funding by Funding Source .......................................... H 6-2
              H 6-2 SHRA Projected Funding by Funding Source, 2013-2021...................... H 6-2
              H 6-3 Entitlement Funds, Fiscal Year 2013 .......................................................... H 6-4
              H 8-1 Land and Construction Costs ...................................................................... H 8-5
              H 8-2 Development Standards in Zoning Districts that Permit Housing ....... H 8-9
              H 8-3 Permitted Land Uses in Residential Zoning Districts ............................ H 8-10
              H 8-4 Permitted Residential Land Uses in Nonresidential Zoning
                     Districts.......................................................................................................... H 8-11
              H 8-5 Parking Standards for Residential Uses .................................................... H 8-17
              H 8-6 Typical Single-Family Fees per Unit ......................................................... H 8-21
              H 8-7 Typical Multifamily Fees per Unit (150-unit Project)............................. H 8-22
              H 8-8 Permit Processing......................................................................................... H 8-23
              H 9-1 Quantified Objectives for 2013-2021 ....................................................... H 9-10
              H 9-2 Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs ................................................... H 9-12
Page H T-iv |                                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Table of Contents
                                                                            H-T
List of Acronyms
ACS                       American Community Survey
CADA                      Capitol Area Development Authority
CHAS                      Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
CPTED                     Crime Prevention through Environmental Design
CSUS                      California State University Sacramento
DHA                       Department of Human Assistance
DOF                       Department of Finance
DSD                       Development Services Department
ELI                       Extremely low-income
FHA                       Federal Housing Administrator
FMRs                      Fair Market Rents
GHG                       Greenhouse Gas
GPAC                      General Plan Advisory Committee
HAP                       Housing Assistance Payment
HCD                       Housing and Community Development
HELP                      Housing Enabling Local Partnerships
HOI                       Housing Opportunity Index
HUD                       Housing and Urban Development
LI                        Low-income
MF                        Multifamily
MFI                       Median Family Income
NEV                       Neighborhood Electric Vehicles
RHNA                      Regional Housing Needs Allocation
SACOG                     Sacramento Area Council of Governments
SF                        single-family
SHRA                      Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency
SRO                       Single Room Occupancy
SSDI                      Social Security Disability Insurance Program
SSI                       Supplemental Security Income
VLI                       Very low-income
Adopted December 17, 2013                                               | Page H T-v
                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS
              This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H T-vi |                                        Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Executive Summary                                                                     H-E
Executive Summary
The Sacramento General Plan reflects a sustainable vision for growth over the next 25 years. A major part
of that vision will be to ensure that the City grows in a manner that meets the housing needs of all its
residents.
This Housing Element goes beyond a simple quantitative approach to housing needs and focuses instead on
the broader values and goals of the community. Covering a much shorter time period, the Housing Element
nonetheless reflects the long term vision of City’s General Plan. Key to this vision is a shift toward infill
development and a focus on sustainable and complete neighborhoods. The General Plan directs growth to
key “opportunity areas” in order to house people near jobs, transit, and other urban amenities. Emphasis is
placed on the design and character of the city’s neighborhoods, both existing and new, that contribute to a
high quality of life for all Sacramento residents.
The 2013-2021 Housing Element is intended to not only meet the requirements of State law but, more
importantly, serve as the City’s strategic housing plan. The plan first evaluates the city’s housing conditions
and needs and provides an inventory of vacant residential land available to meet that need. At the heart of
the Housing Element, however, are the goals, policies, and programs, which will guide City investments and
land use decisions to address future growth and existing needs. Organized under six key themes, this new
strategy demonstrates the City’s commitment to meeting the housing needs of all its residents.
Sacramento’s Housing Challenges
The City has a strong history of providing housing for people of all income levels. However, recent changes
in the market have created unique challenges for the City. The need to grow and accommodate future
residents is hampered by an unstable housing market, declining State and Federal support for affordable
housing, and environmental constraints.
During the development boom of the early 2000s, many new homebuyers saw the real estate market as a
vehicle for building assets and wealth. In an attempt to secure the “American Dream,” many households
used subprime or other risky mortgages in order to purchase a home in the hope that they could enjoy ever-
increasing home equity. However, beginning in 2006, the housing market slowed dramatically and home
prices weakened and began to fall. The economy also weakened and access to credit became more difficult
to obtain in an atmosphere of rising mortgage defaults and foreclosures. A wave of foreclosures impacted
not only individuals but also entire neighborhoods.
After several years of decline in housing prices and high foreclosure rates, Sacramento is now in the early
stages of a housing recovery. Median home prices are rising again after a 51 percent decline from $333,700
in 2007 to a low of $149,250 in 2012. From May 2012 to May 2013, the median home sales price in
Sacramento increased by nearly 45 percent. A key contributing factor to this increase is the limited supply of
housing and competition from investor interests. According to several sources, the inventory of available
homes in the city decreased by more than 60 percent from 2012 to 2013. In April 2013, 52 percent of
homes that went on the market had a pending sale within two weeks; 29 percent had pending sales within
one week. The region had only 1.2 months worth of housing inventory; six months is considered a healthy
inventory. As the market recovers, housing is once again seen as a contributor to economic growth.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H ES-1

                                                                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Beyond the housing market, the overall economy is improving. The unemployment rate in California
dropped to 9 percent in 2013, from its peak of over 12 percent in 2010. As the economy improves, the rate
at which people form households will increase, which will drive housing demand. Some of those new
households are likely to be home buyers instead of renters, given the rising cost to rent and the relatively
low cost to own; however, many of these new households, particularly lower-income households, will
demand new rental housing. Coupled with the difficulty lower-income households face in entering the
housing market, the City’s stock of existing affordable housing is more and more strained. The City has
historically been a leader in producing affordable housing, but much of that housing is aging and in need of
repair. The City has a wealth of affordable housing assets, ranging from public housing to regulated rental
projects, to unregulated single room occupancy (SRO) units. Each housing type provides a much needed
housing opportunity, but as market forces shift, many of these housing projects are jeopardized. The City
recognizes the importance of all of its existing housing, and has made a strong commitment to maintaining
these valuable units even in the face of a challenging market.
Ensuring the City’s commitments to maintaining its existing housing requires balancing housing funds and
resources between preservation efforts and new development. As market forces rebound during this
Housing Element planning period, the City must be positioned to best take advantage of all housing
opportunities, infill and greenfield, market rate and affordable. An understanding of these dual and
competing needs underscores the strategic framework of the City’s Housing Element.
The City’s Housing Strategy
As this new Housing Element planning period begins, the City is faced with the reality of new challenges
and increasing need in an era of limited resources. With the elimination of redevelopment agencies in
California, the City has lost its largest local source of funding for affordable housing. As a result, the City
has had to discontinue several programs relying on this funding. As the City looks to preserve and build
upon its past successes, the City is focusing on innovative approaches to housing and the targeted use of
resources.
In consideration of historical production, new and existing needs, available resources, and constraints the
City faces, the Housing Element approach and organization focuses on six themes that reflect key
challenges for City housing policy and programs. These themes reflect community input on needs,
assessment of priorities, and alignment with the General Plan goals. The themes and related priority
programs are summarized below.
Sustainability, Balanced Communities and Complete Neighborhoods
Sustainability of housing, through “green” building and planning techniques, creates socially and
economically responsible living, minimizing the impact of growth on the larger community. However,
housing cannot be viewed solely as a collection of individual buildings; housing must be planned and
developed as the building blocks of neighborhoods and the whole community. Through a proactive
planning process, the City will encourage a variety of housing types, both in its existing neighborhoods and
as new neighborhoods are created. As Sacramento’s population grows and its housing needs evolve, the City
will track and report on the changes in the demographic makeup of our communities and the resulting
impact on housing.
Page H ES-2   |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Executive Summary                                                                         H-E
Production of New Housing
As the City grows, more development will occur in existing developed areas, gradually shifting away from
greenfield sites. The City has already started this shift toward an infill focus, by providing incentives for infill
development, updating the Zoning Code to facilitate intensive infill development, and facilitating
infrastructure improvements in infill areas. Nevertheless, development in greenfield areas, which historically
supported a high proportion of the City’s new housing production, will also need to include a wide variety
of housing types and densities in order to address the needs of future residents.
Extremely Low-Income and Special Needs Housing
The City of Sacramento has demonstrated a strong commitment to serving the housing needs of extremely
low-income (ELI) households and homeless residents through the SRO Strategy, Ten Year Plan to End
Chronic Homelessness, and the “no net loss” policy in its public housing asset repositioning strategy.
During the previous Housing Element planning period the City approved several new permanent supportive
housing projects and single room occupancy unit developments to serve the needs of ELI households and
residents facing homelessness. This Housing Element continues this strong commitment to these important
programs.
Rehabilitation and Preservation of Existing Housing
Recognizing the importance of preserving and maintaining existing housing resources, the City will pursue
opportunities for targeted rehabilitation investment. Targets for rehabilitation funding will include
properties in distressed neighborhoods with substantial blight; properties in areas with limited new growth
potential, but where economic diversity is low; and properties left vacant due to foreclosure. In addition to
this targeted strategy, the City will continue to promote the preservation of existing affordable housing
citywide.
Accessible Housing and Neighborhoods
The city is home to over 65,000 persons with disabilities. With the aging of our population, this number is
expected to increase. Accessible housing and neighborhoods allow for better integration and population
stability as people are able to “age in place.” The City has demonstrated its commitment to providing
housing for all through the adoption of a Universal Design Ordinance that encourages accessibility in new
housing and the adoption of a Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance that established a process to allow
special consideration in the planning and building process to address the housing needs of those persons
with disabilities. The City will continue this commitment to improving accessibility by encouraging universal
design in new housing and providing funding to residents to retrofit their homes for increased accessibility.
Modest Income Homeownership
The City will promote alternative housing types and modify existing regulations to assist the market in
providing attainable housing for Sacramento’s middle-income residents. Existing funding for
homeownership assistance, which reaches lower-income residents will be targeted to overlap with other City
goals, inclusionary housing, and moving foreclosed properties back to homeownership.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H ES-3

                                                                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Meeting Our City’s Housing Needs
The themes above provide a context for the goals, policies, and programs guiding City housing development
over the next eight years (i.e., 2013-2021). These programs form an approach to providing housing that is
varied and diverse for a population equally as diverse. Together, these programs present a comprehensive
look at housing in the city, and how housing supports and enhances other citywide initiatives in the General
Plan. Through the combination of programs presented in this Housing Element, the City anticipates
production of over 12,500 new and substantially rehabilitated units, including over 1,800 lower income
units. In addition to the anticipated quantitative production, the Housing Element embodies a civic
philosophy for housing in Sacramento that is purposeful, inclusive, and reflective of the realities of living in
Sacramento in the second decade of the 21st Century.
Page H ES-4 |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Introduction                                                                       H-1
1 Introduction
1.0 Purpose
This chapter provides background for the Housing Element, including
state law requirements, housing needs, other City housing strategies,
policies and documents, and an overview of the public outreach
program for the Housing Element update. In addition, this chapter
provides a brief summary of the Element’s contents, and identifies the
Element’s consistency with the rest of the City’s General Plan.
1.1 State Law Requirements                                                    Metro Square
The contents of the City of Sacramento’s Housing Element reflect a combination of local issues, priorities,
and state law requirements. California law (Government Code Section 65583) requires that every city and
county adopt a Housing Element that contains:
       An assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant to meeting
        these needs;
       A statement of the community’s goals, quantified objectives, and policies relative to the
        maintenance, preservation, improvement, and development of housing;
       An inventory of developable sites capable of accommodating development of housing for a range of
        income types to meet the City’s share of the regional housing need; and
       A program which sets forth an eight-year schedule of actions to implement the policies and achieve
        the goals and objectives of the Housing Element.
1.2 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
An important part of the Housing Element is the determination of the City’s new housing construction
need. Under California law (California Government Code Section 65584), new housing construction need is
determined, at a minimum, through a regional housing allocation process.
Sacramento (along with all other cities and counties in the state) must plan to accommodate its share of the
housing need of persons at all income levels. The fair share process began with a regional allocation from
the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The Sacramento Area Council of
Governments (SACOG) then determines what share of the regional allocation will be met by each of its
member cities and counties, including the City of Sacramento. The City’s share of regional housing need or
the City’s Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) is based on SACOG’s Regional Housing Needs Plan.
Under this plan, Sacramento must accommodate 24,101 new housing units between 2013 and 2021. Of
these housing units, 4,944 should be affordable to households earning no more than 50 percent of median
income, 3,467 to households earning between 50 percent and 80 percent of median income, 4,482 to
households earning between 80 percent and 120 percent of median income, and 11,208 to households
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H 1-1

                                                                                Chapter One: INTRODUCTION
earning more than 120 percent of median income. In addition, of the 4,944 units needed for very low-
income households, half, or 2,472, are presumed to be needed for extremely low-income households, those
making 30 percent or less of median income.
The City’s responsibility under state law in accommodating its regional housing allocation is to identify
adequate sites that will be made available through appropriate zoning and development standards and with
services and facilities to encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for all income levels.
The City does not have to guarantee that its share of the regional allocation will be constructed, although the
City must include a quantified housing construction objective in the Housing Element.
Housing Production to Date Compared to Housing Needs
The Housing Element includes two sets of housing targets or goals: the
SACOG RHNA target and the housing production goal. The RHNA
target for the previous Housing Element (17,649 units) relates to the
number of housing units the City must demonstrate it was able to
accommodate through adequate sites between 2006 and 2013. The
housing production goal (15,021 units) relates to the City’s own goal for
housing construction for 2008 through 2013, considering historic
construction activity levels, available land, and funding and program
goals. The RHNA target and the production target cover different time
periods due to differences in State law related to the RHNA and                Fremont Building
quantified objectives included in the Housing Element.
Between 2002 and 2007, housing development in the city, particularly in new growth areas subject to the
Mixed Income Housing Ordinance, resulted in the production and rehabilitation of units in excess of the
RHNA and production goals contained in the 2002-2007 Housing Element. In the more recent planning
period of 2006-2013, despite the weak housing market, the City has met 65 percent of its RHNA obligation.
By the end of 2012, the City had met 76 percent of its housing production goal.
1.3 Public Participation
State law (California Government Code section 65583[c] [6]) requires
the City to “make a diligent effort to achieve public participation of all
economic segments of the community in the development of the
Housing Element.” Public participation in the City is an integral part of
all planning processes. The Housing Element included specific outreach
to a variety of stakeholder groups, including affordable housing
advocates, developers, neighborhood activists, and advocates for special
needs. The public at large was involved in the preparation of the
Housing Element through a community workshop and five Planning &               Public Participation
Design Commission meetings. Additionally, City staff presented the
project to the Adult and Aging Commission, SHRA Commission, and Disabilities Advisory Commission.
Public hearings with the Planning Commission and City Council were scheduled four times from September
2013 to January 2014 to provide community members additional opportunity to provide input. A summary
of the public outreach efforts for the update of the Housing Element may be found in Chapter 4 and a
summary of meeting notes in Appendix H-B.
Page H 1-2 |                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Introduction                                                                       H-1
Through this ongoing public input, the City has identified issues, concerns, and recommendations for
housing policies and programs that are reflected in the updated Housing Element. The Housing Element is
in large part a synthesis of these efforts.
1.4 Organization of the Housing Element
The City of Sacramento’s Housing Element, a part of the General Plan, is a comprehensive statement of the
City’s housing needs and strategies. The Housing Element addresses a broader range of issues than these
other planning documents, including sustainability, green building, energy conservation, balanced and
complete neighborhoods, neighborhood accessibility, and regulatory issues. The Housing Element provides
the guiding principles and over-arching policies that define the City’s housing strategy. Many of the
Element’s implementation measures are coordinated with or defined through other planning documents,
including:
        Sacramento City and County Ten-Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness
        Consolidated Plan
        Public Housing Asset Repositioning Strategy
        Single-Room Occupancy Strategy
        Preservation Ordinance
        Housing Trust Fund Ordinance
        Mixed Income Housing Ordinance
The Housing Element incorporates strategies and implementing actions from these other plans and has
been reviewed for consistency with these plans. While the Housing Element is not intended to supplant any
of these independent documents, as a part of the General Plan, the Housing Element is seen as the broad,
inclusive, and comprehensive housing document for the City. The Housing Element does not dive into the
same level of detail as many of these other documents, but the strategic vision that prompted each should
be reflected in the policies and programs of the Housing Element.
This Housing Element is divided into the following chapters:
Executive Summary provides an overview and road map of the City’s housing issues, needs, and policies.
The Executive Summary connects the visioning strategic goals of the City with the practical implementation
measures of the Housing Element. As a stand alone document, the Executive Summary should allow the
reader insight into citywide priorities for housing policy and provide general understanding of the process
for bringing this vision to reality.
1. Introduction provides an overview of State requirements, a summary of the public participation process,
and a summary of the organization of the Housing Element.
2. Evaluation of Past Programs summarizes the City’s achievements in implementing programs under the
previous Housing Element, which was adopted in 2008. Lessons learned from an evaluation of
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H 1-3

                                                                                    Chapter One: INTRODUCTION
achievements have been considered in the development of new goals, policies, and implementation
programs in this Housing Element.
3. Community Profile describes current conditions and trends related to population, housing, and
employment. Topics covered in this chapter include population and household characteristics, income and
poverty, housing cost and condition, publicly assisted housing, and employment characteristics. This chapter
also includes discussion about the preservation of subsidized rental units at risk of converting to market rate
housing and what steps the City can take during the 2013-2021 period to maintain this inventory of
affordable housing.
4. Public Participation describes the City’s efforts to engage all segments of the community during the
preparation of the updated Housing Element. The chapter includes a list organizations and agencies with
which the City consulted, the methods of community outreach, and a summary of comments received and
how these comments have been addressed.
5. Land Inventory describes the availability and characteristics of land that can accommodate housing
development to meet the City’s future needs. Among the issues covered in this chapter are the number,
types, and affordability of housing units constructed since the beginning of the period covered by the
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA); the City’s ability to accommodate its remaining share of the
region’s housing needs; and possible constraints that could affect development potential on housing
opportunity sites.
6. Housing Program Resources summarizes programs and funding resources available in the City of
Sacramento to assist in the development, rehabilitation, and conservation of housing affordable to low- and
moderate-income households.
7. Energy Efficiency summarizes the City’s plans and programs for increasing energy efficiency of housing
and reducing the City’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from existing housing and new housing
development.
8. Analysis of Constraints to Housing describes potential governmental and nongovernmental factors
that could affect the availability and cost of housing, particularly for low- and moderate-income households
and population groups with special needs.
9. Goals, Policies, and Programs contains the City’s housing goals, policies, and implementation
programs – the heart of the City’s strategy for addressing its housing needs. The goals adopted in this
Element address:
       Sustainability, Stability, and Integration: Create and enhance sustainable housing, balanced communities
        and complete neighborhoods;
       Production: Produce new housing units to meet growth projections and regional fair share goals;
       Extremely Low-Income and Special Needs: Ensure housing for extremely low-income and special needs
        families;
       Rehabilitation: Rehabilitate and preserve our existing housing resources;
       Accessibility: Provide accessible housing and neighborhoods; and
Page H 1-4 |                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Introduction                                                                        H-1
       Modest Income Homeownership: Provide and sustain homeownership, especially for “modest” income
        families.
Also included in this chapter is an implementation schedule that specifies responsible agencies, timeframes,
and objectives for each implementation program and a summary of the City’s quantified objectives for
housing development, rehabilitation, and conservation (preservation of affordable rental housing).
1.5 General Plan Consistency
State law requires the Housing Element to contain a statement of “the means by which consistency will be
achieved with other General Plan elements and community goals” (California Government Code, Section
65583[c] [6] [B]). There are two aspects of this analysis: 1) an identification of other General Plan goals,
policies, and programs that could affect implementation of the Housing Element or that could be affected
by the implementation of the Housing Element, and 2) an identification of actions to ensure consistency
between the Housing Element and affected parts of other General Plan elements.
Elements of the General Plan most closely related to housing issues include the Land Use and Urban
Design, Mobility, and Public Health and Safety. Several of the goals of these elements relate to Housing
Element goals and will affect implementation of the Housing Element.
Relevant Land Use and Urban Design goals and policies include:
       Sustainable growth and change. Goals and policies address infill development, diversifying the
        City’s housing stock, and increased transit and alternative transportation use. Other goals and
        policies promote a balanced housing mix within neighborhoods as well as development of housing
        for seniors.
       Integrated urban pattern. Goals and policies support removal of accessibility barriers and
        development of a well-connected urban pattern.
       Sustainability and renewal. Goals and policies promote revitalization and rehabilitation of existing
        structures and neighborhoods, and sustainable building practices.
       Clear design direction. Goals and policies support development regulations that express intended
        outcomes (rather than prohibitions), and integration of public safety concerns into development
        designs.
       Fair and equitable access. Goals and policies support equitable distribution of housing and
        services throughout Sacramento.
    Relevant Mobility goals and policies include:
       Transportation choices. Goals and policies support expanded transportation choices, including a
        variety of public transportation, pedestrian, and bicycle transportation. Other goals and policies
        include reductions in parking requirements.
       Pedestrian network. Goals and policies support a continuous pedestrian network, with design
        elements that encourage use by pedestrians.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                        | Page H 1-5

                                                                                  Chapter One: INTRODUCTION
      Link transit and land use. Goals and policies support integration of stations into neighborhoods,
       and transit designed to meet the needs of all residents, including seniors and those with disabilities.
   Relevant Public Health and Safety Element goals include:
      Public safety. Goals and policies support crime prevention and reduction policies for high-crime
       areas. The development process, including fee collection and design review, will be operated so as to
       support fire safety.
      Public health and human services. Goals and policies include meeting the needs of homeless
       residents, senior citizens, and residents with disabilities. The City will promote development patterns
       that encourage walking, and offer educational programs to improve public health.
      Code enforcement. Goals and policies support code enforcement activities, including maintenance
       of deteriorating housing units, replacement or demolition of substandard buildings, and systematic
       inspections of all residential rental properties.
   Other elements with goals and policies related to housing issues include the Utilities and Environmental
   Constraints Elements. Some relevant goals and policies from these elements include:
      Utilities. Goals and policies support prioritization of infill areas for utility infrastructure
       improvements. Green building and energy efficiency goals are also included in this chapter, and
       referenced in the Energy Conservation chapter of the Housing Element Background Report.
      Environmental Constraints. Goals and policies in this element include continued flood protection
       improvements, and evaluation of flood protection prior to development approvals.
   The City’s Housing Element team has been working with the General Plan team throughout the
   Housing Element update process to ensure consistency between the Housing Element and other
   elements of the General Plan.
   As the Elements of the General Plan are amended in the future, the City will review the Housing
   Element to ensure internal consistency in the General Plan. Amendments to these other elements in the
   future may warrant an amendment to the Housing Element or vice versa.
Page H 1-6 |                                                                            Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Evaluation of Past Performance                                                       H-2
2 Evaluation of Past Performance
2.0 Key Findings
Since 2008, the start of the previous Housing Element planning period, the City of Sacramento has achieved
many key objectives of the previous Housing Element. Some of the main accomplishments are as follows:
   The City produced new affordable, infill, transit-oriented, single room occupancy, and permanent
    supportive housing units.
   The City rehabilitated single-family and multifamily units that were at risk, vacant, foreclosed, and
    located in downtown and redevelopment target areas. The City also rehabilitated developments
    including senior and single room occupancy units.
   The City and the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA) also housed residents
    through the Housing Choice Voucher Program and provided several developments with fee waivers and
    deferrals, and sewer credits for the production of affordable housing.
   The City provided income-qualified residents with homebuyer assistance loans and Mortgage Credit
    Certificates to purchase foreclosed properties.
   The City rezoned over 2,000 parcels for consistency with the General Plan, increasing the City’s capacity
    to provide housing for lower-income households and increasing flexibility for infill development.
   The City adopted a new Planning Development Code and several ordinances that allow residential uses
    by right in many commercial, mixed-use, and high density residential zones; include parking regulations,
    a design review process, and urban development standards that encourage infill development;
    incorporates universal design features into housing; provide a process for reasonable accommodation;
    and clarify that transitional and supportive housing is to be treated in the same manner as single-family
    and multi-family housing.
   The City worked with the Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency and other partners to increase flood
    protection in Natomas, North Sacramento, and South Sacramento.
2.1 Introduction
This chapter evaluates past performance and assesses the continued relevance of the 2008-2013 Housing
Element policies and programs in addressing Sacramento’s current and future housing needs. This
evaluation provides valuable information on whether Housing Element programs have been successful in
achieving stated objectives and addressing local needs. While many policies and programs from the 2008-
2013 Housing Element continue to successfully provide housing opportunities, understanding the
challenges of other programs allows consideration of new policies and programs in light of changing
demographics, needs and objectives.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H 2-1

                                                       Chapter Two: EVALUATION OF PAST PERFORMANCE
State law requires the review and evaluation of prior achievements as part of a Housing Element update.
California Government Code Section 65588 requires that this evaluation assess:
        the appropriateness of the housing goals, objectives, and policies in contributing to the attainment
         of the state housing goal;
        the effectiveness of the Housing Element in attaining the community’s housing goals and objectives;
         and
        the progress of the City in implementing the Housing Element.
Details on the City’s achievements under the 2008-2013 Housing Element are presented below, including
housing production, housing rehabilitation, and other accomplishments. Analysis and evaluation of the
individual implementation programs in the 2008-2013 Housing Element is presented in Appendix H-A. A
table listing the affordable housing units created from 2008-2012 can be found in Appendix H-G.
2.2 Housing Production
The City and the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA) have facilitated the
development of a variety of housing types, including affordable housing, throughout the city. Sacramento’s
key housing production accomplishments in the last five years include:
   Between 2008 and 2013, the City approved four permanent supportive housing projects (i.e., Boulevard
    Court, Palmer House, 7th & H, Kelsey Village), increasing the total number of newly developed
    permanent supportive housing units by 261 units. Many of these projects used the Mental Health
    Services Act (MHSA) Proposition 63 funds to provide long-term operating subsidies. Other projects
    received operating guarantees from SHRA in the form of a 15-year operating deficit reserve.
   The City adopted the Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Strategy in 2006, with a goal of no further loss of
    SRO units downtown, to build new and rehabilitate existing SRO units. Between 2008 and 2010 SHRA
    approved predevelopment loans for construction of the 7th and H project (150 units). SHRA received a
    $2 million Housing Trust Fund Award from the State of California to assist the 7th and H project. The
    7th and H project also received an allocation of nine percent low income housing tax credits.
   The City received $135 million in Proposition 1C funding in 2008 and 2009 for transit-oriented
    development projects, including the Downtown Railyards, Township 9, Curtis Park Village, La
    Valentina Station, Broadway Lofts, and Capitol Lofts. The Downtown Railyards, La Valentina Station,
    Curtis Park Village, and Capitol Lofts include a substantial amount of affordable housing (69, 81, 91,
    and 86 affordable units respectively).
   Between 2008 and 2013 there were 1,285 homes built in residential infill target areas.
   The Mixed Income Housing Ordinance resulted in 56 new affordable units between 2008 and 2013.
   The City has taken several steps to facilitate infrastructure improvements to support new development.
    The City completed Mitigation Fee Act compliant comprehensive plans for providing and funding
    infrastructure improvements in the Panhandle, Greenbriar, Delta Shores, and River District areas. The
    65th Street Finance Plan is underway and is expected to be completed in late 2013. In 2010 the City also
Page H 2-2  |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Evaluation of Past Performance                                                          H-2
    implemented the Shovel Ready Sites Program for the River District, Florin Corridor, 65th Street Area,
    and Northeast Light Rail Line. The program will address infrastructure needs for the sites, as well as
    tackle contamination and access issues.
2.3 Housing Preservation and Rehabilitation
The City and SHRA financed the rehabilitation of multifamily housing and preserved many affordable
developments throughout the city during the previous Housing Element planning period. Sacramento’s key
rehabilitation achievements in the last five years include:
   Using $17 million in Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) grant funding from HUD, SHRA
    developed three unique programs: 1) the Vacant Properties Program, which provided financing
    incentives to encourage for-profit and non-profit builders to purchase, rehabilitate, and sell foreclosed
    single-family homes within identified target areas; 2) the Block Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program,
    which works with established developers to acquire, rehabilitate, and maintain properties as rental or
    for-sale housing, land banking for future redevelopment activities, and development of mixed used
    projects where foreclosures and vacant properties have intensified blight issues; and (3) the Property
    Recycling Program, which allows SHRA to engage in strategic investments and partnerships to remove
    the blight of foreclosed and vacant properties through redevelopment activities, the acquisition and
    rehabilitation of single-family homes, and the acquisition, rehabilitation, and occupancy of affordable
    rental housing. Through these programs, SHRA rehabilitated and sold 342 single-family and multifamily
    units, and retained or created an estimated 900 jobs. The City allocated all NSP funds by the end of
    2012.
   In 2004 the City Council adopted a Housing Preservation Ordinance aimed at preserving Federally-
    subsidized projects at risk of conversion to market rate. SHRA has been the Lead Agency implementing
    the ordinance, and has provided low-cost financing to preserve several at-risk projects. In 2008 SHRA
    assisted in the acquisition and/or rehabilitation of four senior apartment complexes with 285 total units:
    Broadway Seniors Apartments, Casa De Angelo Apartments, Rio Linda Manor, and Forest Palms.
    Forest Palms received an allocation of nine percent low income housing tax credits. In 2009 the SHRA
    preserved Southcrest Apartments, a 32-unit complex, with project-based Section 8.
   From 2008 to 2011, SHRA assisted 376 low- and very low-income residents with grants for emergency
    repairs and/or accessibility modifications to their homes. During the same time frame, SHRA assisted
    25 homeowners with rehabilitation loans. Most of the homes assisted were in Redevelopment Areas or
    other distressed areas of the city. However, in 2012 SHRA discontinued the Create a Loan Home
    Rehabilitation and CalHome Owner-Occupied Rehabilitation Loan programs due to the loss of
    redevelopment funds.
   As a result of ongoing reductions in capital and operating funding from HUD, the City adopted the
    Asset Repositioning Study in July 2007. This study set the stage for the implementation of a proactive
    strategy to "reposition" SHRA public housing units to reduce dependence on HUD and eliminate
    capital and operating deficits. One of the guiding principles of this strategy was a "no net loss" policy.
             o On March 10, 2009, the City Council approved the disposition and transfer of two
                 properties known as Sutterview and Washington Plaza totaling 153 units of affordable senior
                 housing to a related nonprofit for the purpose of obtaining the financing and tax credits
                 necessary to complete major rehabilitations of both. HUD approval was subsequently
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H 2-3

                                                       Chapter Two: EVALUATION OF PAST PERFORMANCE
                 received on October 8, 2009, and the properties transferred July 8, 2010. Construction is
                 anticipated to begin by January 2014.
             o On March 9, 2010, the City Council approved the rehabilitation of the property located at
                 626 I Street, which received a $10 million grant from HUD's American Recovery
                 Reinvestment Act (ARRA). ARRA funding leveraged additional sources for the significant
                 rehabilitation resulting in 108 affordable units and three floors of commercial space. The
                 project was completed in 2012.
             o On July 18, 2012, HUD approved the disposition of Sierra Vista Apartments, a 78-unit mid-
                 rise property for seniors located in downtown Sacramento, from SHRA’s public housing
                 stock to a nonprofit affiliate of SHRA. Final transfer of the property is pending a
                 commitment from HUD for 100 percent project-based housing vouchers to replace the
                 public housing operating subsidy previously received under its annual contributions contract
                 (ACC). The commitment for 100 percent project-based vouchers is anticipated to be
                 received by August 2013. The project-based housing vouchers will allow the current
                 residents to remain in place while paying only 30 percent of their annual income towards
                 rent, ensuring extremely low-income units remain in place when the property is
                 "repositioned" with the nonprofit affiliate. Repositioning in turn will allow the nonprofit to
                 obtain low income housing tax credits and other conventional sources of financing needed
                 to complete a major rehabilitation and upgrade of the property.
   In 2005 the City adopted the Downtown Housing Strategy for the Central City, which identified the
    JKL corridor as the primary focus area and called for a Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) for $25
    million. Three sites were submitted as part of that process: 11th and J Streets, 16th and J Streets, and
    the 700 and 800 blocks of K Street. While the 700 Block was approved in 2011, the City and SHRA
    were unable to come to agreement with the developer of the 800 Block prior to the end of
    redevelopment. Additionally, in 2011 the City renovated the 32-unit Maydestone building (15th and J
    Street). In 2012 SHRA discontinued the Downtown Housing Strategy program due to the loss of
    redevelopment funds.
   As part of an initiative to safeguard existing affordable housing, SHRA approved $5 million to fund the
    immediate repair needs of Riverview Plaza, a 120-unit senior affordable downtown high rise. SHRA
    assistance to Riverview Plaza restricted 33 units at 50 percent of the area median income for an
    additional 55 years. SHRA also worked with the owner of Pioneer Towers to assist with the
    rehabilitation of the 198-unit senior downtown high-rise to ensure long-term affordability.
   Since adoption of the SRO Ordinance in 2006, SHRA rehabilitated 32 SRO units at the YWCA and 104
    SRO units at the Hotel Berry. YWCA also received a total of 11 Mental Health Services Act Vouchers
    and the Hotel Berry received 10 Mental Health Services Act Vouchers. Additionally, in 2012 SHRA
    loaned $1.2 million to renovate the Ridgeway Hotel into 22 SRO units, which is currently under
    construction.
   In 2012, SHRA issued housing revenue bonds totaling $8.73 million for rehabilitation of the Taylor
    Terrace (168 units) project, which is currently under construction.
Page H 2-4 |                                                                            Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Evaluation of Past Performance                                                       H-2
2.4 Other Accomplishments
This section presents key accomplishments pertaining to housing for extremely low-, very low-, and low-
income households and homeless persons; improvements to development processing; infill development;
energy efficiency; and home ownership.
   On January 14, 2009, the County, the Regional Sanitation Board, and the Water Board amended the
    ordinances enacting the County Fee Waiver and Deferral Program. In addition to removing all sunset
    dates from the program, the revised ordinances extended the fee deferral period to 24 months, and the
    waiver compliance period to 36 months maximum. Through the Regional Sanitation Board fee waiver
    and deferral program, SHRA provided fee waivers and deferrals to 530 affordable units in the City and
    County between 2008 and 2012.
   The Economic Development Department issued 995.67 sewer credits from 2008 to 2012. Since 2010
    these sewer credits have helped create 1,632 new jobs and 313 infill and low-income housing units.
   SHRA currently (2013) administers approximately 12,000 Housing Choice Vouchers. Housing Choice
    Vouchers cover the portion of fair market rent above the tenant’s share which is set at approximately 30
    percent of their income. The average annual household income for the Housing Choice Vouchers is
    $13,821. The Housing Choice Voucher Program remains the most efficient way to provide housing for
    extremely low-income households.
   On March 15, 2011, the City adopted the Northeast Line Implementation Plan to promote
    reinvestment, redevelopment, and revitalization along the light rail corridor, including the Globe,
    Arden/Del Paso, and Royal Oaks Stations.
   In 2008 SHRA convened an internal team of policy, redevelopment, and homeownership staff to
    explore the most strategic uses of homebuyer programs. SHRA modified the homebuyer program
    guidelines and procedures to reflect the team’s recommendation to target homebuyer assistance
    programs. From 2008 to June 2013, SHRA assisted 212 homebuyers in the City with homebuyer
    assistance loans: 81 of the homes assisted were foreclosed properties; 110 of the homes assisted were in
    Redevelopment Areas; an additional 92 of the homes assisted were in other distressed areas of the city.
    SHRA’s homebuyer assistance programs are ongoing.
   In December 2008 SHRA was awarded an allocation of the 2008 Housing Act Volume Cap for a
    Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program specific only to foreclosed properties. From 2009 to 2011,
    SHRA assisted 67 homebuyers in the City purchase foreclosed homes with the MCC Real Estate-
    Owned Program, an allocation of the 2008 Housing Act Volume Cap.
   The City adopted an ordinance in October 2008, which established a Development Fee Deferral
    Program as part of an economic incentive plan to alleviate impediments and create incentives to foster
    downtown housing. The Fee Deferral Program expired on December 31, 2009.
   Through the Rental Housing Inspection Program, the City performed nearly 20,000 initial inspections
    from 2008 to 2012, and 70 percent of identified rental properties are registered with the program.
   In Fall 2009 the City rezoned over 2,000 parcels for consistency with the 2030 General Plan, including
    14 parcels included in the Housing Element vacant land inventory. Many of these sites were located
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 2-5

                                                        Chapter Two: EVALUATION OF PAST PERFORMANCE
    within one quarter mile of a light rail station. The rezoning resulted in a net increase in the city’s capacity
    to provide housing to lower-income households and increased flexibility for infill development.
    Community Development staff has also developed a system of tracking all rezones and general plan
    amendments approved by City Council.
   In April 2013 the City adopted the new Planning and Development Code, which allows for live/work
    uses by right in many commercial, mixed-use, and high density residential zones. The new Code also
    encourages sustainable infill development by restructuring and improving processes in the development
    code (e.g., parking regulations, design review, urban development standards) to make sustainable infill
    development economically feasible. The new Code also includes new definitions for “transitional
    housing” and “supportive housing” that clarify that transitional and supportive housing is to be
    considered in the same manner as single-family and multifamily developments.
   On February 16, 2010, the City Council adopted the Universal Design Ordinance. The ordinance, which
    took effect on August 16, 2010, requires features to be offered to potential buyers that would make the
    home visitable.
   On August 25, 2009, the City Council adopted the Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance to
    streamline and formalize City procedures related to accessibility and adaptability accommodations for
    development. The Ordinance provides a process for persons with disabilities to request modifications
    or exceptions in the application of the City's land use and zoning standards, regulations, policies, and
    procedures.
   The Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency (SAFCA), with the support of the City of Sacramento and
    in cooperation with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (USBR),
    and the Central Valley Flood Protection Board (CVFPB), is working toward progressively increasing the
    level of flood protection in the Sacramento area to 200-year flood protection from major rivers and
    streams. SAFCA is evaluating the levee systems protecting portions of northern and southern
    Sacramento to determine if the levees meet the criteria established by the Federal Emergency
    Management Agency for levee accreditation through the National Flood Insurance Program. These
    evaluations are expected to be completed in 2013. Major ongoing flood protection activities include
    improvements to Folsom Dam, improvements to the levee system, and completing the South
    Sacramento Streams project which addresses flood protection for the south part of the city.
Page H 2-6 |                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                       H-3
3 Community Profile
3.0 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to identify characteristics of Sacramento’s population and housing that are
essential to an understanding of the city’s housing needs. Sacramento’s housing needs include both current
unmet needs among residents who live in the city now and estimated future needs among residents expected
to live in the city over the next generation. An understanding of who lives or will live in Sacramento, in
relation to the types, cost, and condition of housing, is critical to an understanding of housing needs.
While evaluating housing needs, it is important to remember Sacramento’s vision for the future. The City’s
vision, as expressed in the General Plan “Vision and Guiding Principles” statement, is to be “the most
livable city in America” where every neighborhood will be a desirable place to live with a range of housing
choices, diversity, and equitable treatment of all neighborhoods and groups. Sacramento will also strive to
be a model of sustainable development.
Among the key principles from the City’s General Plan vision that will guide Sacramento’s housing
strategies are:
        Provide a mix of housing to meet the needs of current and future residents, including an equitable
         distribution of affordable housing, throughout the city;
        Include a mix of housing types within neighborhoods to promote a diversity of household types and
         housing choices for residents of all ages and income levels in order to promote stable
         neighborhoods; and
        Work to end homelessness in Sacramento by providing affordable housing opportunities and
         services.
Starting from this vision, the City of Sacramento has developed a housing strategy for the provision of
housing programs around six key themes, as follows:
     1) Sustainability and Stability
     2) Production
     3) Extremely Low-Income and Special Needs Housing
     4) Rehabilitation and Preservation
     5) Accessibility
     6) Housing Integration and Providing Housing Opportunities for All Income Groups
The six themes describe the housing needs and strategies that the City wishes to focus resources, efforts,
and policies on under this Housing Element. Demographic and trend data in this chapter supports those
themes by detailing current and future housing needs and deficiencies. This chapter further provides detail
on population and economic data which is linked to availability of and provision of housing.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H 3-1

                                                                        Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
This chapter is organized as follows:
        Population and Household Characteristics
        Income and Employment
        Housing Characteristics
        Housing Costs
        New Housing Needs, Special Housing Needs, and At-Risk Housing
Data in this Chapter is derived from a variety of sources, and compiled to show relationships, major trends,
and to respond to known issues and concerns. The most prominent data source used is the US Census data, in
varying forms, including the decennial census from 1990, 2000, and 2010, the 2006-2010 American
Community Survey (ACS) (and the 2008-2010 ACS to a limited extent) and the Comprehensive Housing
Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data, which are based on the 2005-2009 American Community Survey. The
decennial census data are based on a survey of the entire U.S. population, with about one person in six
answering a more detailed questionnaire. The ACS data are based on a much smaller survey size, with about 3
million people answering the survey each year. This smaller sample size results in a lower level of accuracy than
the decennial census. Because of the variability of the data sources, not all information is consistently available
during the same time period, and the margin of error for data also varies. The most recently available data by
source was always used, and notations are provided within the text and charts to document the source data
and source year.
The Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) compiled much of this data and provided it to the
jurisdictions in the region for use in updating housing elements. SACOG and HCD developed the regional
data review process so that data drawn from the pre-approved data sets would not need to be reviewed again
by HCD when the housing element is submitted. A letter from HCD describing this process is included in
Appendix F.
3.1 Population and Household Characteristics
Summary of Key Findings in this Section
        Sacramento’s population increased by nearly 60,000 between 2000 and 2010, largely housed within
         new development in North Natomas.
        The fastest growing age group was persons between 60 and 64, followed closely by persons aged 55
         to 59. However, the bulk of the population is under the age of 45, especially in the 25 to 34 age
         range.
        The number of persons 65 years of age or more has not increased as rapidly as other age groups,
         although the total number of older adults age 65 and older continues to increase.
        The city is continually diversifying. The Hispanic population has the fastest rate of population
         growth among all racial and ethnic groups.
Page H 3-2   |                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                      H-3
        Population within the city of Sacramento is forecasted to increase by 36 percent by 2035. The
         Central City is expected to grow the most between 2008 and 2035.
Sacramento’s population has grown steadily since 1990 at a rate approximately equal to that of the State as a
whole. Sacramento’s population growth is a sign of positive economic development, strategic City
investments, and community health. Population growth has been supported largely by development in
North Natomas, South Natomas, the South Area, and other large tracts of undeveloped land. Development
in these greenfield areas tends to be geared towards more traditional suburban family housing, in line with
the population trends during the nineties of increasing household size.1
Future housing needs, and the City’s strategy for housing production, will depend, in part, on the changing
character of Sacramento’s population. Household sizes have been increasing since the nineties as the
population continues to diversify. The younger population under age 45, especially ages 25 to 34, still makes
up the largest subset of the population.
However, long-term trends also suggest that the city will continue to experience an aging population. The
population of seniors (over 65) has increased since 2000, although they represent a shrinking percentage of
the city’s population. Older adults (55-64) approaching or at retirement age are among the fastest growing
age groups in the city. Aging of these groups is expected to result in additional housing demand associated
with active seniors and “empty nesters” without children. To respond to the changing desires of seniors, the
City is striving to provide alternative and accessible housing types located near cultural amenities, transit,
and services.
These long-term changes will affect the types of housing and services that future residents demand. The
average household size has increased slightly due to the increasing number of large unrelated households.
However, the total number of large families has decreased. At the same time the number of childless
households, seniors and older adults, and small families has also increased. These trends point to a greater
need for homes and amenities in a variety of sizes. This shift in demographics aligns with the City’s overall
focus on compact, infill housing outlined in the 2030 General Plan.
Population Growth Rates
Sacramento’s population was 466,488 on April 1, 2010. Table H 3-1 shows the city of Sacramento’s growth
rate relative to Sacramento County and the state. Sacramento’s share of the state population has remained
approximately one percent of the state total. The city of Sacramento’s growth rate since 1990 has more or
less equaled the overall growth in the state of California, with a slightly slower rate of growth from 1990-
2000 and slightly faster rate of growth from 2000-2010. Additionally, the growth rate was slightly higher
before the recession in 2008 (1.5 percent) and has since (2008-2012) decreased significantly (0.6 percent).
Similar to historical trends in the region (1990-2010), the population within the city of Sacramento is
forecasted by SACOG to increase by 1.3 percent annually from 2010 to 2020 and 1.3 percent annually from
2020 to 2035 (see Figure H 3-1). The population is expected to increase from 470,437 in 2012 to 640,381 by
2035 – a 36 percent increase in total population.
1 A household consists of any individual or group of people sharing a housing unit, whereas a family consists of a related group
  of people sharing a housing unit.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                         | Page H 3-3

                                                                             Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
                  Table H 3-1      Population Change 1990–2010
                                                              City of      County of
                                  Year                                                    California
                                                          Sacramento     Sacramento
                  Population
                                 1990                       369,365       1,041,218      29,760,021
                                 2000                       407,018       1,223,499      33,871,648
                                 2010                       466,488       1,418,788      37,253,956
                  Average Annual Percent Change
                               1990-2000                      1.0%           1.6%            1.3%
                               2000-2010                      1.4%           1.5%            1.0%
                               1990-2010                      1.2%           1.6%            1.1%
                 Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; U.S. Census Bureau, 1990,
                 2000 and 2010.
           650,000
                                                                                                     640,381
           600,000
           550,000
                                                                                    528,866
           500,000
                                                         470,437
                                               457,702           466,488
           450,000
                                            407,018
           400,000
                          369,365
           350,000
                    1990      1995      2000    2005        2010      2015     2020      2025       2030     2035
                          1990         2000       2008            2010        2012        2020          2035
          Population    369,365      407,018    457,702         466,488     470,437      528,866       640,381
  Source: 1990, 2000, 2010 Census; 2012 DOF; 2008, 2020, 2035 Sacramento Area Council of Governments, May 2013; City of
  Sacramento, 2013.
  Figure H 3-1: Existing Population and Population Projections for the City of Sacramento
Page H 3-4  |                                                                                  Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                        H-3
Population by Community Plan Areas
Table H 3-2 presents 2000 and 2010 population by community plan area. The North Natomas community
plan area had the highest population growth between 2000 and 2010, increasing by over 53,000 people.
South Natomas and the South Area also experienced significant growth rates at almost 13 percent and 7
percent respectively. The number of people living in the Central City, Fruitridge/Broadway, Land Park, and
the Pocket decreased slightly between 2000 and 2010. Land Park and Fruitridge Broadway experienced the
most significant population decline at 6 and 5 percent respectively. At the same time, the number of housing
units in these areas increased, indicating that average household size has decreased in these neighborhoods.
These demographic changes in established neighborhoods may indicate aging populations with grown
children, and increasing numbers of younger singles and couples. Contributing to this condition may be the
comparatively small, older homes in these areas of the city. Families with greater space needs may be seeking
housing farther from the city center in newer neighborhoods.
                    Table H 3-2         Population 2000-2010
                                                                                                    Percent
                                 Community Plan Area                    2000           2010         Change
                                                                                                  (2000-2010)
                    Arden/Arcade                                      14,049         14,070          0.1%
                    Central City                                      32,655         32,367         -0.9%
                    East Sacramento                                   30,969         31,635          2.2%
                    Fruitridge/Broadway                               63,675         60,716         -4.6%
                    Land Park                                         32,235         30,336         -5.9%
                    North Natomas                                      2,321         55,582       2,294.7%
                    North Sacramento                                  54,652         55,855          2.2%
                    Pocket                                            45,419         43,833         -3.5%
                    South Area                                        92,841         99,183          6.8%
                    South Natomas                                     38,692         43,645         12.8%
                    Total                                             412,016        469,232        13.9%
                    Note: Data for the community plan areas is based on 2000 and 2010 Census block groups.
                    Block group boundaries changed between 2000 and 2010. Slight boundary differences
                    occur in small areas in North Natomas, South Area/Land Park, and East Sacramento/
                    Fruitridge; however, the boundaries are similar enough to generalize by community area.
                    Source: 2000 and 2010 Census.
Table H 3-3 shows 2008 population data and 2020 and 2035 population projections by community plan area
for the city of Sacramento.2 Following earlier trends, North Natomas and the Central City are expected to
grow the most between 2008 and 2020 at 27 and 48 percent respectively. The Fruitridge/Broadway and
South Area are both expected to grow by about 14 percent. From 2020 to 2035, the Central City is
expected to grow by another 53 percent and Arden Arcade is expected to grow by 50 percent. Land Park,
which lost population from 2000 to 2010, and South Natomas are expected to have the smallest growth
rates overall from 2008 to 2035.
2 The Community Plan Area (CPA) population calculation includes all SACOG traffic analysis zones (TAZs) with 50 percent or
more of the developed area within the CPA boundary and the city limits. The totals included in Table H 3-3 do not equal those
in Figure H 3-1 because the TAZ areas differ from the city limits. Similarly, Table H 3-2 and H 3-3 are not directly comparable
because the Census data is grouped into block group boundaries, while the SACOG data is grouped into TAZ boundaries.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                             | Page H 3-5
                                                                          Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
             Table H 3-3     Population Projections 2008-2035
                                                                   Percent                  Percent
                                                       2020                       2035
                Community Plan Area         2008                   Change                   Change
                                                    (Projected)                (Projected)
                                                                 2008-2020                 2020-2035
             Arden/Arcade                 13,930      15,016        7.8%         22,496     49.8%
             Central City                 48,261      71,436       48.0%        109,312     53.0%
             East Sacramento              37,030      38,641        4.4%         45,426     17.6%
             Fruitridge/Broadway          55,428      62,578       12.9%         72,673     16.1%
             Land Park                    31,438      34,304        9.1%         37,905     10.5%
             North Natomas                54,369      69,235       27.3%         89,025     28.6%
             North Sacramento             46,579      51,805       11.2%         57,354     10.7%
             Pocket                       49,720      50,890        2.4%         52,940      4.0%
             South Area                   78,880      89,756       13.8%        105,908     18.0%
             South Natomas                42,065      45,209        7.8%         47,342      4.7%
             Total1                       457,702    528,866       15.6%        640,381     21.1%
             Source: SACOG, May 2013; City of Sacramento, 2013; Mintier Harnish, 2013.
Page H 3-6 |                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile     H-3
Adopted December 17, 2013          | Page H 3-7
                                                                            Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Age Distribution
The age of Sacramento’s population reflects recent growth trends, with the bulk of the 2010 population
(almost 66 percent) under the age of 45, and the median age of 33 years. However, since 2000, the fastest
growing age group is persons aged 60 to 64, whose numbers increased by 67 percent in 10 years, followed
closely by persons aged 55 to 59, whose numbers increased by 64 percent, as compared to an overall
population increase of 15 percent during that same time period. In contrast, the number of adults aged 35 to
44 remained stagnant and those aged 75 to 84 actually declined in population by 7 percent between 2000 and
2010. If most residents who are now in their 40s and 50s remain in the city over the next 20 years, the senior
population should continue to increase and eventually begin to increase as a proportion of the total population
in Sacramento.
Table H 3-4 shows the population distribution by age groups and Figure H 3-3 shows age distribution for
the city of Sacramento as estimated in 2010.
                   Table H 3-4     Age Distribution 2000 and 2010
                    Age Interval    2000     % of Total      2010     % of Total   % Change 2000–
                       (Years)     Number      Pop.        Number         Pop.           2010
                         0-9      61,930      15.2%        66,416       14.2%            7%
                       10-19      61,328      15.1%        64,472       13.8%            5%
                       20-24      30,195      7.4%         37,671        8.1%            25%
                       25-34      63,321      15.6%        77,608       16.6%            23%
                       35-44      61,483      15.1%        61,485       13.2%            0%
                       45-54      52,118      12.8%        59,546       12.8%            14%
                       55-59      16,783      4.1%         27,444        5.9%            64%
                       60–64      13,417      3.3%         22,426        4.8%            67%
                       65-74      23,052      5.7%         25,780        5.5%            12%
                       75-84      17,312      4.3%         16,049        3.4%            -7%
                         85+       6,079      1.5%          7,591        1.6%            25%
                        Total     407,018    100.0%       466,488      100.0%            15%
                   Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2000 and 2010 U.S.
                   Census.
Page H 3-8  |                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                            H-3
                                    65 to 74   75 to 84        Over 85
                                       5%         3%               2%
                                60 to 64                      Under 10
                                  5%                              14%
                             55 to 59
                                6%
                                                                          10 to 19
                                                                           14%
                                      45 to 54
                                        13%
                                                                         20 to 24
                                                                           8%
                                               35 to 44
                                                13%          25 to 34
                                                               17%
                        Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2010 U.S. Census.
                        Figure H 3-3: Age Distribution in 2010
Although the total number of city residents age 65 and over is rising slightly, seniors represented a slightly smaller
percentage of the city’s population in 2010 than they did in 2000. The senior population in 2000 was 46,443, or 11.4
percent of the total population. In 2010 the senior population increased to 49,420, but declined proportionally to
10.6 percent of the total population.
Another significant age cohort in the city is adolescents and young adults ages 10 to 24. These residents
represent the future of Sacramento, and have varied and unique housing needs. As these residents age, they
will increase the demand for housing appropriate for single adults and childless couples. As with the increasing
senior population, it is anticipated that alternative housing types, amenities, and urban housing options will be
valued by these younger adults.
Race/Ethnicity
Sacramento is a racially and ethnically diverse city, with pluralities of White, Black or African-American,
Asian, and Hispanic people. Sacramento’s racial and ethnic diversity has been influenced by a number of
historic factors. Some of these include:
        The presence of the State government and military facilities that provided job opportunities and
         upward mobility for minority populations;
        Sacramento’s agricultural, railroad, and mining legacies, which attracted Hispanic and Asian
         populations from various countries; and
        The attractiveness of the Sacramento region to recent immigrants from throughout the world.
Compared to the county, the city is significantly more diverse racially and ethnically. In 2010, 55 percent of
the city’s population was non-white, compared to 42.5 percent non-white in the county as a whole or 36.5
percent of the county excluding the city. Similarly, the city has a notably higher proportion of Hispanic
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                | Page H 3-9

                                                                                    Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
individuals than the county (almost 27 percent compared to fewer than 22 percent). Table H 3-5
summarizes the population by race and ethnicity in 2000 and 2010 for the city and county.
               Table H 3-5         2000 and 2010 City and County Comparison of Race and
                                   Ethnicity
                                                          % of                                                  % of
                          Race/                                                % of City
                                            City 2000     City     City 2010             County 2010          County
                         Ethnicity                                               Total
                                                         Total                                                  Total
               White                        196,549 48.3%          210,006      45.0%      815,151            57.5%
               Black or African-
                                             62,968     15.5%       68,335      14.6%      147,058            10.4%
               American
               American Indian,
                                              5,300      1.3%       5,291        1.1%       14,308             1.0%
               Alaskan Native
               Asian                         67,635     16.6%       85,503      18.3%      203,211            14.3%
               Native Hawaiian,
                                              3,861      0.9%       6,655        1.4%       13,858             1.0%
               Other Pacific Islander
               Other1                        70,705     17.4%       90,698      19.4%      225,202            15.9%
               Total                        407,018 100%           466,488 100.0% 1,418,788                  100.0%
               Persons of Hispanic
                                             87,974     21.6%      125,276      26.9%      306,196            21.6%
               Decent2
               Source: 2000 and 2010 U.S. Census.
               1
                  The “Other” category refers to persons of two or more races and any other category not already
                  defined which a person identifies.
               2
                  Hispanic Decent: This number comes from the total population and is not a category of race. It
                  is defined as anyone being of Spanish, Latino, or Hispanic decent.
The most notable changes in the racial and ethnic make-up of the city’s population between 2000 and 2010
were the significant numerical and percentage increases in the Hispanic and Asian populations and
percentage decreases in the White and Black/African-American populations. The rising number of Hispanic
residents reflects both immigration and natural increase among families of Hispanic origin. The trend of
increasing Hispanic population is similar to the state as a whole.
Although the White population of the city increased between 2000 and 2010, the percentage of the city’s
population that was White declined by over 3 percent. Populations of Asians, Native Hawaiians/Pacific
Islanders, and persons of other races increased between 2000 and 2010.
Household Size
The average household size increased in the city of Sacramento during
                                                                                           Average Household Size (2010)
the 1990s. Sacramento’s average household size in 1990 was 2.50,
increasing slightly to 2.57 in 2000 and 2.62 in 2010. Household size                       All Households.......................2.62
can be related to overcrowding and overpayment, which will be                              Owners ....................................2.68
discussed later in this section.                                                           Renters.....................................2.56
As shown in Table H 3-6, the number of households in Sacramento increased from 144,661 in 1990 to
174,624 in 2010, a 21 percent change. The city’s population is growing faster than the number of
households, increasing by 26 percent during this same time.
Page H 3-10  |                                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                         H-3
                 Table H 3-6     Household Change 1990–2010
                             Year                 Number of Households            Total Population
                             1990                         144,661                    369,365
                             2000                         154,581                    407,018
                             2010                         174,624                    466,488
                 Percent Change Since 1990                  21%                         26%
                 Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 1990, 2000 and 2010 U.S.
                 Census.
Conclusions
Based on the population and demographic data presented in this segment, an increase in housing needs for
older adults, young adults, and small families is forecasted, pointing to the need for alternative housing types
and designs. Average household size currently remains in the range of 2.6 to 2.7 people per household.
However, with the fastest-growing segments of the population being adults aged 55 to 64, it can be expected
that more households will need smaller housing options. The city’s population is growing steadily at a rate of
about 1 percent per year, with corresponding household growth projected to be concentrated in North
Natomas, South Area, Fruitridge/Broadway, and the Central City.
3.2 Income and Employment
Summary of Key Findings of this Section
       Almost 50 percent of all households have lower incomes.
       The elderly and large families are more likely than others to have lower incomes.
       The city’s income distribution resembles a “barbell” with large numbers of relatively poor and
        affluent residents and relatively fewer middle income residents.
       Trade, transportation, and utilities jobs; professional and business services jobs; and government
        jobs make up most of the region’s employment base.
       The occupations projected to have the most job openings and the fastest growing occupations
        support “barbell” income distribution.
       There were 299,732 jobs within the Sacramento Policy Area in 2008. By 2020 the number of jobs is
        expected to increase by 8 percent to 324,027, and by 2035 the number of jobs is expected to increase
        by another 20 percent to 390,112. Sacramento will add over 90,000 jobs from 2008 to 2035. Over
        the entire projection period, the Central City and North Natomas areas are projected to experience
        the greatest increase in employment, while Land Park is projected to experience the lowest increase
        in employment.
       Job growth and opportunities are mostly in lower wage employment sectors.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H 3-11

                                                                            Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Income
The correlation between household income and
housing needs is undeniable, especially for lower                Income Categories for the Housing Element are:
income-residents. Before the housing market boom,
                                                                 Extremely Low-Income...................... <30% of median
even as incomes in Sacramento steadily rose, housing             Very Low-Income: ........................... 31-50% of median
costs on the open market grew at a much faster rate              Low-Income..................................... 51–80% of median
than incomes. During the housing boom, moderate-                 Moderate-Income .......................... 81–120% of median
income households increasingly struggled to find                 Above Moderate-Income .................>120% of median
adequate housing that they could afford. In the past
                                                                 In 2009, 48% of Sacramento households had lower
few years, housing costs have consistently decreased             incomes
making housing affordable to moderate-income
households and even some low-income households.
However, very low- and extremely low-income households were still unable to afford housing even as home
prices decreased, making them most affected by the gap between incomes and housing costs.
This section compares incomes based on the median income, as shown                   2009 Median Household Income
in the highlight box above. Collectively, extremely low-, very low-, and                               (U.S. Census)
low-income are referred to as “lower income” in this section.
According to the Census Bureau, Sacramento’s median household City of Sacramento................ $50,267
                                                                                   County of Sacramento .......... $56,439
income in 2009 was $50,267, compared to a median household income
of $56,439 countywide. The 2009 city median income represents a 36 percent increase since 1999. While the
gap between the median city and county incomes grew from 1989 to 1999, in 2009 the gap decreased below
what it was in 1989. Table H 3-7 compares citywide and countywide median income in 1989, 1999, and
2009.
                 Table H 3-7      City and County Median Income 1989, 1999, and 2009
                       Year               City                 County                % difference
                       1989             $28,183               $32,297                       15%
                       1999             $37,049               $43,816                       18%
                       2009             $50,267               $56,439                       12%
                 Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 1990 and 2000 US
                 Census; 2006-2010 ACS.
Contributing to the inequality between city and county incomes are relative income levels within the city
itself. In 2009 48 percent of the city’s households had incomes less than 80 percent of the countywide
median, compared to 43 percent countywide. The countywide median income is typically used as a standard
measure against which to compare incomes in different communities.
The percentage of lower-income groups overall has decreased since 2000. However, the percentage of
lower-income households is still much more significant for large families and the elderly, as shown in Table
H 3-8. Fifty-seven percent of elderly households and 60 percent of large family households are lower-
income. Although the elderly and large families represent just 36 percent of lower-income households, the
prevalence of lower incomes among these residents signals a relatively greater need for affordable housing
compared to other groups.
Page H 3-12  |                                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                     H-3
                  Table H 3-8         2009 Estimated Number of Households by Income Level
                                                                       Household Type
                       Income Level                         Small      Large                                % of
                                              Senior                               Other        Total
                                                          Families1   Families                              Total
                  Extremely Low-
                                               7,135        8,185      2,780      9,395        27,495       16%
                  Income
                  Very Low-Income              6,080        8,690      3,140       5,370       23,280       13%
                  Low-Income                   6,180       11,640      4,585      10,105       32,510      19%
                  % Lower Income               57%          41%         60%        47%          48%         48%
                  Moderate +                  14,705       41,055      7,070      27,845       90,675       52%
                  Total Households           34,100       69,570      17,575      52,715      173,960      100%
                  Source: 2005-2009 CHAS.
                  1
                    ”Small Families” are 2 to 4 related persons and “Large Families” are 5 or more related
                    persons.
In addition to the high percentage of lower-income elderly and large family households, 16 percent of all
households are extremely low-income, meaning that they earn less than 30 percent of the countywide
median income, or $21,850 for a family of four. The challenges faced by households with extremely low
incomes are disproportionately felt among seniors (26 percent) and large families (30 percent) in relation to
their relative numbers in the overall household population. Although the total share of lower-income
persons has decreased overall by about 2 percent, the share of senior and small family households with
extremely low incomes has increased by 7 and 9 percent respectively from 1999 to 2009. Persons with
disabilities are also more likely to have extremely low incomes than the population at large. Extremely low-
income households typically receive some form of public assistance, earn very low wages, or live off of
retirement incomes. Many are homeless, at risk of homelessness, or live in substandard housing.
In contrast to the large lower-income population in the city, about 31 percent of households had incomes of
$75,000 or more in 2009. Only 19 percent had incomes in the middle range ($50,000–$74,999). As a result,
the income distribution in the city looks like a “barbell,” with larger proportions of the population at the
ends of the income range and a smaller proportion in the middle. Figure H 3-4 presents income levels for all
households.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                         | Page H 3-13

                                                                             Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
                  60%
                                   50%
                  50%
                  40%
                                                                                     31%
                  30%
                                                            19%
                  20%
                  10%
                    0%
                              Lower Income            Middle Income             Higher Income
                                $0-49,999           $50,000-$74,999                $75,000+
                                                    % of Households
                 Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2006-2010 ACS.
                 Figure H 3-4: 2009 Income Distribution
Employment Trends
Future housing needs depend, in part, on employment trends. Changes                Major Employment Sectors
in the types and pay levels of jobs available in Sacramento and the
surrounding region will have an impact on the type and cost of housing             Government Jobs (27%)
that future residents will desire and can afford. The Sacramento region            Trade, Transportation, and Utilities
is a hub for state government and related industries, health services,             (17%)
                                                                                   Professional and Business Services
financial services, and local/regional serving retail. Sacramento also has         Sector Jobs (13%)
an opportunity to capture a growing share of employment in emerging
technology and energy industries. The region’s current employment                  92,000 new jobs by 2018
base, and the potential to attract new types of employers that offer
better paying jobs, will affect future housing needs in Sacramento.
The 2010 Census shows 357,159 persons age 16 and over employed in the city of Sacramento with a 7.4
percent unemployment rate, and over 1.6 million persons age 16 and over employed in the region with a 6.1
percent unemployment rate. The government jobs sector leads the region’s employment base at 27 percent;
followed by the trade, transportation, and utilities sector at 17 percent; and the professional and business
services sector at 13 percent.
Figure H 3-5 presents 2008 existing employment data and 2020 and 2035 employment projections from
SACOG for the Sacramento Policy Area. In 2008 there were 299,732 jobs in Sacramento. By 2020 the
number of jobs is expected to increase by 8 percent to 324,027, and by 2035 the number of jobs is expected
to increase by another 20 percent to 390,112, for a total increase of 30 percent from 2008 to 2035.
Sacramento will add over 90,000 jobs from 2008 to 2035.
Page H 3-14  |                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                  H-3
          400000
                                                                                                            390,112
          375000
          350000
          325000
                                                         324,027
          300000
                            299,732 (2008)
          275000
          250000
                  2010            2015                2020               2025              2030               2035
        Source: SACOG (February 2013), California Department of Finance, City of Sacramento, and Mintier Harnish.
        Figure H 3-5: Employment Projections for the Sacramento Policy Area
Table H 3-9 shows 2008 existing employment data and 2020 and 2035 employment projections for the
Sacramento Policy Area by community plan area. By 2020 the Central City is projected to experience the
greatest increase in employment, adding 6,642 jobs from 2008 to 2020 (for a total of 121,450 jobs). The
North Natomas area is also projected to experience significant employment growth, adding 6,489 jobs by
2020 (for a total of 28,018 jobs). In contrast, the Pocket area is projected to add only 51 jobs from 2008 to
2020 (for a total of 5,027 jobs).
During the next projection period from 2020 to 2035, the Central City is projected to experience the
greatest increase in employment again, adding 31,386 jobs (for a total of 152,836 jobs). North Natomas,
Fruitridge/Broadway, and the South Area are also projected to experience significant employment growth
by 2035. Land Park is projected to experience the lowest increase in employment, adding only 697 jobs
between 2020 and 2035 (for a total of 13,694 jobs). Over the entire projection period from 2012 to 2035,
the Central City and North Natomas areas are projected to experience the greatest increase in employment.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                      | Page H 3-15
                                                                                  Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
            Table H 3-9        Employment Projections 2008-2035
                                                                      Net New                Net New     Change
                                                          2020                     2035
                Community Plan Area            2008                     Jobs                   Jobs     2008-2035
                                                       (Projected)              (Projected)
                                                                     2008-2020              2020-2035
            Arden/Arcade                     24,876      25,628         752       27,478      1,850       2,602
            Central City                    114,808     121,450        6,642     152,836     31,386      38,028
            East Sacramento                  21,633      23,129        1,496      25,524      2,395       3,891
            Fruitridge/Broadway              48,174      52,140        3,966      60,152      8,012      11,978
            Land Park                        12,863      12,997         134       13,694       697         831
            North Natomas                    21,529      28,018        6,489      40,169     12,151      18,640
            North Sacramento                 18,766      19,476         710       21,205      1,729       2,439
            Pocket                            4,976      5,027           51       5,815        788         839
            South Area                       19,639      21,728        2,089      26,868      5,140       7,229
            South Natomas                    12,468      14,434        1,966      16,371      1,937       3,903
            Total                           299,732     324,027       24,295     390,112     66,085      90,380
            Source: City of Sacramento Planning Staff, SACOG.
According to the 2010 projections by the California Employment Development Department (EDD), over
92,000 jobs are forecast to be added to the Sacramento region between 2008 and 2018. As shown in Figure
H 3-6 projected growth in employment sectors in the region are expected to be similar to existing (2010)
employment in 2018. While the government; trade, transportation, and utilities; and financial activities
sectors will decline to a slightly smaller share of employment; the professional and business services;
education services, health care, and social assistance; and construction sectors will grow to a slightly larger
share of employment. Most of the fastest-growing employment sectors in the region, including most of the
occupations with the greatest number of projected job openings over the next several years, pay relatively
low wages.3
3 California Employment Development Department (EDD), 2008-2018 Fastest Growing Occupations, Sacramento-Arden
  Arcade-Roseville Metropolitan Statistical Area (El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, and Yolo Counties), 2010.
Page H 3-16   |                                                                                     Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                     H-3
                                250,000
                                200,000
          Number of Employees
                                150,000
                                100,000
                                 50,000
                                     0
                                          2008 Estimated Employment   2018 Projected Employment
        Source: EDD, 2010.
        Figure H 3-6: Estimated and Projected Employment Growth by Sector
Figure H 3-7 shows the 10 employment sectors that have the greatest projected number of job openings by
2018 categorized by income level based on average wages. When compared to the 2010 U.S. Census
countywide median income ($56,439), 69 percent of the 170,980 job openings in the top 10 occupations
projected through 2018 pay wages equivalent to low-income or less. Only two job categories in the top 10
occupations, registered nurse and first-line supervisors/managers of office and administrative support
workers, pay wages above the countywide median income, at $101,562 and $61,480 respectively (180 and
109 percent of median income). It should be noted that this analysis compares individual wages to the
median household income, which includes many households that have two wage earners. A household with
two people working in the occupations shown in Figure 3-7 may have a high enough combined income to
qualify as a higher income bracket.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H 3-17
                                                                                  Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
 60,000
                                                                                        Registered Nurses
 50,000                                                                                 First-Line Supervisors/Managers of
                                                                                        Office and Administrative Support
                                                                                        Workers
                                                                                        Stock Clerks and Order Fillers
 40,000
                                                                                        Office Clerks, General
 30,000
                                                                                        Customer Service Representatives
                                                                                        Combined Food Preparation and
 20,000
                                                                                        Serving Workers, Including Fast Food
                                                                                        Waiters and Waitresses
 10,000
                                                                                        Retail Salespersons
       0                                                                                Cashiers
                    VLI               LI               MI               AMI
              $17,496.00-        $28,221.51-      $45,151.01-      $67,727.01+
              $28,221.50         $45,151.00       $67,727.00
Note: VLI: Very low-income, LI: Low-income, MI: Moderate-income, AMI: Above moderate-income
Source: EDD, 2010.
Figure H 3-7: Projected Job Openings in the Top 10 Occupations by Income Category
  Another measure of anticipated future job growth is fastest growing occupations, which includes those with
  a small number of total employees and a rapid growth rate, as shown in Table H 3-10. These occupations
  may provide clues about what industries or areas of the economy are positioned for faster growth in
  Sacramento. The projected growth in medical and dental assistants, for instance, may reflect an expanding
  health care industry. The projected growth in communications analysts may indicate an overflow from Bay
  Area technology firms as some functions are moved to lower cost markets such as Sacramento. Increases in
  self-enrichment teachers, which teach voluntary classes that students take for fun or personal enrichment,
  may reflect changing education priorities.
  Page H 3-18     |                                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                      H-3
                Table H 3-10 Fastest Growing Occupations 2008–2018
                                  (Sacramento-Arden Arcade-Roseville Metropolitan
                                  Statistical Area)
                                                            Annual Average          Median
                                                              Employment    Percent        Percent
                             Occupational Title                                     Hourly
                                                                            Change         of MHI1
                                                             2008      2018          Wage
                Medical Scientists (except
                                                           1,650      2,420   47    $42.20  156
                Epidemiologists)
                Personal and Home Care Aides              20,410     29,840   46    $11.43   42
                Network Systems and Data
                                                           1,590      2,290   44    $34.86  128
                Communications Analysts
                Home Health Aides                          3,170      4,430   40    $10.32   38
                Dental Hygienists                          1,780      2,450   38    $45.23  167
                Dental Assistants                          2,690      3,690   37    $18.43   68
                Self-Enrichment Education Teachers         1,060      1,450   37    $19.60   72
                Medical Assistants                         2,810      3,820   36    $14.12   52
                Fitness Trainers and Aerobics
                                                           2,260      3,020   34    $20.28   75
                Instructors
                Surgical Technologists                      520        690    33    $23.23   86
                Source: EDD, 2010.
                1
                  2010 U.S. Census countywide median income ($56,439).
In contrast to job openings in existing fields, anticipated job growth in the Sacramento region over the next
10 years includes a number of jobs in the low- and very low-income categories. Addition of these jobs
should add to the lower end of a modified “barbell” income distribution, providing fewer opportunities for
upward mobility.
Conclusions
While Sacramento’s median income continues to rise, the challenges for those most in need increases as
well, perpetuating the gap between middle- and lower-income households. The “barbell” distribution of
incomes in Sacramento is likely to become more pronounced. While higher-paying government sector;
trade, transportation, and utilities sector; and professional and business services sector jobs continue to lead
the region’s employment base, the occupations projected to have the greatest number of openings and the
fastest-growing occupations are expected to add to the low end of the income spectrum. Among lower-
income households, needs are most acute for seniors and larger families. Seniors, in particular, are least likely
to benefit from job growth and economic opportunities, and may have additional housing challenges not
evident simply in income categories.
While the city has experienced an economic slowdown during the recent global recession, Sacramento is
anticipated to experience strong long-term employment growth. Increases in employment and
accompanying population growth will drive a need for additional housing production for all income levels,
including lower-income households filling many of the lower paying jobs anticipated to be created through
2018.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 3-19

                                                                                  Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
3.3 Housing Characteristics
Summary of Key Findings of this Section
        Nearly 32,000 housing units were built between 2000 and 2010 (including about 20,000 single-family
         homes), the largest amount of homebuilding since the 1950s.
        About two-thirds of the city’s housing is single-family homes, of which 26 percent are renter-
         occupied (compared to 21 percent countywide and statewide).
        Sacramento has a relatively low homeownership rate—49 percent compared to 58 percent
         countywide and 56 percent statewide. The homeownership rate has decreased slightly since 2000.
        The vacancy rate excluding seasonal and homes rented or sold but not occupied in 2010 was 3
         percent for owner-occupied housing, 8 percent for rental housing, and 6 percent total, above the
         “normal” vacancy rates for a housing market in balance. However, when including seasonal and
         homes rented or sold but not occupied, the overall vacancy rate is higher at about 8.5 percent.
        The Sacramento Region has one of the highest foreclosure rates of any Metropolitan Statistical
         Areas in the United States. The North Sacramento, South, and Fruitridge/Broadway areas have the
         highest vacancy and foreclosure rates within the city.
        About 63 percent of the city’s housing units are more than 30 years old, making them susceptible to
         repair or maintenance concerns.
        Between 1 percent and 18 percent of the city’s housing (2,000 to 36,000 units) may need
         rehabilitation and another 2,000 to 3,000 units may need replacement.
Housing Type
Between 2000 and 2010, nearly 32,000 housing units were constructed in the city, largely in North Natomas.
About 20,000 single-family homes and 11,000 multifamily units were added during this period, representing
the highest rate of housing construction since the 1950s, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.4 The
proportion of single-family homes (detached and attached) held constant between 2000 and 2010. While the
proportion of multifamily units also held constant overall between 2000 to 2010, the percentage of
multifamily developments of 5 or more units increased by 2 percent and the percentage of multifamily
developments of 2-4 units decreased by 2 percent. Table H 3-11 compares the number of housing units by
type in 1990, 2000, and 2010.
4 The city experienced greater population and housing unit gains in the 1960s, than in the 1950s, but this was largely due to the
  merger of the City of Sacramento and the City of North Sacramento in 1964.
Page H 3-20   |                                                                                     Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                  H-3
                Table H 3-11 Housing Type (1990–2010)1
                                                    1990                   2000                   2010
                    Type of Structure         Housing     % of     Housing       % of     Housing       % of
                                               Units      Total      Units       Total      Units       Total
                Single-family2                98,105      64%     107,229        65%      127,660       65%
                Multifamily 2-4 units         14,971      10%      15,859        10%       16,277       8%
                Multifamily 5+ units          35,303      23%      37,156        23%       47,823       25%
                Mobile homes/other             4,983       3%       3,670        2%        3,686        2%
                Total                        153,362     100%     163,914       100%      195,446      100%
                Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; DOF, 2010; 1990 and 2000
                U.S. Census.
                1
                  2000 Census April 1, 2000: Housing Unit total may differ in census due to different sampling
                  methods and definitions of units.
                2
                  Single-family includes attached and detached units.
Housing type (e.g., single-family, multifamily) is not the same as tenure (owner versus rental occupancy).
Citywide, nearly 26 percent of single-family homes are rentals, compared to about 21 percent countywide
and statewide. Less than 4 percent of multifamily units are owner-occupied citywide, compared to over 5
percent countywide and 10 percent statewide.
Housing Type by Community Plan Area
The Central City, Arden Arcade, and South Natomas communities have the highest percentage of
multifamily units in the city. These communities are characterized by a larger share of commercial and/or
office development than other areas of the city and higher density residential neighborhoods. Figure H 3-8
shows the distribution of single-family and multifamily housing by community plan area. The 2012 estimates
are based on City of Sacramento land use data, which are not the same as California Department of Finance
estimates used in Table H 3-11.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                      | Page H 3-21

                                                                                Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
                                 100%
                                 90%
                                 80%
      Percent of Housing Units
                                 70%
                                 60%
                                 50%
                                 40%
                                 30%
                                 20%
                                 10%
                                     0%
                                          Single Family Units       Multifamily Units
    Source: City of Sacramento, 2012.
    Note: Does not include mobile homes. Mixed use and retirement community units were considered multifamily.
    Figure H 3-8: Housing Type by Community Plan Area
Housing Tenure
  Household Tenure (2010)          Sacramento has a relatively low rate of homeownership, about 49
                                   percent, compared to homeownership countywide and statewide (58 and
  Homeowners     86,271    49 %    56 percent, respectively). The citywide homeownership rate has
  Renters        88,353    51 %    decreased slightly since 2000, when it was 50 percent. As noted above,
  Total         174,624   100 %
                                   the percent of renter-occupied single-family homes in the city
(26 percent) is high relative to countywide and statewide rates, which partly explains the decrease in
homeownership during a time period when the number of single-family homes increased by about 19
percent. This discrepancy is further understood in light of the financial markets that accompanied this
building boom, which allowed for easy access to credit and encouraged investment in real estate, especially
in emerging markets such as Sacramento. After the housing market crashed many of these same areas that
experienced a building boom, such as North Natomas, saw many new homeowners foreclosing on their
homes and becoming renters again.
Page H 3-22                      |                                                                Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                       H-3
Vacancy Rates
Vacancy figures used in this section come from three different sources which                         Vacancy Rates (2010)
report different time periods and use different methods to measure vacancy;
therefore, they are not directly comparable to one another. However, using all                       3 % of Homeowner Units
three data sets allows for a more detailed understanding of vacancy rates in the                     8 % of Rental Units
city.                                                                                                6 % Total Vacancy Rate
In 2010, the vacancy rate was 3 percent for owner-occupied housing and 8 percent for rental housing. This
estimate excludes units rented or sold but not occupied, seasonal homes, and other vacant housing not
available to occupy. The total vacancy rate was 6 percent.5 Real estate and housing professionals consider a
balanced housing market to have a vacancy rate of about 5 percent overall, with a rate of 2 percent for
owner-occupied housing and 6 to 7 percent for rental housing.6 Table H 3-12 shows vacancy rates between
1990 and 2010. The higher vacancy rate in 2010 is due to the high level of housing construction during the
early 2000s and the subsequent foreclosures that followed.
                   Table H 3-12 Vacancy Rate Excluding Units Not Available to Occupy
                                      1990–20101
                                        Year                                        Vacancy Rate
                                       1990                                             4%
                                       2000                                             4%
                                       2010                                             6%
                   Note: 1 Excludes units rented or sold but not occupied, seasonal homes, and other vacant
                   housing not available to occupy.
                   Source: 1990, 2000, 2010 Census.
Although the city’s vacancy rates in Table H 3-11 suggest a housing market in balance, there are significant
differences in vacancy by community plan area and housing type. Figure H 3-9 shows average residential
vacancy rates excluding units rented or sold but not occupied, seasonal homes, and other vacant housing
not available to occupy by community plan area for 2010. These data indicate a vacancy rate of
approximately 8 percent, slightly different from the 6 percent as estimated for the entire city. The Central
City has the highest vacancy rate at almost 12 percent and East Sacramento has the lowest vacancy rate at
5.42 percent.
5 The City calculates vacancy rates using Census data, and excluding units rented or sold but not occupied, seasonal homes, and
  other vacant housing not available to occupy. These vacancy rates may not be directly comparable to the CPA data presented in
  Figure 3-10 or the overall vacancy data in Table 3-12.
6 Giang Hoang-Burdette, Nobody’s Home: California Residential Vacancy Rates, May 9, 2012; Joan C. Fahrenthold, Associated
  Press, America’s Sickest Housing Markets, 2012; Emett Pierce, San Diego Union Tribune, Uptick in County Rental, Vacancy
  Rates, Tenants Together, June 6, 2008; William Poe, Area Landlords High on Healthy Rental Market, July 27, 2012; Housing
  New York City, 2008; Mary Ellen Podmolik, Chicago’s a Renter’s Market, but Vacancies, Delinquencies on Rise, Census Paints
  a Bleak Picture of Arizona Housing, Census Paints a Bleak Picture of Arizona Housing, 2011; Rolf Boone, The Olympian,
  Thurston Apartment Vacancy Rates Up a Bit, 2012; Bill Conerly, Housing Recovery Progressing Very Slowly, Businomics,
  2011.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                          | Page H 3-23

                                                                                              Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
                                      12.00%
                                      10.00%
                       Vacancy Rate
                                       8.00%
                                       6.00%
                                       4.00%
                                       2.00%
                                       0.00%
                                                                     2010 Vacancy Rate
                  Source: City of Sacramento, 2010; 2010 Census.
                  Note: Because vacancy rates for the community plan areas were calculated based on the
                  planning area and may include portions of block groups outside the city limits, the data may not
                  be directly comparable to that presented in Table H 3-11.
                  Figure H 3-9: Residential Vacancy Rates by Community Plan Area
Vacancy rates in Sacramento are higher when seasonal homes and homes rented or sold but not occupied
are included. As shown in Table H 3-13, the vacancy rate in Sacramento has increased since 2000 when the
vacancy rate was closer to normal at 5.7 percent. However, by 2010 the vacancy rate had reached 8.5 percent
when, according to the U.S. Census, a total of 16,287 of 190,911 housing units were identified as vacant
within the city limits. Similarly, the Department of Finance 2012 estimates reported 16,317 vacant units
within the city.
                       Table H 3-13 Overall Vacancy Rate in Sacramento 2000–2012
                                Year           Total Housing Units     Vacant Housing Units      Vacancy Rate
                             2000                  163,957                    9,376                 5.7%
                             2010                  190,911                   16,287                 8.5%
                             2012                  191,268                   16,317                 8.5%
                      Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2000, 2010 U.S.
                      Census; Department of Finance Table 2: E-5 City/ County Population and Housing
                      Estimates, 2012.
Figure H 3-10 shows the overall vacancy rate by Census block group in the city of Sacramento. Most block
groups in the city have vacancy rates above the optimal level of 5 percent. Less than 20 percent of block
groups had a vacancy rate of 5 percent or less. The highest concentration of extremely high vacancy rates is
in the Central City, where many block groups in the northern Downtown area are more than 20 percent
vacant. There are also several block groups that are 15 to 20 percent vacant in North Sacramento along
Interstate 80 and Business 80, and between the South Area and Fruitridge/Broadway Areas along Highway
99.
Page H 3-24   |                                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                              H-3
A third source of vacancy data is the non-profit organization Sacramento Self Help Housing. Sacramento
Self Help Housing collects vacancy data for low-cost (generally class “B” and “C”) rental apartment
complexes. The majority (but not all) of the units polled by Sacramento Self Help Housing are located
within the city of Sacramento. During the third quarter of 2012, Sacramento Self Help Housing’s data
indicate approximately a 4 percent vacancy rate for these lower cost apartments. This vacancy rate is
substantially below 6 to 7 percent suggested for a balanced rental housing market.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                  | Page H 3-25

              Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Page H 3-26 |                Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                         H-3
Age and Condition of Housing
Age of Housing
The age of housing, by itself, does not necessarily equate with poor housing conditions. However, a
neighborhood with a large stock of older housing (particularly older non-subsidized rental housing)
occupied by a high percentage of lower-income households has a much greater potential for housing
problems than an affluent neighborhood with older housing.
If not properly maintained, housing can exhibit obvious signs of “wear and tear” after 30 years (or even less,
depending on the quality of materials and construction). Non-structural components such as paint, siding,
doors, windows, roof shingles, electrical, plumbing, and ventilation can deteriorate or fail during the first 30
years. After 40 years or more, housing can exhibit structural problems (e.g., sagging roofs, foundation
failure, walls out of plumb) if subject to inadequate maintenance and repairs.
Table H 3-14 shows when housing units were built in the city. Of the 191,000 housing units in the city
counted by the ACS in 2010, about 63 percent were built before 1980, and about 50 percent were built
before 1970. The median age of housing was built in 1972. Of all housing units built before 1970, 65
percent were owner occupied and 35 percent were renter occupied. In 2000 approximately 17 percent of
pre-1970 housing units were occupied by households below the poverty level of income.7 Except for
subsidized rental housing maintained to state or federal quality standards, these older housing units occupied
by persons living in poverty may be most vulnerable to problems of housing condition.
                  Table H 3-14 Age of Housing Stock
                             Year Built                    Number of Units                % of total
                           2005 or later                        8,939                      4.7%
                            2000–2004                          19,253                      10.1%
                            1990–1999                          13,224                      6.9%
                            1980–1989                          28,473                      14.9%
                            1970–1979                          30,611                      16.0%
                            1960–1969                          23,969                      12.5%
                            1950–1959                          26,638                      13.9%
                            1940–1949                          17,264                      9.0%
                          1939 or earlier                      22,629                      11.8%
                              TOTAL                           191,000                      100%
                  Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2006-2010 ACS (Selected
                  Housing Characteristics).
Housing Condition
Potential Housing Rehabilitation Need. Since 2008, the City of Sacramento has been conducting
comprehensive and proactive code enforcement activities of rental properties in targeted neighborhoods of
the city as part of the Rental Housing Inspection Program (RHIP), which is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 9. The program has resulted in a marked decrease in substandard rental housing throughout the city
as owners are subject to fines and re-inspection if code violations are found. Of the 17,166 properties
7 Comparable statistics for 2010 are not available from the 2010 Census or 2006-2010 ACS.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H 3-27

                                                                                Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
inspected between 2008 and 2012, only 122 units (or 1 percent) were deemed substandard. Of the
substandard rental properties 68 percent were single-family homes, 29 percent were duplexes, 2 percent
were small multifamily projects (3 to 4 units), and 1 percent were larger multifamily projects (5 or more
units). Based on data as well as discussions with City Code Enforcement staff, it is estimated that only
about 1 percent of the city’s rental housing stock (about 1,950 units) would be considered substandard and
in need of substantial rehabilitation.
Another indicator of housing condition, particularly that of single-family homes, is the data from the City’s
Vacant Building Program. Many areas of Sacramento have been impacted by the wave of foreclosures that
began in 2006. Foreclosures resulted in large numbers of vacant homes in neighborhoods such as
Meadowview (South Area), Oak Park (Fruitridge/Broadway Area), and Del Paso Heights (North
Sacramento area), among others. In order to address concerns about substandard housing conditions
associated with bank-owned foreclosed properties, the City revised its Vacant Building Ordinance to
decrease the wait time before a structure may be declared a nuisance, increased fees and penalties, and
streamlined the vacant building enforcement process. Unlike the RHIP, the City’s Vacant Building Program
responds to resident complaints. The number of complaints began increasing in 2006 and peaked in 2008,
but have generally declined since then as more investors have purchased these foreclosed homes, repaired
them, and converted them into rental housing. As a result, what was a considerable problem for many
neighborhoods in terms of housing condition, public safety, and blight has begun to ease suggesting that the
condition of many of these homes is slowly improving. Table H 3-15 shows the number of vacant building
complaints by year and by community plan area.
                 Table H 3-15       Residential Vacant Building Cases by Community Plan Area
                 Community Plan
                 Area                     2006    2007    2008     2009    2010      2011    2012    Total
                 Arden Arcade                 1       1       3         1       1        2       3      12
                 Central City                17      15     17          5     10        10     14       88
                 East Sacramento              5       6       1         2       5        1       5      25
                 Fruitridge/Broadway         91    128     169       131     123        95    105      842
                 Land Park                    9       9       8         8       5        4       7      50
                 North Natomas                6      13     16        15      15         4       5      74
                 North Sacramento            61    134     170       100      76        47     79      667
                 Pocket                       2       7       8       10      10         4       3      44
                 South Area                  42      95    189       141     160        78     86      791
                 South Natomas                6      22     40        34        9       13       8     132
                 Citywide                   240    430     621       447     414      258     315    2,725
                 Source: City of Sacramento, Code Enforcement Division, Vacant Building Program, 2013.
The 2005-2009 CHAS data indicates that about 36,000 housing units affordable to extremely low- and very
low-income residents were built before 1980. This figure could be a proxy for housing rehabilitation need
based on the age and presumed average condition of these units. By this measure approximately 21 percent
of the city’s housing units may need rehabilitation.
Based on these two sources, the City estimates that at least 2,000 but as many as 36,000 housing units in the
city may need rehabilitation.
Page H 3-28   |                                                                                    Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                    H-3
Potential Housing Replacement Need. The best proxy for housing conditions available through the US
Census is self-reported deficiencies in plumbing and kitchen facilities. In the 2010 ACS, 1,043 total units in
the city were estimated to lack plumbing facilities, and 1,972 units were estimated to lack kitchen facilities.
According to this measure, a total of 3,015 housing units may need replacement.
In 2007, the Center for Housing Policy conducted a study of housing problems for working families in various
metropolitan areas across the country, including the Sacramento Metropolitan Area.8 The Center concluded
that approximately 2 percent of working families (those earning between minimum wage and 120 percent of
median income) live in dilapidated housing that may need replacement.9 By applying this rate to the number of
working families in the city in 2010, about 2,031 working families may live in dilapidated housing in the city.
This number could be higher, however, because Sacramento has a relatively older housing stock with a higher
proportion of working families than other jurisdictions in the Sacramento region.
Based on these two sources, the City estimates its housing replacement need at between 2,000 and 3,000
housing units.
Conclusions
Sacramento experienced a boom in housing construction during the 2000s, the highest level experienced
since the 1950s. Nearly 32,000 housing units were constructed between 2000 and 2010, mostly single-family
homes. Citywide, about two-thirds of housing units are single-family homes (detached and attached).
Despite the high percentage of single-family homes, Sacramento lags in homeownership, in part due to the
large percentage of lower income households in the city − about half of all households. Just under half of
Sacramento households are homeowners, compared to 58 percent countywide and 56 percent statewide.
Vacancy rates excluding units rented or sold but not occupied, seasonal homes, and other vacant housing
not available to occupy in 2010 were 3 percent for owner-occupied housing and 8 percent for rental
housing, above the “normal” vacancy rates for a housing market in balance. Overall vacancy rates in
Sacramento are higher when seasonal homes and homes rented or sold but not occupied are included, at
about 8.5 percent total in 2010. However, lower-cost apartments have a vacancy rate of just 4 percent,
increasing pressures on lower-income families to find affordable housing.
About 63 percent of the city’s housing stock was built before 1980, meaning that a large number of housing
units are susceptible to a need for rehabilitation or replacement. Although the City has not conducted a
comprehensive housing condition survey, information from several sources suggests that between 2,000 and
36,000 housing units may need rehabilitation and between 2,000 and 3,000 housing units may need
replacement.
3.4 Housing Cost and Affordability
Summary of Key Findings of this Section
       The median home price decreased in the city from $333,700 in 2007 to a low of $149,250 in 2012.
8 The U.S. Census Bureau defines Sacramento Metropolitan Area as the counties of Sacramento, Placer, El Dorado, and Yolo.
  No data was available specifically for the City of Sacramento in the Center for Housing Policy report.
9 The study defined dilapidated conditions as severe physical problems, including inadequate plumbing, heating, and/or electrical
  systems.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                        | Page H 3-29

                                                                       Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
       Area rents increased 6 percent per year on average between 2002 and 2007. Rent increases were
        higher in the early 2000s but leveled off after 2003, increasing only four percent between 2007 and
        2010.
       In 2005 about 7 percent of homes were priced at a level affordable to a household earning the
        median income in the Sacramento area. This drastically increased to 83.2 percent by 2011 and seems
        to have held constant in 2012 (81.0 for the third quarter).
       Market rents in Sacramento are not affordable to extremely low-income households or most very
        low-income households.
       Many low-income households can afford market rents in older buildings, and some newly
        constructed apartment units have market rents affordable to even very low-income households.
       In 2009, the HUD CHAS data estimated that 38 percent of homeowners and over 51 percent of
        renters paid more than 30 percent of their incomes for housing.
       About 68 percent of lower-income households paid more than 30 percent of their incomes for
        housing in 2009.
       Overcrowding decreased from 11 percent of all households in 2000 to 5 percent in 2010.
There are several ways to measure housing affordability and affordability trends. These measures typically
focus on supply, demand, income, and development cost factors such as vacancy rates, the relationship of
median housing costs to median income, the percent of income devoted to housing costs, and the percent
of households living in overcrowded conditions. Housing affordability is usually defined as a cost that does
not exceed 30 percent of household income, including mortgage or rent, taxes, insurance, and utility costs.
Households paying more than 30 percent of their incomes for housing are described as “overpaying” or
“cost burdened.”
This section evaluates these various measures of housing cost and affordability and how these measures
have changed over time.
Home Sales
As with California in general, prices for single-family homes in the Sacramento area experienced dramatic
increases from 2002-2007, before declining over the past five years (2008-2012). Home prices decreased in
Sacramento on average more than 13 percent annually between 2007 and 2012. In 2012, the median home
price in the city of Sacramento was at a low of $149,250. The median price in 2012 dropped below the pre-
boom median price in 2002. Table H 3-16 compares city and county housing prices between 2007 and
2012.
Page H 3-30  |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                 H-3
          Table H 3-16 Median Sales Price 2007-2012
                                                        Median Price1                                 %
                                                                                                   Average Total %
               Area
                             2007        2008        2009         2010         2011           2012 Annual  Change
                                                                                                   Change
          Sacramento
                           $347,700 $277,250 $209,800 $191,500 $177,400 $172,000                     -8%    -51%
          County
          City of
                           $333,700 $270,050 $195,000 $158,050 $149,300 $149,250                    -13%    -55%
          Sacramento
          Source: Zillow.com, 2012.
          1
            January-December, except for 2012 (January- October). Not adjusted for inflation.
Since 2007, the median sales price has fallen about 8 percent annually countywide and 13 percent citywide. The
lowest home prices in both the city and the county occurred in 2012, with an overall drop of approximately 51
percent for the county and 55 percent for the city between 2007 and 2012. It is not yet clear how long the current
trend of declining prices will continue, but housing prices tend to be cyclical. For example, housing prices
dropped as steeply (or more so) during the early 1990s, yet rebounded beginning in the late 1990s and hit new
highs in 2005 and 2006. In the long-term sales prices are likely to rise, and current (January 2013) data has already
indicated that this may be the case, as the median sales price in the city has increased by about 5 percent to
$157,300.
The recent housing price decline resulted from a variety of larger economic factors, including a slowdown in
the housing market, tightening credit, and rising foreclosure activities (discussed in more detail below).
However, there are many signs that a housing recovery is underway. Foreclosure activities have showed
some signs of slowing in recent years (2,766 in Sacramento County during the third quarter of 2012
compared to 4,351 in the third quarter of 201110). Current (December 2012) market trends show that the
number of homes for sale is at a low point.11 Home listings in December 2012 were down 50 percent from
the prior year, representing only one month of inventory. With a four- to six- month inventory considered
normal, the current climate is a seller’s market.
Rental Costs
In 2010, the median contract rent in the Sacramento Metropolitan Statistical Area (El Dorado, Placer, and
Sacramento Counties) was $896, compared to $856 in the city. Rents rose very rapidly between 2001 and
2003, but have leveled off since then, with smaller-year to year increases. The average annual increase from
2001 to 2007 was approximately six percent. The median contract rent rose by four percent between 2007 and
2010.
Larger annual rent increases in the early 2000s suggested a strong demand for rental housing associated with
economic growth. By contrast, growth in the number of new rental units was relatively modest prior to
2003, according to the California Department of Finance, further explaining the rise in rental rates. After
2005, economic growth slowed along with increases in rents. Growth in the number of new rental housing
units was higher between 2003 and 2006 just as the housing market was cooling off and housing demand
was weakening. The number of new rental housing units continued to increase by 2010 as the vacancy rate
10 Notices of Default for the county, October 17, 2012. Accessed on December 4, 2012.
   http://www.dqnews.com/Articles/2012/News/California/CA-Foreclosures/RRFor121017.aspx.
11 Hudson Sangree, Effort to Aid Buyers Fizzles. Sacramento Bee. January 18, 2013.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                    | Page H 3-31

                                                                         Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
rose. In the short term, high vacancy rates and a depressed housing market are expected to continue to
moderate rent increases. Once the local housing market rebounds, however, the long-term trend of higher
rent increases may continue.
Table H 3-17 shows rental rates for the Sacramento area by unit size.
                 Table H 3-17 Rental Rates           by    Number     of Bedrooms     City    of
                                    Sacramento
                                   Unit Type                               2012
                                    Studio                                 $625
                                  1 Bedroom                                $732
                                  2 Bedroom                                $887
                                  3 Bedroom                               $1,200
                                  4 Bedroom                               $1,450
                                    Median                                 $988
                 Source: Zillow, 2012.
Older, smaller Class B and C apartment complexes typically have more affordable rents, but also have lower
vacancy rates as a result.
Affordability
Affordable housing is defined, in most cases, as housing and related costs (e.g., utilities, insurance, property
taxes for owner-occupied properties) that can be obtained for 30 percent or less of a household’s gross
income. Although in the past local housing costs have tended to increase faster than local incomes, both
home prices and rents declined significantly during the recent recession. These downward trends followed
earlier rapid price increases for rent (especially between 2001 and 2003) and home prices (which peaked in
2006). Home prices have been increasing in early 2013, indicating that home prices are on the rise again. In
the short term, stable rents and home prices represent a positive trend for housing affordability, but in the
long term, the historical trend of cost increases is likely to continue.
Ownership Affordability
A measure of ownership housing affordability is the Housing Opportunity Index, the percentage of homes
that a household earning median income can afford in the area. The Sacramento Area Housing Opportunity
Index (HOI) is one such affordability index and is prepared by Wells Fargo and the National Association of
Home Builders. Housing affordability goes through cycles of increasing and decreasing affordability with
changes in the local housing market and economy.
Before 1998 affordability in the Sacramento region was generally increasing. The general trend in the
affordability of ownership housing from the late 1990s to 2000s was a decline in the proportion of homes
that households earning median income could afford. The affordability index dropped from a high of 68.8
percent in 1998 to a low of 7.3 percent in 2005. However, Table H 3-18 shows that affordability has actually
increased since 2005 with a decline in home prices. The housing affordability index began increasing again in
2006, and reached a historical high of 83.2 in 2011.
Page H 3-32  |                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                       H-3
                   Table H 3-18 Sacramento Area Affordability Index for Select Years
                                         Year                                     Index Percentage (%)1
                                        1991                                               26.9
                                        1992                                               42.3
                                        1993                                               62.5
                                        1994                                               58.6
                                        1995                                               61.1
                                        1996                                               61.2
                                        1997                                               65.5
                                        1998                                               68.8
                                        1999                                               56.7
                                        2000                                               45.5
                                        2001                                               44.0
                                        2002                                               43.7
                                        2003                                               25.4
                                        2004                                               14.5
                                        2005                                               7.3
                                        2006                                               9.2
                                        2007                                               27.2
                                        2008                                               66.0
                                        2009                                               72.3
                                        2010                                               79.3
                                        2011                                               83.2
                                        2012                                               81.0
                   Source: National Association of Home Builders Housing Opportunity Index, 2012.
                   1
                     Figures are the percentage of homes that a household earning median income can afford
                   during the fourth quarter of each year (1st quarter 2002, 3rd quarter 2012).
Rental Affordability
There is no rental housing equivalent specifically for Sacramento to the Housing Opportunity Index. To
estimate rental affordability, Fair Market Rents can be used as an approximate measure to determine
affordability for lower and moderate-income households12. Fair Market Rents (FMRs) include the shelter
cost plus the cost of tenant-paid utilities (except telephones, cable or satellite television service, and internet
service) as calculated by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the
Sacramento MSA. Table H 3-19 shows 2012 FMRs and how they compare to actual median market rents.
Generally, the FMR is higher than the current (2011) median market rent.
12 In general, FMRs are the maximum chargeable gross rent in an area for projects participating in the HUD Section 8 (Housing
   Choice Voucher) Program. FMRs are based on the cost of modest, non-luxury rental units in the local market area for various size
   units (1 bedroom, 2 bedroom, etc.). For more information, see http://www.huduser.org/datasets/fmr.html.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                           | Page H 3-33
                                                                                  Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
                    Table H 3-19 Fair Market Rents, Sacramento Metropolitan Area
                                Unit Size                HUD FMR (2012)              Median Market Rent 1
                              Efficiency                       $737                          --
                              1 bedroom                        $837                         $732
                              2 bedroom                       $1,021                        $887
                              3 bedroom                       $1,473                      $1,200
                              4 bedroom                       $1,689                      $1,450
                    Source: HUD, The Final FY 2012 FMRs for All Bedroom Sizes, 2012.
                    1
                      Median Market Rent for December 2012 from Zillow.com.
The 2012 FMRs for different apartment sizes were compared with state income standards. Depending on
family size, some market rate rental units may be affordable to lower income households. At a FMR of
$1,021, a two-bedroom apartment is affordable to a household earning about $40,825, which would be
affordable to low-income (LI) households with two to four members, but not to very low-income (VLI) or
extremely low-income (ELI) households. An efficiency apartment FMR of $737 would require an annual
income of $29,475. This rent would be affordable to a VLI couple, or a LI individual. Fair Market Rents in
Sacramento are not typically affordable to VLI households and are never affordable to ELI households. It is
unlikely that the market will ever be able to provide units affordable to ELI households, given that the
affordable rent often cannot cover the debt service on the unit, much less the cost of operations.
Another measure of rental affordability is the relationship between rents for newer apartment complexes and
household incomes. An internet search of almost 20 newer apartment complexes found monthly rents ranging
from $666 to $1,215 for one-bedroom units, $750 to $1,495 for two-bedroom units, and $835 to $1,575 for
three-bedroom units.13 Some market rents on the smallest, least expensive newer units might be affordable to
very low-income households earning close to 50 percent of the area median income, but not to extremely low-
income households (30 percent or less of the area median income).
Affordability and Ability to Pay
The following section compares 2012 income levels and ability to pay for housing with actual housing costs.
According to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), housing is classified as
“affordable” if households do not pay more than 30 percent of income for payment of rent (including
utilities) or monthly homeownership costs (including mortgage payments, taxes, and insurance). Since
above moderate-income households do not generally have problems locating affordable units, affordable
housing is usually defined as units that are reasonably priced for low- and moderate-income households.
Table H 3-20 shows the definition of housing income limits as they are applied to housing units in
Sacramento.
According to HUD, the median family income for a four-person household in the Sacramento PMSA was
$76,100 in 2012. Income limits for larger or smaller households were higher or lower, respectively, and are
calculated using a formula developed by HUD.
13 Apartment complexes listed on www.zillow.com and www.forrent.com built since 2005, in the City of Sacramento, excluding
   luxury rental projects in downtown/midtown Sacramento, which have rents between 26 and 130 percent higher than the rental
   ranges cited in this section.
Page H 3-34     |                                                                                  Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                     H-3
               Table 3-20: HUD Income Limits based on Persons per Household, 2012
                                                                Persons per Household
                     Income Categories            1           2          3            4      5
               Extremely Low-Income           $16,000     $18,300     $20,600     $22,850 $24,700
               Very Low-Income                $26,650     $30,450     $34,250     $38,050 $41,100
               Low-Income                     $42,650     $48,750     $54,850     $60,900 $65,800
               Median-Income                  $53,287     $60,947     $68,607     $76,100 $82,261
               Moderate-Income                $63,960     $73,080     $82,200     $91,320 $98,640
               Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2012
               http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets
Table 3-21 shows the 2012 HUD-defined household income limits for extremely low-, very low-, low-, and
moderate-income households per Sacramento PMSA by the number of persons in the household.
Additionally, the table shows maximum affordable monthly rents and maximum affordable purchase prices
for homes. For example, a three-person household was classified as low-income (80 percent of median)
with an annual income of up to $54,850 in 2012. A household with this income could afford to pay a
monthly gross rent (including utilities) of up to $1,371 or could afford to purchase a house priced at or
below $225,051. This assumes a household with this income has money to afford a down payment.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H 3-35
                                                                                     Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
       Table 3-21: Ability to Pay for Housing based on HUD Income Limits, 2012
       Extremely Low-Income Households at 30% of 2012 Median Family Income
                                       Studio           1 BR           2 BR            3 BR             4 BR          5 BR
       Number of Persons                  1               2              3               4                5             6
       Income Level                    $16,000        $18,300        $20,600         $22,850          $24,700       $26,550
       Max. Monthly Gross
       Rent 1                            $400           $458           $515            $571             $618          $664
                               2
       Max. Purchase Price             $65,649        $75,086        $84,523         $93,754         $101,345      $108,936
       Very Low-Income Households at 50% of 2012 Median Family Income
                                      Studio       1 BR           2 BR             3 BR             4 BR          5 BR
       Number of Persons                   1              2              3               4                5             6
       Income Level                    $26,650        $30,450        $34,250         $38,050          $41,100       $44,150
       Max. Monthly Gross
       Rent 1                            $666           $761           $856            $951            $1,028        $1,104
       Max. Purchase Price 2          $109,346       $124,937       $140,529        $156,120         $168,635      $181,149
       Low-Income Households at 80% of 2012 Median Family Income
                                       Studio           1 BR           2 BR            3 BR             4 BR          5 BR
       Number of Persons                   1              2              3               4                5             6
       Income Level                    $42,650        $48,750        $54,850         $60,900          $65,800       $70,650
       Max. Monthly Gross
       Rent 1                          $1,066         $1,219         $1,371          $1,523           $1,645         $1,766
                               2
       Max. Purchase Price            $174,994       $200,023       $225,051        $249,875         $269,980      $289,879
       Median-Income Households at 100% of 2012 Median Family Income
                                       Studio           1 BR           2 BR            3 BR             4 BR          5 BR
       Number of Persons                   1              2              3               4                5             6
       Income Level                    $53,287        $60,947        $68,607         $76,100          $82,261       $88,423
       Max. Monthly Gross
       Rent 1                           $1,332         $1,524         $1,715          $1,903           $2,057        $2,211
                               2
       Max. Purchase Price            $218,638       $250,068       $281,497        $312,241         $337,520      $362,801
       Moderate-Income Households at 120% of 2012 Median Family Income
                                       Studio           1 BR           2 BR            3 BR             4 BR          5 BR
       Number of Persons                   1              2              3               4                5             6
       Income Level                    $63,960        $73,080        $82,200         $91,320          $98,640      $105,960
       Max. Monthly Gross
       Rent 1                           $1,599         $1,827         $2,055          $2,283           $2,466        $2,649
                               2
       Max. Purchase Price            $262,430       $299,850       $337,269        $374,689         $404,723      $434,758
       Notes: Incomes based on the Sacramento PMSA (El Dorado, Placer, and Sacramento Counties); FY 2012 Median
       Family Income: $76,100; HUD FY 2012 Section 8 Income Limits
       1
         Assumes that 30% of income is available for either: monthly rent, including utilities; or mortgage payment, taxes,
       mortgage insurance, and homeowners insurance
       2
         Assumes 95% loan @ 4.5% annual interest rate and 30-year term; assumes taxes, mortgage insurance, and
       homeowners’ insurance account for 21% of total monthly payments
       Source: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD); and Mintier Harnish, 2012.
Page H 3-36 |                                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                      H-3
Subprime Lending and Foreclosures
Background
The 2000s were a time of immense housing boom and bust in the United States. Low interest rates and large
investments of foreign capital in the early 2000s made access to credit easy. This easy access to credit led to
increased demand from buyers looking to purchase homes, which led to rapidly increasing home prices and
a building boom. Eventually the housing market became saturated with a surplus of unsold homes, which
caused housing prices to peak and begin to sharply decline in mid-2006.
During this period of expanding credit, lending standards began to deteriorate, particularly between 2004
and 2007 in the subprime mortgage market. Subprime loans are loans offered to individuals who do not
qualify for a loan at the prime rate due to poor credit history, but historically they have also been offered to
non-White households even though that household might qualify for a conventional loan. Subprime loans
carry higher interest rates than conventional loans. Lenders began offering more subprime loans and
increasingly risky loan options and borrowing incentives, such as adjustable rate and zero down payment
mortgage loans to high-risk borrowers and in particular to African American and Hispanic households.14
One of the more risky loan options used frequently during this time period was adjustable rate mortgages.
Because of easy access to credit and the belief that home prices would continue to appreciate, many
subprime borrowers purchased adjustable rate mortgages, thinking they would be able to refinance their
mortgages after a year or two of appreciation before the initial low-interest grace period ended and higher
interest rates went into effect. However, when housing prices began a steep decline in mid-2006, refinancing
became more difficult. As adjustable rate mortgages began to reset at higher interest rates, many
homeowners found they were unable to afford the higher monthly payments and began to default on their
mortgage loans, leading to a drastic increase in the number of defaults and foreclosures.
This increase in defaults and foreclosures on subprime mortgages starting in 2006 is known as the subprime
mortgage crisis. Due to the complex repackaging of subprime mortgages into larger investments, the
subprime mortgage crisis contributed significantly to a financial meltdown in 2008 and a global recession. In
2010 President Obama signed into law the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
(Dodd Frank Act), which made substantial changes to the financial regulation system in the United States,
including creating new loan origination standards for residential mortgage lenders. Furthermore, on January
1, 2013, the State of California enacted the Homeowner Bill of Rights, which is designed to protect
homeowners and borrowers during the mortgage and foreclosure process.
Subprime Lending Trends
Figure H 3-11 shows the percentage of mortgages that were subprime (i.e., high-cost) between 2004 and
2007 according to HUD in 2010. As shown on the figure, North Sacramento, the South Area, and
Fruitridge/Broadway had higher rates of subprime mortgages than other areas of Sacramento. In some
Census Tracts within Fruitridge/Broadway, more than 40 percent of all conventional mortgage loans were
subprime between 2004 and 2007.
14  Carolina Reid and Elizabeth Laderman, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. The Untold Costs of Subprime Lending: Examining
the Links among Higher‐Priced Lending, Foreclosures and Race in California. November 18, 2009.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                        | Page H 3-37

                                                                      Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Figure H 3-11 also shows there was a correlation between areas with higher rates of subprime mortgages
and areas with higher concentrations of lower-income residents in Sacramento. As shown on Figure H-3-11,
almost all of the neighborhoods with the highest rates of subprime loans were neighborhoods where 50
percent or more of the households were considered low-income (i.e., earned less than 80 percent of the area
median income).
Nationally and locally, there is a relationship between subprime lending and race and ethnicity. According to
the Center for Responsible Lending, African Americans and Latinos were disproportionately affected by the
foreclosure crisis. Borrowers of color were about 30 percent more likely to receive a subprime loan than
White borrowers, even after accounting for income and credit. Figure H 3-12 shows the total number of
foreclosures recorded from 2006 to 2012 and the percentage of the population that is Black and/or
Hispanic by Census Tract. Generally, the Census Tracts with the greatest number of foreclosures also have
the highest percentage of Black and/or Hispanic persons. When compared to Figure H 3-11, Figure H 3-12
shows there is a high correlation between the areas with the highest percentage of Black and/or Hispanic
persons and the areas with the highest percentage of subprime mortgages. Most of the areas where more
than 29 percent of all mortgage loans were subprime were also more than 51 percent Black and/or
Hispanic. Similarly, most areas where less than 3 percent of all mortgage loans were subprime were also less
than 41 percent Black and/or Hispanic.
Page H 3-38 |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile      H-3
Adopted December 17, 2013          | Page H 3-39
              Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Page H 3-40 |                Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                       H-3
Foreclosure Trends
California was one of the states hardest hit by the foreclosure crisis. According to the California
Reinvestment Coalition, since the beginning of the foreclosure crisis, more foreclosures have occurred in
California than any other state. As of December 2012 California had the third highest foreclosure rate, with
one in every 457 homes receiving a foreclosure filing (compared to 1 in 810 homes nationally). Only Florida
and Nevada had higher rates. However, nationally and at the state and local levels, the number of
foreclosures is decreasing. According to DataQuick, foreclosure resales accounted for 16.6 percent of all
California resale activity during the last quarter of 2012, down from 20.0 percent the prior quarter and 33.6
percent in 2011. It peaked at 57.8 percent in the first quarter of 2009.
Figure H 3-13 shows the number of foreclosures in Sacramento from 2006 to 2012. The total number of
foreclosures in Sacramento peaked at 6,232 housing units at the beginning of the recession in 2008. Over
the next four years, the number of foreclosures dropped to 1,720 housing units in 2012. Figure H-3-14
shows the distribution of foreclosures between 2006 and 2012 in Sacramento. As shown in the figure, North
Sacramento and the South Area experienced the highest rates of foreclosure, with some Census Tracts
having more than 30 percent of homes in foreclosure.
                                            7000
                                            6000
                   Number of Foreclosures
                                            5000
                                            4000
                                            3000
                                            2000
                                            1000
                                               0
                                                   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012
                                                                        Year
                Source: SACOG, 2012; Foreclosureradar.com, 2012.
                Figure H 3-13: Foreclosures 2006-2012
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H 3-41
              Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Page H 3-42 |                Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                H-3
 As shown in Figure H 3-15, a significant percentage of 2012 home sales in the city of Sacramento were real
estate owned (REO) or short sales, ranging from a low of slightly below 30 percent in East Sacramento to a
high of nearly 70 percent in North Natomas. In most of the community plan areas, REO and short sales
made up about 50 to 60 percent of total home sales.
                      Source: Data Quick, data through October 2012.
                      Figure H 3-15: REO or Short Sales as a Percentage of Total 2012
                      Home Sales by Community Plan Area
While foreclosure rates are decreasing, foreclosures still make up a large share of total home sales in the
Sacramento area. More than 2 percent of homeowners in the Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville
Metropolitan Statistical Area were in foreclosure in the first quarter of 2012, the sixth-highest amount in 75
metropolitan areas.15
Overpayment
“Overpayment” is another measure commonly used by public
                                                                                   Overpayment (2009)
agencies to measure housing affordability. HUD refers to
overpayment as “housing cost burden” in its CHAS data. 34,150 Homeowner Households (38% )
Households that pay more than 30 percent of their gross income 42,345 Renter Households (51% )
for housing are said to be “overpaying” for housing. The 2005-
2009 CHAS data provides some insight into overpayment. As shown 49                 in%Table
                                                                                       of AllH
                                                                                             Households  Overpay
                                                                                                3-22, about 44 percent of
households are overpaying for housing. Overpayment is more common for renter households.
                  Table H 3-22 2009 City of Sacramento Monthly Housing Costs of
                                     Households by Percentage of Income
                      Income Spent on Housing         Owner       %     Renter      %       Total      %
                  Less than 30 Percent               54,665      62    41,470       49     96,135      56
                  30 to 50 Percent
                                                     20,550      23    20,680       25     41,230      24
                  (“cost burdened”)
                  50 Percent or more
                                                      13,600     15     21,665      26     35,265      20
                  (“severely cost burdened”)
                  Total                              88,815     100    83,815      100    172,630     100
                  Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2005-2009 CHAS data.
15 Joan C. Fahrenthold, Associated Press, America’s Sickest Housing Markets, 2012.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                    | Page H 3-43

                                                                            Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Residents at the lower end of the income scale are more likely to overpay for housing. Table H 3-23 shows
the number of lower-income households in 2009 that paid more than 30 percent of their income for
housing. In all, 56,500 households, or 68 percent of lower-income households, were estimated to overpay
for housing in 2009. In 2009, 80 percent of ELI households overpaid for housing, compared to 75 percent
of VLI, and 53 percent of LI households. Renters are also more likely to overpay for housing. Overall, 61
percent of lower-income owners and 71 percent of lower-income renters were overpaying for housing in
2009. While the total number of lower-income households overpaying for housing has decreased since 2000
(from 74,642 to 56,500 households), the proportion of lower-income households overpaying for housing
has increased (from 58 to 68 percent of households).
                 Table H 3-23 2009 City of Sacramento Lower Income Households
                                  Overpaying for Housing
                                                       Owners            Renters           Total
                             Category                Overpaying         Overpaying      Overpaying
                                                   Number        %    Number      %    Number     %
                 Extremely Low-Income
                                                    4,130       74    17,795     81    21,925     80
                 (<30% MFI)
                 Very Low-Income
                                                    5,075       62    12,425     82    17,500     75
                 (30–50% MFI)
                 Low-Income (50–80% MFI)            7,785       55     9,290     51    17,075     53
                 All Lower Income (<80% MFI)       16,990       61    39,510     71    56,500     68
                 Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2005-2009 CHAS data.
Overcrowding
                                               An overcrowded household is one that lives in a dwelling unit
  Overcrowded Households (2010)
                                               with more than one person per room (excluding bathrooms,
   2,902 Homeowner Households                  porches, balconies, foyers, halls, or half-rooms). Overcrowding
   6,091 Renter Households                     is caused by two major problems: lack of availability and lack of
   8,993 Total Overcrowded Households (5%)     affordability of appropriately sized units, particularly for large
                                               families. When households are unable to afford adequate
housing, “doubling up” with family or friends may lead to an increase in overcrowding.
Overcrowding increased from about 9 percent in 1990, to 11 percent in 2000, but decreased to
approximately 5 percent in 2010. The data from 2010 represent a significant decline from the 2000 total.
This downward trend in overcrowding has been reflected in the 2006 and 2010 ACS.
Availability of Subsidized Housing
There are two types of rental assistance available to renters in need of assistance: 1) rent restricted housing
units in projects assisted with public funds, and 2) rental housing vouchers that pay property owners the
difference between what a renter can afford and a payment standard based on the fair market rent.
The Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA) is a joint powers agency created by the
Sacramento City Council and the Sacramento County Board of Supervisors to serve as the Housing
Authority, the Redevelopment Agency, and the Housing Department for the City and the County of
Sacramento. California Assembly Bill 1X26, the Dissolution Act, eliminated all redevelopment agencies
throughout the state effective February 1, 2012, including the Redevelopment Agencies of the City and
County. The Dissolution Act allowed successor agencies to wind down the affairs of the former
Page H 3-44  |                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                         H-3
redevelopment agencies. The City and County have assumed these roles and have designated SHRA as the
local entity to retain the housing assets and housing functions of the former Redevelopment Agencies.
SHRA has one of the largest inventories of public housing among California Housing Authorities. Assisted
housing is an important component of the housing inventory for maintaining housing diversity and choice
and for housing households with extremely low and very low incomes. Currently, SHRA administers 1,868
units of public housing within the city of Sacramento and an additional 1,047 units of public housing in
other portions of Sacramento County, and approximately 12,000 Housing Choice Vouchers (formerly
Section 8) throughout the city and county of Sacramento, providing assistance to extremely low- or very
low-income households.
In its past function as a Redevelopment Agency, SHRA provided funding for the construction,
rehabilitation, purchase, and preservation of affordable rental and ownership units throughout the city and
county. From 2007 to 2012, SHRA funded 554 new rental units, rehabilitated 1,958 rental units and 44
single family units, and provided down payment assistance for 274 homeownership units in the city.
Conclusions
The median home price in Sacramento decreased by about 55 percent between 2007 and 2012 to a low of
$149,250. In accordance with declining home prices, housing affordability has significantly increased since
the late 2000s. An estimated 81.0 percent of households in the city can afford a median-priced home in 2012
compared to 7 percent in 2005. This drastic increase in affordability indicates that many households who
desire to become homeowners can now afford to do so, including many middle income households who
traditionally do not qualify for homebuyer assistance. However, though home prices are much more
affordable access to those homes especially for low-income homebuyers and even some moderate-income
homebuyers remains an issue due to tighter lending standards and the presence of investors paying cash for
homes. In the long-term sales prices are likely to rise, and current (January 2013) data has already indicated that
this may be the case, as the median sales price in the city has increased by about 5 percent to $157,300.
Rents rose in the early 2000s – approximately six percent on average – although not as dramatically as
housing prices. Rents in Sacramento have generally stabilized, rising less than 3 percent per year between
2003 and 2007, and about 4 percent between 2007 and 2010. The initial rise in rents during the early 2000s
may have been due to high population growth and strong housing demand during a time when the supply of
rental housing did not keep pace with population growth. A large number of apartment complexes have
been completed in the Sacramento area since 2000, eventually increasing the supply of rental housing and,
perhaps, contributing to the slow-down in rent increases as vacancy rates also continued to rise. Even so,
very little of the unregulated rental housing constructed since 2000 is affordable to very low- and extremely
low-income households.
Housing cost burden is high in the city, although the total number of households overpaying for housing
has decreased since 2000. In 2009, 38 percent of homeowners and 51 percent of renters paid more than 30
percent of their incomes for housing. Overpayment was highest among extremely low-income renters (over
80 percent) and very low-income renters (over 75 percent).
There has been a decrease in overcrowded housing units since 2000, from approximately 11 percent of all
households to 5 percent in 2010. This can be a result of several things, for example families or individuals
can now afford to rent a place by themselves or large families can now afford larger units.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H 3-45

                                                                       Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
As late as the early 1990s, Sacramento could be generally considered an “affordable” place to live. Though
changes in the market, demographic changes and population growth reversed this trend in the early 2000s,
Sacramento is affordable once again. However, the increasing share of lower-income households with
housing cost burdens may signal the need for more variety of regulated housing options.
3.5 New Housing Needs, Special Housing Needs, and At-Risk
        Housing
Summary of Key Findings of this Section
       The City should plan to accommodate 24,101 housing units between 2013 and 2021, of which 35
        percent should be affordable to lower-income households.
       There are over 15,000 subsidized rental housing units in the city, including public housing, of which
        1,602 are at risk of converting to market rate housing.
       Almost 16 percent of city households have extremely low-incomes. Black households, elderly
        households, and Hispanic households are most likely to have extremely low-incomes.
       Over 8,300 city residents live in group quarters, mostly in nursing homes and other residential care
        facilities.
       Female-headed households with children account for about 10 percent of all households. Over 30
        percent have poverty level incomes.
       Seniors account for about 11 percent of city residents. Almost 21 percent have extremely low-
        incomes. Among seniors, single women have the lowest median income.
       Large families (households with five or more related persons) account for 10 percent of city
        households. About 60 percent of large family renters have lower incomes.
       About 14 percent of city civilian noninstitutionalized residents over the age of five have one or more
        disabilities.
       A January 2013 countywide homeless count found 2,538 homeless individuals. Over 1,700 homeless
        individuals were counted in various shelters and transitional housing, while nearly 800 were counted
        in unsheltered locations.
This section presents the City’s share of estimated new housing need as established by the Sacramento Area
Council of Governments (SACOG) through the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) process
between 2013 and 2021. In addition to the RHNA, new housing need in Sacramento should reflect
demographic and economic trends in the city, and existing needs that are not being met. The city has an
inventory of over 15,000 subsidized rental housing units including public housing that are affordable to
lower-income households, a valuable resource that should be preserved, if possible.
This section also identifies special housing needs, including the needs of seniors, female-headed households,
disabled residents, students, large families, farm workers, and extremely low-income (ELI) households.
These housing needs must be considered in formulating the City’s housing policy. Some special needs
groups have needs beyond housing, including job training, health care, mental health care, child care, and/or
Page H 3-46  |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                       H-3
other supportive services. With a few exceptions, special needs groups are disproportionately lower income
and have higher poverty rates than the population at large, creating further challenges to finding suitable
housing that is also affordable.
New Construction Need
The 2013 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) for the Sacramento region covers the planning
period from January 1, 2013 to October 31, 2021. SACOG allocated 24,101 housing units as the City’s share
of regional housing needs during this period. Approximately 21 percent of these housing units should be
affordable to extremely low- and very low-income households, 14 percent to low-income households, and
19 percent to moderate-income households. The City’s obligation under State law is to demonstrate how it
will accommodate its share of regional housing needs with adequately zoned sites that are development
ready. The City does not need to guarantee that all of the housing units it must accommodate can actually be
built. Table H 3-24 shows the City’s housing allocation from SACOG by income level.
                     Table H 3-24 New Construction Needs (January 1, 2013–October 31,
                                        2021)
                             Income Group                      Number of Units                % of Total
                     Very Low                                      4,944                          21
                     Low                                           3,467                          14
                     Moderate                                      4,482                          19
                     Above Moderate                               11,208                          46
                     Total                                        24,101                         100
                     Source: SACOG Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) September, 2012.
In addition to identifying overall housing needs, the City must demonstrate that it can accommodate a
variety of housing types (e.g., single room occupancy units, residential care facilities, homeless shelters) that
house those with special needs. State law also requires that cities and counties plan for the needs of
extremely low-income households. The City may assume that 50 percent of its very low-income regional
housing allocation is for extremely low-income (ELI) households. 16 With this assumption, the City’s
housing need for ELI households is 2,472 new units over the nearly nine-year RHNA period.
At-Risk Housing
Assisted Housing Projects. In 1989, the California Government Code was amended to include a
requirement that localities identify and develop a program in their housing elements for the preservation of
assisted, affordable multifamily units. Subsequent amendments have clarified the scope of the analysis to
also include units developed pursuant to inclusionary housing and density bonus programs. In the
preservation analysis, localities are required to provide an inventory of assisted, affordable units that are
eligible to convert within 10 years. As part of the analysis, an estimation of the cost of preserving versus
replacing the units is to be included, as well as details on alternative programs designed to preserve the
affordable units.
The city of Sacramento is home to approximately 15,000 affordable units, including public housing. In
general, once the period of restricted rent/occupancy expires, a property owner may charge market rents for
16 Under state law, SACOG is not required to prepare a regional housing allocation specifically for extremely low-income
   households. However, the City must include quantified objectives in the Housing Element for the number of housing units
   that might be constructed, rehabilitated, or preserved for ELI households.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                          | Page H 3-47

                                                                       Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
the previously restricted units. There is a threat that low-income occupants may have to find alternative
housing if rents rise to market levels, although in properties with Housing Assistance Payments (HAP)
vouchers, those residents are provided “enhanced” vouchers to subsidize their rent in market rate projects.
Although these projects are required by law to be listed as at risk of converting to market rate housing, it is
not a very good indicator of whether these units will actually convert. The majority of units included in this
list are projects built under Federal Housing Administration (FHA) mortgage insurance programs in the late
1960s and early 1970s. In addition to the FHA mortgage insurance, most of these projects also included
Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) vouchers, which function similarly to locally controlled Housing
Choice Vouchers, formerly Section 8. These vouchers allow the owner to collect fair market rent, but
restrict occupancy to lower-income residents and assure that the resident will only be responsible for that
portion of the rent equal to 30 percent of their income. Because these vouchers are contingent on annual
appropriations from the federal government, HAP vouchers must be annually renewed. Much of the
affordability of these older FHA properties is linked directly to the voucher subsidy, and so technically, the
units are constantly “at risk”. Over time, data and experience has shown that many owners continue to
renew their contracts beyond the expiration date, providing evidence that the link between affordability
expiration date and conversion is not inevitable.
Even with the relatively low likelihood of conversion, the City is proactive in preventing the loss of
affordable housing units. In 2004, the City has adopted a Preservation Ordinance which requires that
owners of projects with federal mortgage insurance and/or HAP vouchers provide the Sacramento Housing
and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA) and the tenants of the property written notice within one year of an
anticipated prepayment, termination of a subsidy contract, or termination of rental restrictions. This allows
SHRA time to work with the owner to find a way to maintain the affordability of the units through subsidies
or incentives, negotiation for purchase, or connecting the owner to an affordable housing developer for
purchase. Should the owner still opt to convert to market rate rents, the ordinance ensures that tenants have
at least 180 day notice and gives SHRA the right to inspect the property and sales agreement and to impose
penalties to owners who fail to comply.
The inventory of assisted units required to be reported on in the Housing Element includes all multifamily
rental units regulated by federal, state, and/or local programs, many of which are covered by the City’s
Preservation Ordinance. Such units include those developed under the US Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) programs, tax exempt mortgage revenue bond programs, low-income housing
tax credits, redevelopment programs, inclusionary housing programs, and density bonus programs that are
eligible for conversion to market rate within the next 10 years (2013 to 2023). The total number of units at-
risk for this period is 1,339.
Table H 3-25 presents a list of housing units that have income restrictions that may expire before 2023. The
613 units within the projects considered lower risk are those owned by SHRA, a non-profit housing
organization, or an affordable housing developer which has indicated interest in preserving the affordability.
The remaining 1,602 units are within projects owned by profit motivated organizations, however, 374 of
these higher risk units are “at-risk” only due to the annual renewal requirements associated with the HAP
vouchers described above. Of the total at-risk units, there are 313 senior units in two developments (St.
Francis Manor and Wong Center) at-risk of converting.
Page H 3-48   |                                                                       Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                              H-3
Table H 3-25 Units in Projects at Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing
                                                              Primary Funding
       Project Name            Street Address   At-Risk Year                  Total Units Assisted Units
                                                                  Sources
Units at Higher Risk of Conversion
                                                                HUD/ HAP
Larchmont Valley Hi      5280 Meadow Park Wy       2013                           10            10
                                                               HFDA/NC/SR
Normandy Arms            1327 E St                 2013      HUD/ HAP/LMSA        20            20
Artisan Square           1615 Del Paso Blvd        2014            HOME            7             7
Hellenic Senior Center   7847 Rush River Dr        2013         HUD/ HAP          70            70
Gloria Drive Apartments  7201–4 Gloria Dr          2013         HUD/ HAP          32            32
Victoria Apartments      1307 F St                 2013         HUD/ HAP          10            10
Pioneer Towers           515 P Street              2013             HUD          198           100
Woodbridge Apartments    2028 San Juan Rd          2014        CDLAC Bond        301            61
Somerset Parkside        1001 – 1029 Q Street      2014            RHCP           26            26
St. Francis Manor*       2515 J St                 2014      HUD/ HAP 202/8      128           126
Camelot North            1222 E Street             2014            LMSA           20            20
Camelot South            1222 E Street             2014            LMSA           20            20
Don Carlos               1510 O St                 2015          RRP/DPR           8             8
Johnston House           1522 14th St              2015         RRP SHRA           6             6
L & D Properties         2425 Q St                 2015            HOME           10            10
Sequoia Hotel            911 K St                  2016           TI, HCD         92            92
N/A                      502 10th St               2016            HOME            8             7
N/A                      511 9th St                2016               TI           2             2
Grand Avenue Villa       3740 May Street           2017            LMSA           18            18
Somerset Parkside        1001-1035 Q Street        2014           RHCP            26            25
Biele Place              1421 15th Street          2014           RHCP            35            34
Don Carlos               1510 O Street             2015         RRP/DPR            8            8
Johnston House           1506 O Street             2015        RRP SHRA            6            6
Brannan Court            1500 N Street             2018          CalHFA           40            8
Subtotal                                                                        1,101          726
Units at Lower Risk of Conversion
River City Residences    1816 O Street             2012             HUD           15            15
Wong Center*             331 J Street              2012            LMSA          187           187
Florin Gardens Coop.
                         2536 Wah Avenue           2013          HUD/HAP          52            52
East Phase II
Florin Garden
                         6951 24th Street          2014            LMSA           72            55
Apartments Coop.
Glenn Ellen Estates      2380 Glen Ellen Circle    2019             RRP           36            36
Oak Park                 4021 Broadway             2019          HUD/HAP          24            24
                         2361 Harbor Drive         2019           CDLAC          714           140
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                 | Page H 3-49

                                                                                  Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Table H 3-25 Units in Projects at Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing
                                                                         Primary Funding
       Project Name              Street Address        At-Risk Year                           Total Units   Assisted Units
                                                                              Sources
                            3741 Rio Linda Blvd             2020       CDLAC/TCAC/SHRA           104             104
Subtotal                                                                                        1,204            613
Total Units                                                                                     2,305           1,339
Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency, 2013; CADA,
2013.
Local Funding Definitions:
CDLAC = Tax exempt bond financing (California Debit Limit Allocation Committee)
HOME = HOME Investment Partnership Program (Federal Funding)
HUD/HAP = Housing and Urban Development/ Housing Assistance Payments Contract
TCAC = Tax Credit financing (Tax Credit Allocation Committee)
TI = Tax Increment
CDBG = Community Development Block Grant funding (Federal funding)
RRP = Rental Rehabilitation Program
Downtown = Downtown redevelopment project area Low-Income Housing Fund
HCD = State Department of Housing & Community Development
LMSA = Loan Management Set-Aside
SHRA = Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency
202/8 = HUD Section 202 and 208 Programs
NC/SR = Section 8 New Construction/Substantial Rehabilitation
DPR = Down Payment Resource
HFDA = Section 8 Funding through Housing Finance and Development Agency
RCHP = Rental Housing Construction Program
* Senior units
Page H 3-50    |                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                       H-3
Preservation Options
In addition to identifying units at risk of converting to market rate housing, Government Code Section
65583(a)(8)(B) requires a comparison of costs to replace lost units through construction or rehabilitation to
the cost of preserving the existing units. Preservation of the at-risk units can be achieved in several ways,
including 1) facilitating a transfer of ownership of these projects to affordable housing organizations; 2)
purchasing of affordability covenants; and 3) providing rental assistance to tenants.
Purchase of Affordability Covenant
The first option to preserve the affordability of at-risk projects is to provide an incentive package to owners
to maintain the projects as low-income housing. Incentives could include restructuring the existing loan,
and/or supplementing the HAP fair market rent to market levels, if market rents are substantially more than
the HUD allowed fair market rent, and/ or providing a low interest loan or grant to finance project
rehabilitation. It is difficult to estimate the cost of purchasing affordability covenants due to the number of
variables in such a purchase.
Transfer of Ownership
Long-term affordability of low-income units can be secured by transferring ownership of these projects to
non-profit or for-profit affordable housing organizations. By doing so, these units would be eligible for
refinancing using a range of affordable housing financing programs, including low-income housing tax
credits and tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds that ensure affordability for at least 55 years from the time
of funding. Most of these transactions also include rehabilitation of the project to modernize the property
and to extend the useful life of the major systems. Upon review of recently financed preservation projects
that have been acquired and refinanced as shown in Table H 3-26, the average cost of acquiring and
rehabilitating these affordable housing units is $112,307 per unit, or $150,379,073 for all 1,339 at-risk units.
                  Table H 3-26 Estimated Acquisition/Rehabilitation Cost
                                                      Number of
                           Preservation Project                        Total Cost     Cost/Unit
                                                         Units
                  Norwood Avenue Apartments               28         $1,840,000       $65,714
                  Wong Center Apartments                 187        $31,916,593      $170,677
                  Y.W.C.A. Residential Hotel              32         $3,217,000      $100,531
                  Average                                 82        $12,324,531      $112,307
                  Total for all 1,339 “At Risk” units                              $150,379,073
                  Source: Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency, 2013.
Rent Subsidy
Tenant-based subsidies could be used to preserve the affordability of housing. Similar to Housing Choice
Vouchers (formerly Section 8), the City, through a variety of potential funding sources, could provide a
voucher to lower income households. The level of subsidy required to preserve at-risk affordable housing
through rent subsidies is estimated to equal the Fair Market Rent for a unit minus the housing cost
affordable by a lower-income household. Table H 3-27 estimates the rent subsidies required to preserve the
housing affordability for a theoretical project with equal numbers of three different prototypical units. Based
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H 3-51

                                                                                   Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
on the estimates and assumptions shown in the table, approximately $2.7 million annually would be required
to preserve the current at-risk inventory of 1,339 units.
                Table H 3-27 Potential Rent Subsidies
                                                          1 BR          2 BR           3 BR       TOTAL
                                                 1
                Per Unit Affordable Rent
                     Low Income
                 A                                        $914         $1,029       $ 1,142
                     (60% AMI)
                     Very Low Income
                 B                                        $761          $856          $951
                     (50% AMI)
                 C Average (A & B)                        $838          $943        $ 1,047
                 D Per Unit Fair Market Rent              $837         $1,021       $ 1,473
                     Monthly Per Unit Subsidy
                 E                                         $0            $78          $426
                     (D–C)
                     Annual Subsidy/Unit
                 F                                         $0           $936         $5,112
                     (E * 12)
                     Total “At Risk” Units 2               446           446           447        1,339
                     Total Annual Subsidy                  $0        $417,456      $2,285,064 $2,702,520
                Source: HUD, 2012; SACOG, 2012; Mintier Harnish, 2013.
                1
                  Gross rents as allowed under the HOME and low-income housing tax credit programs.
                2
                  Assumes 1/3 of total “At Risk” units within each bedroom size.
Replacement Costs Cost Comparisons
To estimate replacement housing costs for units potentially lost in the affordable housing market, per unit
construction costs of recently approved or constructed projects are used. The land for the projects listed
was donated, so the estimated cost does not include the land cost, which would add substantially to the
overall project cost (estimated land costs are discussed in Chapter 8, Constraints). Based on costs for
recently funded new construction multifamily projects, it is estimated that the average per unit cost is
$273,066 or about $3.7 million for all 1,339 units as shown in Table H 3-28
                Table H 3-28 Estimated Replacement Cost
                   New Construction Project         Number of Units         Total Cost1         Cost/Unit
                Broadway and Martin
                                                            56            $14,039,751          $250,710
                Luther King Blvd.
                Kelsey Village                              20             $5,704,286          $285,214
                La Valentina                                81            $29,952,000          $369,778
                North of Richards Blvd. on
                                                           180            $33,581,000          $186,561
                North Seventh Avenue
                Average                                     85            $20,819,259          $273,066
                Total for all 1,339 “At Risk” units                                          $365,635,374
                Source: Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency, 2013.
In summary, the three cost estimating scenarios find the relative preservation costs to be:
Page H 3-52 |                                                                                      Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                        H-3
        Acquisition and rehabilitation - $150,379,073
        Rent subsidy - $2,702,520 annually or $27,025,200 over ten years
        Replacement through new construction - $365,635,374
Replacement and preservation of these 1,339 at-risk units is costly, regardless of the preservation method.
Providing an acquisition and rehabilitation program would be the least costly option. Additionally, there are
many Federal and State funding programs available for acquisition, rehabilitation, and new construction of
affordable housing.
SHRA offers gap financing and bond issuance for new construction and rehabilitation of multifamily rental
housing in the City of Sacramento. The adopted Multifamily Housing Loan Program and Mortgage
Revenue Bond Program guidelines specify that funding recommendations for SHRA financing will be based
on the following project priorities: 1) Preservation (affordable at-risk units); 2) Recapitalization (substantial
rehabilitation of affordable projects); 3) Inclusionary housing; and 4) Rehabilitation and new production.
SHRA provided financial assistance to preserve three affordable housing developments totaling 173 units at-
risk during the 4th cycle housing element. Additionally, four projects totaling 80 units at-risk during the 5th
cycle were substantially rehabilitated and subjected to new regulatory agreements. This resulted in a total of
253 units at-risk for conversion between 2007 and 2020 were subject to new regulatory agreements. Due to
the elimination of redevelopment tax increment and the decreases in Federal funding for affordable
housing, preserving units will be challenging, but a high priority for SHRA.
There are several organizations active in the region that have the capacity to own and manage affordable
rental projects and have expressed an interest in being notified of the availability of assisted rental housing.
These organizations listed in Table H 3-29 have been pre-approved by HCD to participate in acquisition of
at-risk properties. In addition to these qualified companies, there are many other affordable housing
developers locally and throughout the state who participate in preservation projects.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                            | Page H 3-53

                                                                              Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
                Table H 3-29 Qualified Entities in Sacramento County
                                         Company                                       City
                ACLC, Inc                                                           Stockton
                Affordable Housing Foundation                                   San Francisco
                C. Sandidge and Associates                                            Pinole
                Christian Church Homes of Northern California, Inc.                  Oakland
                Community Home Builders and Associates                              San Jose
                Community Housing Opportunities Corporation                           Davis
                Eden Housing, Inc.                                                  Hayward
                Eskaton Properties Inc.                                           Carmichael
                Housing Corporation of America                                  Laguna Beach
                Nehemiah Progressive Housing Dev. Corp.                           Sacramento
                Norwood Family Housing                                            Sacramento
                Project Go, Inc.                                                     Rocklin
                ROEM Development Corporation                                      Santa Clara
                Rural California Housing Corp                                  West Sacramento
                Sacramento Valley Organizing Community                            Sacramento
                Mutual Housing California                                         Sacramento
                Satellite Housing Inc.                                              Berkeley
                Solano Affordable Housing Foundation                                 Fairfield
                Transitional Living and Community Support                         Sacramento
                Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2012.
Conclusions
The City of Sacramento takes a very effective approach to ensuring its stock of regulated rental units
remains affordable and available to lower income residents. While 1,339 units are considered “at risk”
during this housing element cycle, given the City’s proactive Preservation Ordinance and the presence of
Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) vouchers on many of the units, it is unlikely that many affordable
units will look to convert. Should owners opt to convert to market rate, the City has numerous programs
and policies in place to facilitate new affordable development and to provide alternate affordable housing
options to any displaced residents (see Chapter 9 for more detail). Since adoption of the Preservation
Ordinance in 2004, the City has provided funding to preserve 517 units from conversion, ensuring
additional long-term affordability in the existing affordable housing stock.
Special Housing Needs
Special housing needs relate to age, disability, income, family size, or other circumstances (such as student
status) that create additional challenges to obtaining suitable housing that is also affordable. The following
section describes these special needs groups and their associated housing availability issues.
Page H 3-54  |                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                  H-3
Extremely Low-Income (ELI) Households. Extremely low-income (ELI) households are those with an
income of 30 percent or less of the area median income, adjusted for family size. According to HUD’s
2005-2009 CHAS data, approximately 27,495 households (approximately 16 percent of the city’s total
households) were ELI households. Special needs households are more likely than the population at large to
have extremely low incomes. This includes seniors whose primary source of income is Social Security,
persons with disabilities, minimum wage workers, homeless persons, and single parents. In Sacramento,
Black or African American, elderly, or Hispanic households are more likely to have extremely low incomes.
Figure H 3-16 shows population groups, including special needs groups and racial minorities who have a
higher percentage of ELI households.
                                         30%
                                         25%
                                         20%
                       % of Population
                                         15%
                                         10%
                                         5%
                                         0%
                                               Extremely Low Income
                Source: HUD (2005-2009 CHAS)
                Figure H 3-16: Percentage of ELI Households by Population Group
In 2012, a family of four making 30 percent of area median income (ELI) earned $22,850. This income
equates to a wage of about $10.99 per hour for a single wage-earner, or almost three dollars more than the
2012 state minimum wage. As would be expected in a population of such little means, most ELI households
(80 percent) rent their homes. However, among elderly ELI households (26 percent of all ELI households),
homeownership rates rise to approximately 37 percent.
Regardless of tenure, 85 percent of ELI households experience additional housing problems such as
overpayment, overcrowding, and/or severe structural dilapidation. About 80 percent of ELI households
paid more than 30 percent of their incomes for housing, including 67 percent who paid more than 50
percent of their incomes. This same extremely low-income family of four described above could afford a
monthly housing cost of approximately $571 a month. This ELI family would have to spend 63 percent of
their monthly income to afford the median three-bedroom apartment rent of $1,200 per month.
Virtually all ELI households are expected to need aid, including housing cost subsidies and social services.
The City’s program for addressing chronic homelessness, which provides housing followed by additional
services based on the client’s needs, is likely to assist many ELI households with extreme housing issues.
Other programs available to serve ELI clients include the Single Room Occupancy (SRO) strategy, public
housing units, housing choice vouchers, and low-income housing tax credits.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                      | Page H 3-55

                                                                        Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Group Quarters Population. The group quarters population includes residents with special needs, both for
housing and support services. Group quarters residents include inmates at County jails, prisons, military
quarters, college dormitories, nursing homes, and other types of housing or shelter in which unrelated
people live in common. Group quarters populations do not include residents of assisted living facilities that
have individual living units, such as senior apartments with on-site assistance.
Special needs related to residents of group quarters most typical in Sacramento are most likely to reflect the
needs of infirm older adults, persons with disabilities and other self-care limitations, and homeless
individuals and families. These special needs groups are discussed later in this section.
The group quarters population decreased by approximately 8 percent from 2000 to 2010 in the city from
9,002 to 8,314 individuals. The largest subset of the group quarters population in 2010 was 2,775 persons
living in non-institutionalized facilities such as group homes or residential care facilities (also called
“community-based homes”) that provide care and supportive services. Such places include homes for the
mentally ill, developmentally disabled, and others with self-care limitations; drug/alcohol halfway houses not
operated for correctional purposes; and communes.
In 2010, 1,367 people were living in nursing homes, which was a decrease of almost 29 percent over the
2000 total of 1,917. Another 2,254 individuals resided in correctional facilities (including inmates at the main
County jail who did not list another place or residence), which was a 9 percent increase over the 2000 total
of 2,059.
The final group quarter category included 1,493 residents of colleges, which was a 65 percent increase over
the 2000 total of 907. The majority of students who live or study in Sacramento are non-traditional students,
with housing needs independent of their status as students.
Table H 3-30 presents the types of group quarters populations in 2000 and 2010. Due to differences in how
group quarters population were classified in 2000 and 2010, these two sets of data are not directly
comparable. The drastic decrease of persons in military quarters is likely due to the fact that McClellan Air
Force Base closed in 2001. McClellan Air Force Base is located adjacent to the city limits.
                 Table H 3-30 Group Quarters Populations 2000-2010
                             Type of Group Quarters           2000 Population     2010 Population
                 Correctional Institutions                        2,059               2,254
                 Nursing Homes                                    1,917               1,367
                 Other Institutions                                 855                291
                 College Dormitories                                907               1,493
                 Other Non-institutional Group Quarters             N/A               2,775
                 Juvenile Institutions                              N/A                134
                 Military Quarters                                3,172                  0
                 Total                                            9,002               8,314
                 Source: 2000 and 2010 Census.
                 N/A – Not available.
Page H 3-56   |                                                                            Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                 H-3
Single Female-Headed Households. Single female
heads-of-households have special needs due to their                        Single Female-headed Households (2010)
incomes and family status. Single mothers (single female-                  27,640 Single Female-headed Households
headed households with children) and single women 65                       16% of all Sacramento Households
years of age or more (single elderly women) on fixed
incomes are among the special needs population at greatest                 15,285 Single Female-headed Households with
need. The needs of single elderly women are discussed in                   own children under 18 years (9% of households)
the section on seniors following this section.
The number of single female-headed households with own children increased between 2000 and 2010, as
shown in Table H 3-31, while the number of single mothers as a percentage of total households has
remained steady. Single mothers face housing challenges because of their incomes, in that many single
mothers do not earn enough to qualify for market rate housing, and subsidized housing is in short supply,
especially those units of sufficient size and with sufficient amenities to meet the needs of families. Many
single mothers also receive some form of public housing assistance. In 2012, 77 percent of public housing
residents countywide were female headed households. With 43 percent of public housing residents under
the age of eighteen, it can be surmised that a large majority of these households are single mothers.
                     Table H 3-31 Single Female-headed Households with Own Children
                                     Under 18 Years
                                                    Single Female-headed
                                                         Households
                                Year                                           Percent of Total Households
                                                With Own Children Under 18
                                                            Years
                               2000                        14,356                          9%
                               2010                        15,285                          9%
                     Source: SACOG Housing Element Data Profiles, November 2012; 2000, and 2010 Census.
According to the 2006-2010 American Community Survey, approximately 32 percent of single mothers had
incomes below the poverty level. Poverty level, like income levels, varies depending on family size; for a
family of four, the poverty level in 2009 was $22,314, or 39 percent of Sacramento area median income
during that same year. Over half (51 percent) received some form of public assistance income, such as
Supplemental Security Income, public assistance, or food stamps. The median income for single mothers—
$27,648—was less than half (48 percent) of the median income for all families in the city.
A phenomenon on which the Census Bureau began reporting at the turn of the century is the number of
grandparents raising their own grandchildren. Of the nearly 4,200 grandparents raising their own
grandchildren in the city in 2010, 64 percent were women. Nearly 24 percent of grandparents raising
grandchildren lived at the poverty level.17
Single female-headed households with children can be assisted by many of the same strategies targeted to
very low- and extremely low-income households in general. However, childcare, early childhood education
(such as Head Start), and other family supportive services are particularly important for these households.
17 The 2006-2010 American Community Survey did not report on the percentage of grandmothers with poverty level incomes
   raising grandchildren.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                     | Page H 3-57

                                                                        Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
Seniors. Seniors (persons age 65 or more) are a special needs group because a high percentage have
relatively low incomes and decreasing mobility, which limit their housing options. Many seniors own homes
that no longer meet their needs; for example, their homes may be too large, not located near medical and
other service, and/or need repairs or accessibility modifications.
In 2010, 49,420 seniors lived in the city and 29,999 households were headed by seniors in the city (see Table
H 3-2 for detailed population age numbers). Overall the senior population is rising, up 6 percent since 2000,
despite the declining proportion of seniors as a subset of the total population. Senior headed households
have slightly increased since 2000, perhaps due in part to the decreasing number of seniors living in nursing
homes.
Seniors, as a group, have lower incomes than the population at large. The median income in 2009 of
households headed by seniors was $34,760, about 69 percent of the median income of all households in the
city. This median senior income was approximately 60 percent of area median income for a family of two
and 68 percent of area median income for a single person in 2009.
In contrast to city households as a whole, who had a 49 percent ownership rate in 2010, 68 percent of senior
households were homeowners in 2010, down from 71 percent in 2000. Although most elderly residents own
their homes, often unencumbered by debt, many may be in a situation characterized as “house rich and cash
poor.” In other words, a person may have large equity in a home, but still be forced to live on a minimal
fixed income. Selling the home may not be an available option, because the cost to rent a housing unit may
override the income made available by the home sale. Seniors who do rent face the problem of paying ever
increasing rents on fixed incomes. Approximately 32 percent of elderly households were estimated to be
renters in 2010, or 10,157 senior households.
In addition to financial difficulties, many seniors face transportation difficulties and are unable to use public
transit due to limited mobility. Compounding this problem, more than half of all seniors live alone and
therefore may not have access to any type of transportation assistance.
The vast majority of the senior population desires to live an independent lifestyle as long as possible.
Housing and assistance programs for seniors should put priority on independent living, attempting first to
maintain these persons in their own homes.
Female Householders 65 Years of Age or More. A subgroup of seniors that may have special housing
needs are single elderly women. In 2010, 10,968 households were headed by women 65 years of age or
more. Women in this age group face housing challenges that are often greater than the senior population as
a whole because these women have substantially lower incomes than seniors as a group and less ability to
obtain housing that meets their needs.
According to the 2006-2010 American Community Survey, single elderly women had a median income of
about $20,760, about 41 percent of the median income for all Sacramento city households and about 60
percent of the median senior household income of $34,670. In 2006 over half (53 percent) of these single
women owned their homes, and it is likely that a substantial number of these homeowners experienced
difficulties in maintaining and/or adapting their homes for accessibility, given that over half (52 percent) of
elderly women had one or more disabilities.21 In 2006 over 14 percent of elderly women reported that their
Page H 3-58   |                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                                H-3
disabilities affect their ability for self-care, while nearly 27 percent reported that they had difficulties going
outside their homes. 18
                                                     Large Families. A large family is defined as a household of five or
  Large Families (2005-2009 CHAS)
                                                     more related individuals. Large families represent the
  10,025 Owner Households (57%)                      overwhelming majority (98 percent) of large households according
  7,550 Renter Households (43%)                      to the 2006-2010 American Community Survey
  17,575 Total Large Family Households               In 2010, about 10 percent of all households (17,575) were large
                                                     families. This number represents a 10 percent decrease in ten years.
The primary housing challenge facing large families is insufficient income to afford housing of adequate size
to meet their needs. Homeownership among large families increased from 2000 to 2009. By 2009, 57
percent of large families owned their homes, and 43 percent were renters in the city. Large families are
proportionally more represented in lower income brackets than in the household population as a whole.
Large families in higher income categories tend to be homeowners or have adequate income to own or rent
units of adequate size and sufficient number of bedrooms. However, large families who are renters are more
likely to have difficulty finding housing, due both to their lower incomes and the limited number of larger
units in the rental housing stock. In 2009, about 81 percent of large families (6,145) living in rental housing
were low-, very low- or extremely low-income.
                                                   Disabled. Individuals with disabilities have special needs related to
  Residents with Disabilities (2010)               relatively low incomes, housing accessibility, self-care, access to
                                                   transit, and proximity to health care and supportive services. Many
  65,436 Civilian Noninstitutionalized             individuals with disabilities cannot afford housing that meets their
  Individuals with Disabilities
                                                   needs or cannot afford to live in neighborhoods with good access to
                                                   transit.
According to the 2008-2010 American Community Survey, 65,436 civilian noninstituionalized individuals
over age five in the city of Sacramento had one or more sensory, physical, mental, self-care, or “go outside
the home” disabilities.19 This number represents about 14 percent of the city’s civilian noninstitutionalized
population over age five.
The 2000 CHAS data provides the most recent detailed income data for disability status by age. Detailed
disability status is not available from the 2009 CHAS data. The 2000 CHAS data shows 31,454 lower-
income households with disabilities.20 Over 44 percent were very low-income households (including more
than 25 percent extremely low-income), and the other 20 percent were low-income.
18 Comparable data is not available from the 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
19 The Census Bureau defined disabilities based on two questions from the 2000 Census Long Form: 1) a long-lasting condition
   such as blindness, deafness, a severe vision or hearing impairment, or a condition that substantially limits one or more basic
   physical activities such as walking, climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying; and 2) a physical, mental, or emotional condition
   lasting six months or more that creates a difficulty in learning, remembering, concentrating, dressing, bathing, getting around
   inside the home, or going outside the home alone to shop or visit a doctor’s office. Individuals may have more than one
   disability. The Census Bureau used the same definitions for the American Community Survey.
20 CHAS data includes only the number of households with disabilities, not the number of individuals. Comparable data for 2009
   is not available.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                  | Page H 3-59

                                                                       Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
SB 812, which took effect January 2011, amended State housing element law to require an evaluation of the
special housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities. A "developmental disability" is defined as
a disability that originates before an individual becomes 18 years old, continues or can be expected to
continue indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. This includes mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
The 2008-2010 American Community Survey estimates that 29,828 Sacramento residents have a cognitive
difficulty, which comprises 46 percent of disabilities in the city. According to the California Department of
Developmental Services, as of July 1, 2012, the Alta California Regional Center served 17,570 residents with
developmental disabilities in the region, 4,489 (26 percent) of which resided in the city of Sacramento. Of
this total, 36 percent are ages 0-14, 17 percent are ages 15-22, 38 percent are ages 23-54, 6 percent are ages
55-64, and 3 percent are ages 65 or over. The Sierra Vista Developmental Center in Yuba City, which also
served residents from the region, closed in 2009. Most developmentally disabled residents in the region
(60.1 percent) have a type of mental retardation and many (19.4 percent) are autistic.
While about 28 percent of developmentally disabled individuals live in supported housing, 72 percent live at
home. Many developmentally disabled persons are able to live and work independently. However, more
severely disabled individuals require a group living environment with supervision, or an institutional
environment with medical attention and physical therapy. Additionally, almost half (44.1 percent) of
developmentally disabled individuals are under the age of 18. Because developmental disabilities exist
before adulthood, the first housing issue for the developmentally disabled is the transition from living with a
parent/guardian as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
Another perspective on the disabled population in Sacramento County can be seen by examining the
number of Supplemental Security Income (SSI) recipients living in Sacramento County. In December 2011,
based on information from the State Department of Social Services, there were 54,470 blind and/or
disabled individuals receiving SSI throughout Sacramento County. The SSI is a program based on individual
need and resources and does not include the Social Security Disability Insurance Program (SSDI), the
disability insurance program employees normally pay into. Recipients in the SSDI program would add to
total disabled population.
Based on information from caseloads from the Community Services Planning Council, 25,590 people
received mental health services from Sacramento County in 2009. More recent data shows that 9,045
people received mental health services from the County during the month of May 2011 alone. This total
includes both city residents and those from elsewhere in Sacramento County.
Because disabilities include a wide range and severity of sensory, physical, mental, and developmental
conditions, the special needs of persons with disabilities is wide ranging, as well. In addition to affordable
and accessible housing, transportation, and proximity to services, many persons with disabilities need on-site
support or even full-time care in a group home environment.
Students. Three major public colleges are located within the city of Sacramento: California State University
Sacramento (CSUS), Sacramento City College, and Cosumnes River College. The latter two are two-year
colleges. The University of California, Davis Medical Center is also located in the city, and many of the
medical school functions are also located on the Medical Center campus.
In the fall of 2011, enrollment at CSUS, the only four year college in the city, was about 28,000. As of Fall
2011, the enrollment at Sacramento City College was almost 22,800 students, with an additional 15,450
Page H 3-60   |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                        H-3
students at Cosumnes River. This amounts to a total enrollment of about 66,250 students for all three
campuses, or 14 percent of the entire population of the city. The UC Davis Medical Center reports
approximately 800 students, plus interns assigned to the medical center. In general, approximately 11
percent of the city’s population was enrolled in college or graduate school according to the 2006-2010
American Community Survey, pointing to the fact that many students, especially those at the two-year
colleges and the medical center, do not live within the city boundaries.
CSUS is the only college in the city with on-campus housing. Its student housing capacity is approximately
1,600. Consequently, 94 percent of students at CSUS and 98 percent of students citywide live off campus,
including in housing leased by the University. While the University is in the process of significantly
increasing its on-campus student housing capacity, currently, most students live with their parents or in
rental units throughout the Sacramento area.
Sacramento has a large percentage of older, continuing education students, who have already established
homes and careers. Over 23 percent of students at CSUS are age 25 or older. This factor somewhat
decreases the low-income housing needs generated by the college, although data as to the magnitude of this
factor is not available.
There are many other colleges in Sacramento, including law schools, bible colleges, trade schools and
university extensions. These schools have low enrollments relative to the city’s population. However, one
large private college, McGeorge School of Law in Oak Park, has approximately 860 day students.
Farmworkers. Farmworkers represent a small fraction of the
city’s labor force. In 2010, 1,326 city residents were employed in       Farmworkers
the agriculture, forestry, and fishing and hunting industries.           4,475 Farmworkers in Sacramento County
According to the 2007 Agricultural Survey, in 2007 the entire
county of Sacramento had 4,745 farmworkers. Although little
agricultural activity remains within the Sacramento city limits, the region includes significant agricultural
activity that attracts farmworkers and their families.
In 2000, a study to enumerate and profile migrant and seasonal farmworkers in California was completed
for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. This study estimated that 2,831 migrant
farmworkers and 3,284 seasonal farmworkers were employed in Sacramento County. Including all members
of farmworker households, 10,882 farmworkers and their family members were estimated to reside or work
in the county. While the study did not differentiate those living in the unincorporated portions of the
county, based on the location of farming activities, it can be assumed that a large majority of these
farmworker households reside in the unincorporated portions of Sacramento County, and few in
Sacramento city or other cities.
According to the 2000 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Survey (CHAS), seasonal farmworkers (those
who live in the area full-time) are part of the area’s lower-income population. Migrant farmworkers, on the
other hand, are not counted by the Census as part of the local population and may not be counted in
Census-based studies of affordable housing needs. However, migrant workers do have shelter needs while
working in the county. Farmworker housing needs for migrant and seasonal farmworkers may be greatest in
proximity to agricultural areas of the county such as the Delta, than within the incorporated area of the city
of Sacramento, which is remote from farming areas. City farmworker housing needs are anticipated to be
relatively small.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H 3-61

                                                                                  Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
As the county’s farmlands are developed for urban uses, some permanent farmworkers may be displaced
from farm employment and may seek jobs and housing in more urban areas. Again, strategies to assist very
low-income households will also benefit this special needs population.
Homeless Population. While the Sacramento County
                                                                               Homeless Population (Sacramento County)
Department of Human Assistance (DHA) has historically
administered the community’s Continuum of Care (CoC) and                       January 24, 2013 Homeless Count:
homeless programs, a collaborative effort by numerous                          2,538 Total Homeless People
stakeholders transitioned the management of these programs
to the non-profit organization Sacramento Steps Forward (SSF) in 2011. As part of their efforts to
continually monitor, understand, and appropriately plan for housing and service needs for the homeless
population, the City and County, through DHA and SSF, undertake a single day (or a “point-in-time”) count
of the homeless. This project has numerous contributing partners, including but not limited to the
following: the Downtown Sacramento Partnership, law enforcement (police and park rangers), community
volunteers, Sacramento Steps Forward, and the Leadership Council of the Ten Year Plan.21 The homeless
population is varied and complex, and enumerating this population is difficult. The count is conducted for
two reasons. First, it is required by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as part of
the annual application for McKinney-Vento funding. Secondly, the count is conducted as part of the
ongoing monitoring for the Ten Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness. The count relies on a
methodology that allows for focused geographic counting and extrapolation of that count to the broader
geography of the city and County. Although DHA has been conducting point-in-time counts since 2003,
this research-based methodology was first used for the 2007 and 2008 counts.
Table H 3-32 describes a point-in-time count of the subgroups in Sacramento’s homeless population by
shelter status. On the evening of January 24, 2013, SSF conducted a homeless count to determine the size of
the homeless population throughout Sacramento County in shelters, transitional housing, and on the streets.
This point-in-time count documented 2,538 individuals, including 808 in emergency shelters, 944 in
transitional shelters, and 786 on the streets.22 At the time of the 2013 count, 27 percent of homeless people
were severely mentally ill and 39 percent were chronic substance abusers. About 12 percent of homeless
people counted in the 2013 survey were veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces, although the U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs estimates that approximately one-third of homeless people nationally are veterans.
The City and County of Sacramento address homelessness as a regional issue and the point-in-time count
does not distinguish between jurisdictional boundaries. For this reason an estimate of the homeless
individuals found in the City of Sacramento is not available. A rough estimate of the homeless population
can be calculated based on the proportion of the total countywide population that is in the City of
Sacramento in 2013 (33 percent). Using this methodology, there is an estimated homeless population of 838
individuals in the city. This is likely an underestimate of the actual homeless population in the city since
many of the homeless services are located in the city, and therefore it would be expected that a larger share
of the countywide homeless population would reside in the city. As stated earlier, homelessness is viewed as
a regional issue in Sacramento County and the City and County collaborate to address the needs of the
homeless population.
21 The Leadership Council is one component of the leadership structure created to implement the Ten Year Plan to End Chronic
   Homelessness. In 2011, through a collaborative effort of numerous stakeholders, the non-profit organization Sacramento Steps
   Forward was formed to administer the County Department of Human Assistance Continuum of Care and other homeless
   programs. Please see their website for more information: http://www.sacramentostepsforward.org/
22 Sacramento County Department of Human Assistance, 2011
Page H 3-62   |                                                                                      Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                H-3
Since 2009, the Sacramento area has seen a consistent decrease in unsheltered homeless persons; in 2013,
786 unsheltered persons were counted, down from 955 in 2011 (a 17.7 percent reduction) and 1,194 in 2009
(a 34.2 percent reduction). While this downward trend is noteworthy, it should also be noted that counting
homeless persons sleeping in places not meant for human habitation is inherently difficult and it cannot be
assumed that not every unsheltered person was counted.
               Table H 3-32 2013 Homeless Subpopulations
                              Sub-Populations                      Total        Sheltered*       Unsheltered
               Chronically Homeless Individuals                    432             147              285
               Chronically Homeless Families                         3               3               0
               Seriously Mentally Ill                              677             351              326
               Chronic Substance Abuse                             993             523              470
               Veterans                                            302             166              136
               Female Veterans                                       21             18               3
               Persons with HIV/AIDS                                 39             15               24
               Victims of Domestic Violence                        504             220              284
               * Includes persons in emergency shelters and transitional housing, except chronic homeless
               individuals and families includes only emergency shelters.
               Source: 2013 Sacramento Countywide Homeless County Report. Prepared by Sacramento Steps
               Forward.
The Ten Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness focuses on the “housing first” model, which aims to get
homeless individuals and families into permanent housing. However, through the Continuum of Care, the
City and County also recognize the great need to provide emergency and transitional shelter facilities.
Countywide data indicating the estimated shelter needs for homeless individuals and families is presented in
Table H 3-33 and the number of existing beds available by shelter type are presented in Tables H 3-34
through H 3-36.
Currently (2011) Sacramento meets the existing need for emergency shelter beds for individuals and is very
close to meeting the existing need for emergency shelter beds for families (seven beds short). Sacramento
does not meet the existing need for individual or family beds in transitional or permanent supportive
housing. As shown in Table H 3-33, the unmet need in transitional housing is 1,079 beds and the unmet
need in permanent supportive housing is 1,062 beds. The greatest need is for individual permanent
supportive housing with an unmet need of 983 beds and individual transitional housing with an unmet need
of 576 beds.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                    | Page H 3-63

                                                                              Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
                 Table H 3-33 2011 Countywide Needs of Homeless Individuals
                                                                Estimated      Current       Unmet
                             Homeless Populations
                                                                  Need        Inventory     Need/Gap
                                Emergency Shelter                 532            532            0
                                Transitional Housing             1,202           626          576
                 Beds:
                 Individuals    Permanent Supportive
                                                                 1,821           838          983
                                Housing
                                Total                            3,555          1,996        1,559
                                Emergency Shelter                 361            354            7
                                Transitional Housing              946            443          503
                 Beds:
                 Families       Permanent Supportive
                                                                  690            611           79
                                Housing
                                Total                            1,997          1,408         589
                 Source: Sacramento County 2013-17 Draft Consolidated Plan, 2012; Sacramento Steps
                 Forward, 2011.
Homeless Shelter and Housing Facilities. Sacramento’s emergency shelters, transitional housing, and
permanent supportive housing are listed in Tables H 3-34, 3-35, and
3-36. Sacramento Steps Forward counted 4,039 homeless shelter and housing beds for individuals and
families during the warm weather months, with an additional 150 shelter beds available during the winter
overflow period (November to March). These facilities serve the homeless throughout Sacramento County,
although they are scattered throughout the city and unincorporated portions of the County. The current
inventory includes 745 emergency beds, 913 transitional beds and 2,281 permanent beds for homeless in the
city of Sacramento. Almost 60 percent of homeless shelter and housing facilities surveyed are at capacity or
overutilized and the overall average facility use rate is 101 percent. Overutilization is most pronounced for
permanent supportive housing: 70 percent of shelters are at capacity or overutilized and the average shelter
use rate is 103 percent. Overall, transitional and emergency shelters (excluding winter overflow beds) are
almost at capacity but not overutilized on average.
Page H 3-64  |                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                H-3
           Table H 3-34 Emergency Shelter Facilities and Beds for the Homeless
                                                                         Number of Utilization
                              Single Female Shelters            Location
                                                                           Beds       Rate
           Loaves and Fishes, Sister Nora’s Place                 City      13       88%
           Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center
                                                                County      10      100%
           Women’s Refuge
                                                                         Number of Utilization
                               Single Male Shelters             Location
                                                                           Beds       Rate
           Union Gospel Mission Emergency Shelter               County      84       98%
           Volunteers of America North A Street Aid-in-Kind       City      80      100%
                                                                         Number of Utilization
                         Single Male and Female Shelters        Location
                                                                           Beds       Rate
           Sacramento Self Help Housing, Cathedral/Downtown
                                                                  City      5       160%
           Housing
           Sacramento Self Help Housing/The Effort at
                                                                  City      11      100%
           Salvation Army T-3 Program
           The Effort at Salvation Army Interim Care Program      City      28      100%
           The Salvation Army Lodge Program                       City      65      109%
           The Salvation Army Veteran’s                           City      13       85%
           Transitional Living & Community Support for Mentally
                                                                  City      22       86%
           Ill Women & Men (Carol’s Place)
           Volunteers of America Open Arms (HIV)                  City      12       92%
                                                                         Number of Utilization
                                  Youth Shelters                Location
                                                                           Beds       Rate
           Diogenes & WIND Youth Center                         County      12       42%
                                                                         Number of Utilization
                           Single Females with Children         Location
                                                                           Beds       Rate
           St. John’s Emergency Shelter Program                 County     112       85%
           Women Escaping a Violent Environment Emergency         City      54       74%
                                                                         Number of Utilization
                               Adults with Children             Location
                                                                           Beds       Rate
           Frances House Emergency Motel Vouchers                 N/A       16       88%
           Traveler’s Aid, Emergency Motel Vouchers for
                                                                  N/A       10      180%
           Families
           Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center Motel
                                                                  N/A       48      162%
           Voucher Program
           Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center Family
                                                                  City      55       93%
           Shelter
           Volunteers of America Bannon Street Aid-in-Kind        City      62       50%
           Interfaith Network Family Promise Center               City      11      100%
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                    | Page H 3-65

                                                                            Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
           Table H 3-34 Emergency Shelter Facilities and Beds for the Homeless
                                                                                     Number of   Utilization
                             Shelter for the Mentally Ill               Location
                                                                                       Beds         Rate
           Transitional Living & Community Support for Mentally
                                                                          City          22         86%
           Ill Women & Men (Carol’s Place)
           Total Emergency Shelter Beds                                    --           745        99%
                                                                                     Number of   Utilization
                  Winter Overflow Shelters (November to March)          Location
                                                                                       Beds         Rate
           Volunteers of America Winter Sanctuary                         City          100       103%
           Volunteers of America Winter Shelter Program                   City          28         68%
           Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center Winter
                                                                          City          22        132%
           Overflow Shelter
           Total Winter Overflow Beds                                      --           150       101%
           Grand Total Emergency Shelter Beds                              --           895        99%
           Source: 2-1-1 Sacramento databases, 2012 and Sacramento Steps Forward, January 2012.
Page H 3-66  |                                                                                Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                                     H-3
       Table H 3-35 Transitional Housing Opportunities for the Homeless1
                                       Shelter                                    Number of Beds      Utilization Rate
       Clean and Sober New Life                                                          80                100%
       Lutheran Social Services Transitional Housing Families                            35                117%
       Lutheran Social Services Transitional Housing Youth                               20                105%
       Resources for Independent Living Transitional Center                              6                 100%
       Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center Extended
                                                                                         6                  50%
       Shelter Program
       Sacramento Children’s Home Sacramento Crisis Nursery                              4                 125%
       Sacramento Cottage Housing Inc. Quinn Cottages                                    70                 87%
       The Salvation Army Transitional Living Program                                   105                 90%
       Traveler’s Aid Families Beyond Transition                                         52                125%
       Vietnam Veterans of California GDP Sacramento Veterans
                                                                                         30                100%
       Resource Center
       Vietnam Veterans of California GDP Women’s Transitional
                                                                                         6                 100%
       Housing
       Transitional Living and Community Support MICA                                    9                  44%
       Transitional Living and Community Support Palmer                                  48                 92%
       Volunteers of America Adolfo TH-Plus Housing for Foster
                                                                                         10                138%
       Youth
       Volunteers of America Independent Living and Readiness
                                                                                        100                 71%
       Program
       Volunteers of America Mather Community Campus                                    313                108%
       Walking the Village Tubman House                                                  19                100%
       Total Transitional Beds                                                          913                 97%
       Source: Sacramento Steps Forward, January 2012.
       1
         Transitional housing includes apartment units and support services with residency limited to
         two years. Permanent housing has no residency limitation.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                         | Page H 3-67

                                                                                 Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
          Table H 3-36 Permanent Housing Opportunities Targeted to the Very Low-Income
                               and/or Formerly Homeless Individuals and Families
                                               Shelter                                    Number of    Utilization
                                                                                            Beds         Rate1
          Department of Veteran’s Affairs, VASH Vouchers                                     160        134%
          Lutheran Social Services, Achieving Community Change Together                      33             --
          Lutheran Social Services, Adolfo PSH Program                                       26         104%
          Lutheran Social Services, Mutual Housing at the Highlands                          66         100%
          Lutheran Social Services, Saybrook PSH Project                                     177         97%
                                 th
          Mercy Housing, 7 & H Street Housing Community                                      150            --
          Mercy Housing, Ardenaire Apartments                                                22         136%
          Mercy Housing, Budget Inn                                                          74         101%
          Mercy Housing, The King Project                                                    80          96%
          Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center, Casa Serenes                             30         117%
          Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center, Cases De
                                                                                             18         100%
          Esperanza
          Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center, Home at Last                             22             --
          Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center, Omega PSH Project                        57         119%
          Sacramento Area Emergency Housing Center, Omega Expansion                          21          95%
          Sacramento Cottage Housing Inc., McClellan Park PSH                                284         94%
          Sac County DHA Shelter Plus Care                                                   895         71%
          Sacramento Self Help Housing Friendship Housing Program                            24         104%
          Sac Self Help Housing Friendship Housing Program Expansion                         40         102%
          Shasta Hotel Cooperative Shelter Plus Care                                         18         100%
          St. John’s Program for Women and Children                                          30         147%
          St. John’s Program for Women and Children (Non-HUD)                                31         100%
          Transitional Living and Community Support, Folsom Oaks                             18         100%
          Transitional Living and Community Support, PACT Permanent
                                                                                              8         100%
          Housing Program (PPHP)
          Transitional Living Community Support T Street Co-op                                9         100%
          Transitional Living Community Support WORK                                         25          92%
          Turning Point Community Programs, Pathways                                         40          90%
          Turning Point Community Programs, YWCA                                             11         100%
          Volunteers of America Nova House                                                   12          83%
          Total Permanent Beds                                                              2,381       103%
          Source: Sacramento Steps Forward, January 2012.
          2
            Utilization rate is based on a January 2012 housing survey by Sacramento Steps Forward. Some shelters
            that were under development and not surveyed in January 2012 are now currently (May 2013) active.
Page H 3-68 |                                                                                      Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Community Profile                                                                    H-3
Chapter 3 Conclusions
The city of Sacramento is a city with a dynamic and changing population, a wide variety of housing types,
and a diverse supply of resources and opportunities. Understanding the population demographics,
affordability trends, and current housing characteristics is necessary when creating comprehensive policies
and programs to address current and future housing needs. The City has identified six themes that capture
the broad housing goals to be addressed in the Housing Element; data relevant to each theme is summarized
below from the community profile.
Sustainability and Stability
Sacramento is a city of both older, established neighborhoods and one of new housing units and
development opportunities. As such, this theme plays out differently in new communities and in existing
neighborhoods. By diversifying the current housing stock and providing housing for changing populations
who demand alternative housing options, new neighborhoods are strengthened. With approximately 63% of
the city’s current housing stock over 30 years old and up to 21 percent of the current housing stock in need
of rehabilitation, the City has also the unique opportunity to encourage the incorporation of sustainability in
existing housing.
Given the interplay of existing infill areas and greenfield development areas, the city has a variety of
individual neighborhoods, each with its own housing characteristics. As shown in Table H 3-11, one of the
most important is the mixture of single-family and multi-family housing units. The majority of the city
neighborhoods are characterized by a majority of single-family units, with the notable exception of the
Central City. As the general demographics of the city shift to smaller households, more senior households
and more racially diverse households, the need for variety of housing types and tenures throughout the city
may shift this distribution closer to the more urban housing types found in the Central City.
Production
As a basic tenet of the Housing Element, the City is required to plan to accommodate its “fair share” of new
growth allocated to the six-county SACOG region, enumerated in the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(RHNA). Between 2013 and 2021, the City’s RHNA requires that the City plan to accommodate 24,101 new
housing units, including 8,411 units for lower-income households.
Beyond planning for growth to meet the RHNA, however, the City has needs for improving housing for
existing residents. These needs include ensuring that between 1 and 18 percent of households living in
substandard units can improve the conditions they live in and that the 44 percent of the households,
including many lower-income families who overpay for their housing can find relief to this economic strain.
Extremely Low-Income and Special Needs Housing
While the Regional Housing Needs Allocation requires the City to plan for 2,472 new housing units for
extremely low-income (ELI) households, other measures of ELI needs point to the need for an approach
that looks beyond new construction. These measures include enhancing opportunities for the 27,495
existing ELI households in the city, 80 percent of whom are overpaying for their current housing and
preserving existing affordable ELI housing throughout the city. This would also include preserving the city’s
asset of almost 2,000 public housing units, which house, on average, households making 7 percent of area
median income. In addition, there are over 1,800 subsidized rental units in the private market with expiring
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H 3-69

                                                                         Chapter Three: COMMUNITY PROFILE
affordability restrictions, many of which are occupied by ELI households and which have subsidies ensuring
this occupancy.
Rehabilitation and Preservation
The city’s existing neighborhoods are aging at the same time that the new growth greenfield areas are
building out with new housing. To ensure that the existing neighborhoods are maintained as valuable and
viable with attractive housing options, reinvestment in these assets will be needed. Considering that 35
percent of the older housing stock is renter-occupied, this task becomes more important. In addition to the
aging of market-rate housing, there is a need to maintain the existing subsidized housing stock, including
public housing, subsidized housing and homeless and transitional shelters.
Accessibility
With over 65,000 city residents living with some sort of physical, mental, or sensory disability, there is a
need to consider housing options for this population. Given the interplay of disability and income, with the
majority of disabled individuals being lower-income, housing opportunities could attempt to bridge the gap
between affordability and accessibility. In addition, considering the growing senior population and the aging
housing stock, thoughtful targeting of rehabilitation resources can help stabilize this population, allowing
seniors to remain in their homes and ensuring on-going affordability.
Housing Integration and Providing Housing Opportunities for All Income Groups
While the city is ethnically and racially diverse, with about 55 percent of the population non-White and
growing segments of Hispanic and Asian households, income disparities among minority populations lead
to economic and geographic segregation. The city as a whole has a lower median income than the
surrounding region, and within the city, economic stratification is still an issue.
Although market prices declined drastically and 81 percent of households earning the area median income
can afford a median-priced home, home purchase is still out of reach for many buyers, especially very low-
and extremely low-income households. Meanwhile, the median rent is still increasing and unaffordable to
most of these same households. About 50 percent of the city’s population is lower-income and while the
market is currently providing for some lower-income households, housing opportunities for these
households will diminish as market prices rise. A mix of affordable housing types will provide increased
opportunities for the lowest income households.
In addition, the city currently has a low ownership rate overall of 49 percent, well below the state average of
56 percent. Increasing homeownership and providing ownership opportunities for the modest income
worker, therefore, would address this concern. As the economy in Sacramento grows and shifts, housing
can play a vital role in attracting employers. Ownership housing at more moderate levels can also help to
boost the lagging middle class in the city. When combined, these dual strategies will help to improve the
current disparate income distribution.
Page H 3-70  |                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Housing Element Update Public Participation Program
                                                                                                    H-4
4 Housing Element Update Public
        Participation Program
4.0 Key Findings
The City of Sacramento has led a comprehensive public participation program for the Housing Element
update, beginning in 2012. Some of the public involvement tools have included:
       A General Plan open house with specific booths to discuss housing issues.
       Meetings with stakeholders including developers, advocates, nonprofit social service providers, and
        other interested community members.
       A community workshop at City Hall.
       10 study sessions and hearings before the City Council, Planning Commission, Adult and Aging
        Commission, and the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Commission.
4.1 Introduction
State law (Section 65583[c][7] of the California Government Code) requires cities and counties to make a
diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the community in the
development of a Housing Element and requires the Housing Element to describe this effort. This chapter
describes the City’s efforts to engage all segments of the community during the preparation of the updated
Housing Element, including the individuals, organizations, and agencies with which the City consulted, the
methods of community outreach, and a summary of comments received and how these comments have
been addressed.
4.2 Community Outreach
Community Workshop
On March 13, 2013, neighborhood associations, activists, housing advocates, developers and public agencies
were invited to participate in a community workshop. The City provided a “Housing Element 101”
presentation to educate the group on the update process. Highlights of information collected for the
Community Profile were presented at the meeting. The City posed key policy questions, which included:
     •  How to prioritize limited funds and resources?
     •  What affordable housing requirements should there be for new development?
     •  What are the housing needs of different neighborhoods?
     •  How should the City address the housing needs of seniors and persons with disabilities?
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H 4-1

                          Chapter Four: HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION PROGRAM
Stakeholder Group Meetings
The City held stakeholder group meetings during key points of the Housing Element update process. The
stakeholder group consisted of representatives from the development community, affordable housing
community, special needs communities, and other interested parties. During the meetings the City provided
a “Housing Element 101” presentation to educate the group on the update process; solicited feedback and
discussed major issues; proposed themes; and discussed highest priority City needs, major opportunities and
barriers to meeting the City’s housing needs, and priority short-term and mid-term steps on which the City
should focus.
Study Sessions and Public Hearings
The City held study sessions before the Planning and Design Commission on November 15, 2012, March
14, 2013, May 23, 2013, and July 25, 2013 to obtain direction and feedback and to share work progress to
date. Additionally the City had public meetings with the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment
Commission, the Disability Advisory Commission, and the Adult and Aging Commission. A subsequent
public hearing to recommend approval of the draft Housing Element by the Planning and Design
Commission was held on August 15, 2013. On September 3, 2013 City Council approved submittal of the
Draft Housing Element to HCD.
List of Attendees (Organizations Represented)
Throughout the year-long process of updating the Housing Element, many different organizations and
groups have provided input. This list includes some of those organizations, but is not exhaustive and does
not include the many individual citizens who also participated.
       Sacramento Housing Alliance
       Community Services Planning Council – Adult and Aging Commission
       Mercy Housing
       Sacramento Steps Forward
       Sares-Regis Group
       Downtown Partnership
       Habitat for Humanity
       Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Commission
       Sacramento City Planning and Design Commission
       Sacramento Disabilities Advisory Commission (DAC)
       North State Building Industry Association
       Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD)
Page H 4-2  |                                                                       Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Housing Element Update Public Participation Program
                                                                                                       H-4
Envision Sacramento Survey
Between May 13, 2013 and June, 7 2013, the City solicited public input through a survey on its online
discussion forum called Envision Sacramento. More than 160 individuals responded to questions
concerning the use of limited resources, affordable housing requirements for new development, housing
needs in the respondents’ neighborhoods, and housing needs for seniors and persons with disabilities. The
results of the survey can be found in Appendix H-B.
4.3 Distribution Methods of Draft Housing Element
The Draft Housing Element was distributed to City Commissioners and Council members in preparation
for their August and September hearings. City staff posted the draft document on the Housing Element
Update Website on September 5, 2013, and sent a mass email to alert the public.
4.4 Summary of Public Comments
During the Community Workshop, Commission meetings, and stakeholder meetings participants responded
to a series of questions regarding the City’s housing strategy and past successes. There is a significant
diversity of opinions concerning how the City should meet its housing needs. The following is a summary of
the key policy issues that have been discussed. A list of notes from public meetings can be found in
Appendix H-B.
    •    There needs to be regional cooperation to create more affordable housing.
    •    The Mixed Income Housing Ordinance should be flexible and, if it is applied citywide, it cannot
         constrain infill development.
    •    There is a growing need for housing for extremely low-income residents.
    •    The City needs to support housing for all income groups and multi-generational households.
    •    Avoid over-concentration of affordable housing in any area of the city.
    •    Foreclosed homes should be used to create new affordable housing opportunities.
    •    The City needs to avoid a future foreclosure crisis by encouraging responsible lending practices.
    •    The loss of redevelopment financing compels the City to find new sources of funding for affordable
         housing.
    •    The City should have a competitive fee structure that does not discourage new investment.
    •    Affordable housing needs to be coupled with good services and located near amenities.
In response to public comments, the City has revised its policies and programs in an effort to address
current housing needs while at the same time avoiding constraints to housing production.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H 4-3

                                Chapter Four: HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION PROGRAM
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H 4-4   |                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                  H-5
5 Land Inventory
5.0 Key Findings
   Sacramento’s Regional Housing Need Allocation for 2013-2021 is 24,101 units. The City has prepared
    an inventory of vacant sites, which can accommodate 21,216 units. Additionally the inventory includes
    planned and approved projects that will provide an additional 7,924 housing units, for a total residential
    capacity of 29,140 units, which is more than enough capacity to meet the 2013-2021 RHNA.
   The land inventory includes enough capacity to meet the RHNA for all income levels. The City can
    accommodate 10,891 lower-income units (i.e., extremely low-, very low-, and low-income units), 6,527
    moderate income units, and 11,722 above moderate-income units.
5.1 Introduction
This chapter presents an inventory of sites suitable for residential development in Sacramento during the
planning period of this Housing Element update, 2013-2021. Analysis of the data presented in this chapter
demonstrates that the City of Sacramento has an adequate supply of suitable land to accommodate the City’s
housing allocation of 24,101 units.
The chapter provides a brief summary of legal requirements framing the land inventory, and begins with the
City’s progress towards meeting the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). An analysis of capacity
within each zoning district follows, using information from housing recently developed in Sacramento.
Using actual projects provides a basis for the densities assumed in the land inventory. Additional
information demonstrates the availability of infrastructure and public services that support development of
housing for a variety of income levels and special needs groups.
Finally, this chapter contains a discussion of the sites that are suitable for housing development, including
vacant parcels, infill areas, and large development project areas.
5.2 Legal Requirements
California law (Government Code Sections 65583 (a)(3)) requires that the Housing Element contain:
   an inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having
    potential for redevelopment; and
   an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to these sites.
The inventory of land suitable for residential development must be used to identify sites that can be
developed for housing within the planning period (Section 65583.2).
State law further requires that the Housing Element:
         “…identify adequate sites made available through appropriate zoning and development standards
         with services and facilities, including sewage collection and treatment, domestic water supply, and
         septic tanks and wells, needed to facilitate and encourage the development of a variety of types of
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                        | Page H 5-1

                                                                                    Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
        housing for all income levels, including multifamily rental housing, factory-built housing, mobile
        homes, housing for agricultural employees, emergency shelters, and transitional housing in order to
        meet the community’s housing goals as identified in subdivision.”
Government Code Section 65583.2(c) requires the local government to demonstrate that the projected
residential development capacity of the sites identified in the inventory can realistically be achieved. The City
must determine whether each site in the inventory can accommodate some portion of its share of the
regional housing needs by income level during the planning period. The number of units calculated must be
adjusted as necessary based on land use controls and site improvement requirements.
5.3 Regional Housing Need Allocation
The City of Sacramento’s share of the regional housing need is determined by the Sacramento Area Council
of Governments (SACOG) through the Regional Housing Needs Plan, adopted in September, 2012. The
Plan contains the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), which specifies the share of the regional
housing need allocated to each city and county by income level. According to the RHNA, the City should
plan to accommodate 24,101 housing units between January 1, 2013 and October 31, 2021. Table H 5-1
below shows the City’s RHNA by income category. Of the 24,101 total units, 4,944 should be affordable to
extremely low- and very low-income households, 3,467 to low-income households, 4,482 to moderate-
income households, and 11,208 to above moderate-income households. Opportunity sites that are identified
to meet the allocated need must permit adequate densities and contain infrastructure and services such that
production of housing affordable to lower-income residents is feasible.
                Table H 5-1      City of Sacramento Regional Housing Needs Allocation,
                                 January 1, 2013, to October 31, 2021
                         Income Category                    Units                  Percent of Total
                     Extremely Low-Income                   2,472                      10.3%
                        Very Low-Income                     2,472                      10.3%
                           Low-Income                       3,467                      14.4%
                        Moderate-Income                     4,482                      18.6%
                    Above Moderate-Income                  11,208                      46.5%
                             TOTAL                         24,101                     100.0%
                Source: Sacramento Area Council of Governments, Regional Housing Needs Plan, 2013-2021.
                Adopted September 2012.
5.4 Land Inventory
The land inventory consists of several recently built, planned, and approved projects and 3,788 vacant sites
with a capacity to accommodate a variety of multifamily and single-family housing types for renters and
owners, and a variety of housing and shelter options for extremely low-income and special needs groups. Of
the total vacant sites, 286 sites are a half acre or more and have capacity to accommodate moderate- and
lower-income units. In total, the vacant sites have a capacity to accommodate 21,216 housing units.
Additionally, planned and approved projects will allow for 7,724 units, for a total residential capacity of
28,940 units, which is more than enough capacity to meet the 2013-2021 RHNA.
Page H 5-2  |                                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                    H-5
The South Area Community Plan has approximately 28 percent of the identified housing capacity in the
inventory (vacant sites and planned/approved projects). Another 24 percent is in North Natomas, 17
percent in North Sacramento, 11 percent in the Central City, and the remaining 20 percent of the housing
capacity is in the Fruitridge Broadway, South Area, Arden Arcade, East Sacramento, Land Park, and Pocket
community plan areas. A map of these areas can be found in Figure H 3-2 of the Community Profile.
The complete inventory of sites is provided in Appendix H-C.
Recently Built, Planned, and Approved Development Projects with Affordable Units
Since the RHNA period runs from January 1, 2013, to October 31, 2021, Sacramento’s land inventory can
include new units built since January 1, 2013, and projects that are approved and anticipated to be built
during the planning period. Recently built projects that were still under construction and not yet occupied as
of January 1, 2013, are included in this inventory. The City did not do an inventory of all market-rate
projects, but instead focused on projects that include units affordable to extremely low-, very low-, low-, and
moderate-income households. Table H 5-2 shows each of these projects and describes the project status as
of June 1, 2013. It also shows the number of built, planned, and approved units by income category. A
description of each of the projects follows.
In total, there are 7,924 units in recently built and planned and approved projects. The projects listed in the
table will provide 9 extremely low-income units, 194 very low-income units, and 693 low-income units,
which are based on affordability restrictions. The planned projects of Delta Shores, Township 9, and the
Downtown Railyards will have market rate units that will include high density and medium density multi-
family dwellings that, as described in the Community Profile Chapter and Constraints Chapter, have shown
to be affordable to moderate-income families. In total, the planned and approved projects will provide
capacity for 3,838 moderate-income units. The 3,169 attached and detached single-family units planned for
in these projects, as well as 21 of the multifamily units at Legado de Ravel, are considered affordable to
above moderate-income households.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 5-3

                                                                                                                   Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
Table H 5-2      Built, Planned, and Approved Projects with Affordable Units
  Name of       Address/Parcel                              Total    AMI    ELI   VLI   LI    MI     Status as of June 1, 2013
Development        Numbers     Type of Units Density Acres  Units   Units  Units Units Units Units           and Notes                              Notes
Township 9      100200450000   Multifamily       80    1.42    114                             114 Entitlements for 2,350           Infrastructure has been put in
                                                                                                   housing units, which             place with Prop 1C financing.
                100200450000   Multifamily      118    1.96    231                             231 included rezoning, general
                                                                                                   plan amendments, and a
                100200450000   Multifamily      143    0.98    140                             140 financing plan, was
                                                                                                   approved by the City Council
                100200450000   Multifamily       98    2.18    214                             214 in 2007.
Delta Shores     530010072000  Multifamily                                                         The proposal for 4,904           Work on Cosumnes River
                                                 27   35.67  1,738                           1,738
                                                                                                   housing units, which             Boulevard Extension began in
                                                                                                   included rezoning, general       May of 2013.
                 530010072000  Single Family                                                       plan amendments, and a
                                                 14   88.96  1,246  1,246
                               (Attached)                                                          financing plan, was
                                                                                                   approved by the City Council
                 530010072000  Single Family                                                       in January 2009.
                                                 14   88.96  1,246   1,246
                               (Detached
                 530010072000  Single Family
                                                   7 136.89    675     675
Downtown        200100580000   Multifamily                                                         Entitlements for proposal for    Lot 46b Affordable Units Round 1
Railyards                                                                                          at least 10,000 housing          Prop 1C Infill Infrastructure Grant.
                                                230     1.3      69                      69
                                                                                                   units, which included            The property will have a deed
                                                                                                   rezoning and general plan        restriction for 69 low-income units.
                                                                                                   amendments was approved
                200100560000   Multifamily                                                         by the City Council in 2007.     Lot 7a1 Affordable Units - Round
                                                                                                                                    2 Prop 1C TOD Grant. The
                                                230    1.15    139                      139                                         property will have a deed
                                                                                                                                    restriction for 139 low-income
                                                                                                                                    units.
                200100560000   Multifamily                                                                                          Lot 6b Affordable Units - Round 1
                                                                                                                                    Prop 1C Infill Infrastructure Grant.
                                                230    1.69    141                      141                                         The property will have a deed
                                                                                                                                    restriction for 141 low-income
                                                                                                                                    units.
                200100560000   Multifamily                                                                                          Lot 59N Affordable Units - Round
                                                                                                                                    2 Prop 1C TOD Grant. The
                                                230    1.27    141                      141                                         property will have a deed
                                                                                                                                    restriction for 141 low-income
                                                                                                                                    units.
                200100560000   Multifamily                                                                                          Lots 6a/84/57s Market Rate
                                                230    3.36    456                             456
                                                                                                                                    Round 1 Infill Infrastructure Grant.
        Page H 5-4  |                                                                                                            Adopted December 17, 2013
         HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                                                                     H-5
Table H 5-2       Built, Planned, and Approved Projects with Affordable Units
   Name of       Address/Parcel                                Total   AMI     ELI   VLI   LI    MI     Status as of June 1, 2013
Development           Numbers     Type of Units Density Acres  Units   Units  Units Units Units Units           and Notes                         Notes
                 200100560000     Multifamily                                                                                     Lots 16 & 48a/b Market Rate
                                                    230  3.67     388                             388
                                                                                                                                  Round 1 TOD Grant
                 200100560000     Multifamily                                                                                     Lots 7b1 Market Rate Round 2
                                                    230  1.17     112                             112
                                                                                                                                  TOD Grant
                 200100560000     Multifamily                                                                                     Lots 71N/71S/59S Market Rate
                                                    230  2.72     328                             328
                                                                                                                                  Round 2 Infill Infrastructure Grant
Kelsey Village   2830 Stockton    Multifamily                                                         Certificate of Occupancy    The property has a deed
                 Blvd                                      0.7      20                 20             issued on 3/29/13           restriction for 20 very low- and
                                                                                                                                  extremely low-income units.
Township 9       640 Vine Street  Multifamily                                                         Building permit issued on   The property has a deed
                                                                                                      12/18/12. Currently under   restriction for 179 lower income
                                                         1.83     180       1          36  143
                                                                                                      construction.               units as a condition of receiving
                                                                                                                                  Prop 1C financing.
The Arbors       3820 Broadway    Multifamily                                                         Temporary Certificate of     The units will be deed restricted.
                                                         1.42       55                 55             Occupancy issued on
                                                                                                      6/17/13
Curtis Park      3675 W Pacific   Multifamily                                                         Planning Entitlements       The property has a deed
Court            Avenue                                                                               approved on 5/23/13         restriction for 66 inclusionary
                                                         2.01       91      1          30   36     24
Apartments                                                                                                                        units. The project is currently
                                                                                                                                  applying for Prop 1C funding.
Warehouse        R Street         Multifamily                                                         Commenced construction in   116 unit mixed income
Artist Lofts     between 11th                                                                         February 2013 and will be   development financed with 9%
                                                  131.5    .88    116             9    53   24     30
                 and 12th                                                                             completed by the end of     Tax Credits and Prop 1C funding.
                 Streets                                                                              2014.
                    th
Legado de        16 and O         Multifamily                                                         Construction commenced in   Units are categorized based on
Ravel            Streets                                                                              January 2012 and will be    the rent schedules at which the
                                                     83             84    21                       63
                                                                                                      completed by August 2013.   units are currently (August 2013)
                                                                                                                                  being marketed
TOTAL                                                                             9
                                                                7,924  3,190          194  693  3,838
UNITS
         Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                             | Page H 5-5
                                                                            Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
Township 9 and the Downtown Railyards
In 2007, the City Council approved development applications for the Downtown Railyards and Township 9.
Both of these projects are former industrial sites that were rezoned to high density, mixed-use residential
uses. These two developments are located in areas with significant infrastructure constraints. To fund the
necessary infrastructure improvements, both developers are seeking Proposition 1C funding, as well as other
forms of state and federal financing.
The land inventory only includes sites that will accommodate the first and second phases of housing
development for the Downtown Railyards and Township 9. Maps of the first phase of housing development
for Township 9 and the first and second phases of the Downtown Railyards are attached in Appendix H-C.
Both developments will be able to make infrastructure improvements and build the initial phases of housing
development within the next eight years, based on information from the developers as well as performance
requirements associated with the Proposition 1C grants.
The new zoning designations and overlay districts for the Downtown Railyards and Township 9 (RMCU,
ORMU, RMX-PUD-SPD, and OB-PUD-SPD, respectively), are described in the Constraints chapter.
Township 9 proposes a total of approximately 2,350 dwelling units and the Downtown Railyards project
proposes a total of 10,000 to 12,100 dwelling units. However, based on the infrastructure and phasing
limitations described, only 699 dwelling units in the Township 9 project and 1,774 dwelling units in the
Downtown Railyards project are proposed to be built during this Housing Element period. These unit totals
are included in the land inventory and maps of these projects are included in Appendix H-C.
Delta Shores
Delta Shores is located in the southern area of the city and consists of approximately 800 acres. Located
within the Southern border of the city along I-5, Delta Shores will be bisected by the future Cosumnes River
Boulevard, which will ultimately connect Highway 99 to the east with I-5 on the west and extending to
Freeport Boulevard. Work on the boulevard began in May of 2013 and will cost $82 million. The
development includes approximately 120 acres on the west side of I-5 partially fronting Freeport Boulevard
and approximately 680 acres on the east side of I-5. The proposal for 4,904 housing units, which included
rezonings, general plan amendments, and a financing plan, was approved by the City Council on January
2009. A map of Delta Shores in included in Appendix H-C.
Kelsey Village
Kelsey Village, a HUD 202 project, developed by Satellite Housing, is a two-story single building, containing
20 units of permanent supportive housing for very low- and extremely low-income adults with
developmental disabilities. The project was completed in Spring 2013.
The Arbors
The Arbors at Oak Park is a mixed use development located at Broadway and Martin Luther King, Jr.
Boulevard that will provides 55 deed-restricted affordable senior units. SHRA provided over $6 million in
redevelopment funds for land acquisition and construction and leveraged $7.8 million in Low Income
Housing Tax Credits. The project was completed in Summer 2013.
Page H 5-6 |                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                       H-5
Curtis Park Court Apartments
Curtis Park Court Apartments, which was recently approved in May 2013, will satisfy Curtis Park Village’s
obligation for affordable housing under the City’s Mixed Income Housing Ordinance requirement. The
project will provide 66 deed restricted units.
Warehouse Artist Lofts
Warehouse Artist Lofts (formerly known as the Capitol Lofts) is located on the south side of R Street between
11th and 12th Streets. This is a 116-unit mixed income development, which was financed with 9 percent Tax
Credits and Prop 1C funding, will include 75 percent of the units as affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and
low-income households. This project commenced construction in February 2013 and will be completed by the
end of 2014.
Legado de Ravel
Legado de Ravel is located on the corner of 16th and O Streets. The new development will provide 84
market rate apartments in two structures. The units are categorized in Table H 5-2, above, based on
advertized rents as of August 2013. This project commenced construction in January 2012 and will be
completed by August 2013.
Criteria for Selection of Vacant Sites (Methodology)
In December 2012, City staff updated the vacant parcel list by reviewing the most recent parcel/assessor
land use codes, querying permit data, flagging new development/vacant parcels, and reviewing updated
aerial photography to determine validity of vacant parcels. To be included in the City’s land inventory, a
parcel must be zoned at a density that permits the production of housing at the appropriate affordability
level, and must not be constrained by infrastructure limitations or environmental conditions.
Sites within the inventory meet one of the following criteria:
   vacant residentially and non-residentially zoned sites that allow residential development over a half acre;
   vacant residentially zoned, low density sites, that allow above moderate-income residential development
    under a half acre; or
   portions of large development projects that can reasonably be developed between 2013 and 2021.
The selection criteria used to identify sites in the land inventory included:
   Zoning. The land inventory only includes parcels that have zoning that allows residential development
    by right. Other zones, including the SC, C-4, M-1, and M-2, allow residential development with a
    conditional use permit under certain circumstances; however, these sites were not included in the
    inventory. The zones included in the inventory are shown in Table H 5-4, below.
   Vacant status. While there is significant capacity of residential development on underutilized sites, all
    of the sites included in the inventory are vacant.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H 5-7

                                                                                  Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
     Parcel size. For sites with zoning appropriate for lower- and moderate-income housing units (see
      discussion of Density and Affordability, below), one-half acre was considered the minimum parcel size.
      Sacramento has historically produced high density, multifamily housing on parcels less than one acre.
      Table H 5-3 below shows parcels of less than an acre that have accommodated affordable housing. As
      Table H 5-3 shows, a parcel as small as 0.54 acres can produce housing affordable to lower income
      families. As a result, any parcels less than half an acre, besides those zoned R-1 and R-1A, were removed
      from the land inventory.
      For parcels zoned R-1 and R-1A, which allow single-family homes and are assumed to accommodate the
      above moderate-income housing need, the minimum parcel size was 2,600 square feet. Irregularly
      shaped and landlocked parcels were removed from the inventory.
   Table H 5-3       Affordable Housing Projects Developed on Less than an Acre
                                 Funding     Housing        Unit Income Level        Total            DU/
 Project Name Address                                                                        Acres          Zone
                                  Source       Type                                  Units            AC
                                                        ELI VLI   LI   Mod Market
  Fremont           1400 P
                                   Bond       Family     0   24   25    0      70     119     0.88   135.0   R-5
  Mews               Street
                      3301
  Norwood
                   Norwood      Tax Credit    Family     0   11    0    0       4     15      0.7    21.5   R-2B
  Annex
                    Avenue
  St Anton           2110 L
                                   Bond       Family     0   13    4    0      48     65      0.59   110.6   R-5
  Building           Street
                      2401
  Victory
                   Lexington Tax Credit       Family     0   63   11    0       2     76      0.54   140.7   M-1
  Townhomes
                     Street
                                    Tax
                    720 7th
  7th and H                     Increment,    Family    75   75    0    0       0     150     0.55    272    C-3
                     Street
                                  HOME
                      2830
                                  HOME,
  Kelsey Village Stockton                     Family     5   15    0    0       0     20      0.7    28.5    C-2
                                 HUD 811
                      Blvd.
                    429 12th      CDBG,
  La Valentina                                Family    24   40   16    0       1     81      0.87     93    R-5
                     Street       HOME
Density and Affordability
To identify sites that can accommodate a local government’s share of the RHNA for lower-income
households, housing elements must either include an analysis that demonstrates the appropriate density to
encourage and facilitate the development of housing for lower-income households or use a “default density
standard.” The “default density standards” are densities that are deemed appropriate by State law to
accommodate housing for lower-income households based on the type of the jurisdiction. Sacramento is
considered a “metropolitan jurisdiction” with a default density standard of 30 units per acre. By law HCD is
required to accept sites that allow for zoning at this density as appropriate for accommodating Sacramento’s
share of the regional housing need for lower-income households.
All of the 10 zones in the land inventory that are indicated to accommodate lower income housing units
(i.e., extremely low-, very low-, and low-income) allow for development at 30 units per acre as shown in
Table H 5-4, below. The City’s development standards facilitate development at higher densities. For
Page H 5-8   |                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                      H-5
example, parking requirements for senior and affordable units now have half the standard requirement,
which means more of the lot area can be devoted to housing units. Maximum heights can now be exceeded
up to 50 percent with a director-level hearing or by a greater amount by the Planning and Design
Commission. Additionally, the City’s density bonus ordinance was updated in 2013 to be current with State
law. In sum, if an affordable developer needs a density of 30 dwelling units an acre for the project to be
financially feasible, lack of appropriately zoned vacant land will not be an issue.
Because lower density residential zones (such as R-1 and R-1A) permit a limited number of housing types,
the City assumed that above moderate-income (AMI) housing products would most likely be developed in
these districts. Producing housing affordable to lower income households at any income level in these zone
districts is difficult.
The R-2A and R-2B zoning districts have the permitted densities to accommodate small-lot single family
and multi-family dwellings, which can be affordable to moderate-income families.
Method for Estimating Capacity on Vacant Sites
To estimate the development capacity of the vacant sites, affordable and market-rate projects approved
between 2003 and 2008 were analyzed to determine average actual densities in each zoning district. New
developments in the majority of the zoning districts exceeded 80 percent of the allowable density. Table H
5-4, below, shows the maximum allowed density in each zone as well as estimates of realistic densities based
on recently built affordable and market rate housing. Descriptions of each zoning district can be found in
Chapter H-8 of the Housing Element. Housing development potential for the vacant sites (described in later
sections of this chapter) have been estimated to be 80 percent of the maximum allowable density of each
zone, as presented in Table H 5-4.
To provide a conservative estimate of available land, the land inventory includes only 25 percent of the
capacity of sites in zones that are not primarily residential. This assumption reflects the fact that other uses,
such as retail or office uses, may occupy a portion of the land on these sites. The C-1, OB, C-2, and C-3
zones are the four zones in the inventory that allow 100 percent nonresidential uses. Prior to the
Development Code update of 2012, the OB zone did not allow residential development. Outside the
Central City, the C-1 and C-2 required a Planning and Design Commission conditional use permit. With the
recent Code update, the OB, C-1, and C-2 zones now allow housing by right, and the C-3 zone continues to
allow housing by right.
The realistic capacity of these nonresidential zones to facilitate residential development was determined by
surveying building permits allowed in the C-2 zone from 2003 to 2007. Of the 138 parcels that were
developed in the C-2 zone between 2003 and 2007, 32 were developed as residential uses and only four were
developed as mixed use. This means that 26 percent of the C-2 zone was developed for residential uses
based on the exclusively residential and mixed use developments on 36 of the 138 parcels. Therefore it can
be assumed one fourth of the capacity of vacant C-1, C-2, C-3 and OB zoned sites in the City will be used
for residential development.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                            | Page H 5-9

                                                                                         Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
      Table H 5-4       Realistic Unit Capacity Assumed for Each Zone
           Zone           Maximum Density          Realistic Unit     Inventoried Income Level     Assumption for Percent
                               Allowed                Density                                        Residential Buildout
            R-1             1 unit per lot              6.1              Above Moderate                    100%
           R-1A             1 unit per lot              9.4              Above Moderate                    100%
           R-1B             2 units per lot             7.9              Above Moderate                    100%
            R-2             2 units per lot             9.1                  Moderate                      100%
           R-2A                   17                   13.6                  Moderate                      100%
           R-2B                   21                   16.8                  Moderate                      100%
            R-3                   30                   24.0                    Lower                       100%
           R-3A                   36                   28.8                    Lower                       100%
            R-4                  110                   88.0                    Lower                       100%
            R-5                  175                   140.0                   Lower                       100%
            RO                    36                   28.8                    Lower                       100%
           RMX                    60                   48.0                    Lower                       100%
            C-1                   30                   24.0                    Lower                        25%
                                      1
            C-2                70-150                  56.0                    Lower                        25%
            C-3           No Restrictions              192.3                   Lower                        25%
            OB                    36                   28.8                    Lower                        25%
      Source: Sandlund, G., pers comm, 2013.
      1
        Maximum density in the C-2 Zone is based on the corresponding general plan land use designation.
Summary of Capacity on Vacant Sites
Table 5-5 summarizes the capacity on vacant sites by zone and income category. The vacant sites included
in the land inventory have capacity for 8,532 above moderate-income housing units, 2,689 moderate-income
housing units, and 9,995 lower-income housing units (i.e., extremely low-, very low-, and low-income units),
for a total capacity of 21,216 units.
Page H 5-10   |                                                                                       Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                            H-5
                        Table H 5-5        Summary of Vacant Land Capacity by Zone and
                                           Income Category
                                   Zone District             Income Category    Housing Unit Capacity
                        R-1                                       AMI                  3,528
                        R-1A                                      AMI                  4,993
                        R-1B                                      AMI                    11
                        Subtotal, AMI                                                  8,532
                        R-2A                                        MI                  935
                        R-2B                                        MI                 1,753
                        Subtotal, MI                                                   2,689
                        R-3                                     ELI/VLI/LI             1,708
                        R-3A                                    ELI/VLI/LI              135
                        C-1                                     ELI/VLI/LI              164
                        C-2                                     ELI/VLI/LI             3,086
                        RMX                                     ELI/VLI/LI             1,422
                        RO                                      ELI/VLI/LI               51
                        OB                                      ELI/VLI/LI              915
                        R-4                                     ELI/VLI/LI             2,295
                        R-5                                     ELI/VLI/LI              103
                        C-3                                     ELI/VLI/LI              115
                        Subtotal, LI, VLI, and ELI                                     9,995
                        Total Units                                                   21,216
                        Source: City of Sacramento, 2013.
Summary of Total Residential Capacity to Accommodate the RHNA
Table H 5-6 below provides a summary of total residential capacity included in the land inventory compared
to the City’s share of the regional housing need as assigned in the RHNA. As shown in the table, the City
has capacity for 29,140 units, which is more than enough capacity to accommodate the RHNA of 24,101
units. The land inventory includes capacity for 10,891 lower-income units (i.e., extremely low-, very low-,
and low-income units), 6,527 moderate income units, and 11,722 above moderate-income units. The
inventory has surplus capacity for all income categories.
        Table H 5-6        Estimated Residential Capacity Compared to RHNA by Income, City of
                           Sacramento, January 1, 2013 to October 31, 2021
                                    Extremely       Very    Low-      Moderate-    Above Moderate-     Total
                                       Low-         Low-  Income       Income           Income
                                     Income       Income
        RHNA                          2,472        2,472   3,467        4,482          11,208         24,101
        Total Residential                      10,891                   6,527          11,722         29,140
        Capacity
        Planned and                               896                   3,838            3,190        7,924
        Approved Projects
        Capacity on Vacant                       9,995                  2,689            8,532        21,216
        Land
        Surplus/Deficit                        +2,480                  +2,045            +514         +5,039
        Source: City of Sacramento, 2013.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                 | Page H 5-11

                                                                              Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
This is a conservative estimate of the capacity on vacant land based on the criteria used to identify available
sites. It is not a complete inventory of all potential sites and all approved market rate projects. It does not
include parcels smaller than one-half acre or underutilized parcels that might have the potential for reuse or
redevelopment. It also does not count all market rate developments that are planned and approved. There is
additional capacity, particularly for high density units, on small and underutilized parcels.
Areas with Limitations on Development of Housing
Infrastructure and Service Limitations
Five areas in the City of Sacramento either lack infrastructure or have undersized infrastructure. These areas
include Delta Shores, the Downtown Railyards, Township 9, and portions of North Sacramento and
Southeast Sacramento. Delta Shores is a greenfield area that will have infrastructure put in place as large
scale development occurs. An infrastructure financing plan for Delta Shores was developed concurrently
with the PUD and environmental impact report. Township 9 and the Downtown Railyards are both infill
locations that were formerly used for industry. Infrastructure will be provided in these areas concurrently
with large scale development.
The two remaining areas with infrastructure limitations include portions of North Sacramento and
Southeast Sacramento. These areas are already developed areas with small to medium sized vacant lots
offering infill potential. These areas will have a more difficult time attracting the type of development that
can afford to privately fund major infrastructure improvements. Nevertheless, residential development has
occurred in these areas since 2000. However, most recent development has been typically affordable to
moderate-income households. The City has sought additional resources to address infrastructure needs in
these areas.
With the exception of commercial corridors, much of the development in North Sacramento is residential
and at a very low density. As a result, many areas of North Sacramento have inadequate infrastructure
capacity, or no infrastructure at all. The two areas of North Sacramento with the most significant
infrastructure challenges are the area north of Bell Avenue and east of Rio Linda Boulevard and a second
area west of Norwood Avenue and north of Silver Eagle Road. Water lines exist in these areas, but may be
inadequately sized for fire flow depending on the type of proposed development.
Many areas in North Sacramento lack curbs and gutters; instead, water drains into roadside ditches. A new
residential project would have to extend drainage lines to the nearest connecting line and might require
onsite water detention facilities to prevent localized flooding and provide water quality treatment. Sewer
lines in this area may also have to be extended to reach a project site. In some areas, a sewer lift station
might be necessary if the main sewer line from which the project is connecting is too shallow. Sewer lines
need to be constructed to a minimum slope to move the sewage via gravity.
In Southeast Sacramento (south of Fruitridge Road and east of Power Inn Road), unlike North Sacramento,
water, sewer, and drainage lines are adjacent to almost every parcel. However, many of the parcels are deep
and irregularly shaped. There are few additional connections to surrounding infrastructure along the borders
of these deep sites. The cost of running utilities through these sites could be a financial constraint to
development.
Page H 5-12   |                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                      H-5
Water and Sewer
The City’s existing water capacity and planned sewer capacity will be able to accommodate its share of the
regional housing need within the planning period. The Sacramento Water Treatment Plant 2020 Master
Plan, Interceptor Master Plan 2000, and the County Sanitation District-1 Master Plan have designated
planning horizons of 2020 and buildout. Through its ongoing implementation of these water and
wastewater facility master plans, the City of Sacramento will continue to plan for growth in water and
wastewater treatment demands and expand facilities as needed to meet those demands. Further information
about water and wastewater system capacities is provided below.
Water Supply and Demand. Projected water demand in 2020 of 185,788 acre-feet per year will be met by
the City’s total water supply of 310,300 acre-feet per year. Table H 5-7 compares projected water demands
through 2035 to the City’s normal year water supply. Supply totals represent the City’s total surface and
groundwater entitlements, while demand totals represent the City’s maximum projected demands, including
retail, wholesale, and wheeling deliveries. During normal years, groundwater is not required to meet demand,
except for water delivered to areas outside the areas authorized to receive delivery of the city’s surface water
supply. The City has more than enough capacity to meet projected demand during the timeframe of this
Housing Element and beyond.
           Table H 5-7       Average Year Water Supply and Demand Comparison (Acre-Feet)
                                                   2015       2020      2025      2030        2035
            Total Water Supply                    290,800   310,300   329,800    346,800    346,800
            Total Water Demand                    172,589   185,788   217,886    249,984    260,984
            Water Surplus                         118,211   124,512   111,914    96,816      85,816
          Source: 2030 Source: 2010 Urban Water Management Plan.
Sewer Capacity and Expansion. The planning horizons for the SWRTP 2020 Master Plan, Interceptor
Master Plan 2000, and the CSD-1 [sewerage] Master Plan, in conjunction with the proposed land uses for
areas within the SRCSD service area, are used to determine the projected wastewater flows and timing of
flow increases during the planning horizon through 2020. Existing and proposed treatment facilities were
designed to be expanded gradually in incremental units as future wastewater flows and loads increase.
Consequently, some existing facilities have available capacity for future flows and loads, while other facilities
(capacity limiting facilities) are at their existing capacity and would need to be expanded to accommodate
any increase in flows or loads. Master plan facilities would be constructed in phases as flow and load
demands require. Generally, facility expansion would be phased in five- to ten-year increments over the
planning period. These increments are large enough to provide reasonable economy of scale and small
enough to minimize the size of potentially idle facilities. By constructing the Master Plan facilities in phases,
SRCSD can control the rate of facility expansion if actual growth rates are slower or faster than projected. 1
This will allow SRCSD to maintain adequate sewer service capacity to accommodate the City’s remaining
RHNA allocation through 2021 in addition to growth in demand from development under the 2030
General Plan.
1 2030 General Plan Draft MEIR pgs. 6.11-48 and 6.11-49)
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 5-13

                                                                             Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
Environmental Constraints
All parcels included in the sites inventory were reviewed for any known environmental constraints, such as
flood zones, steep slopes, and other possible constraints to development feasibility. The sites included in the
inventory have all been designated for residential development and are not constrained by topography, known
environmental factors, or other site specific constraints that would limit development, with the exception of
flood issues. As described in the Constraints Section, the area that currently (2013) has the greatest
environmental constraint is Natomas. Beginning January 1, 2009, building standards were imposed as a result
of a new Flood Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodplain designation in the basin, which resulted
in a defacto building moratorium due to anticipated flood depths.
For the Natomas Levee Improvement Project, the Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency (SAFCA) has
developed a financing plan, funded by development impact fees and a citywide assessment. Substantial
improvements to Natomas levees have been constructed by SAFCA in cooperation with the State under the
Department of Water Resources’ Early Implementation Program. Further improvements to achieve 100-
year and concurrently 200-year levels of flood protection is pending Congressional authorization and
funding, which is anticipated by the end of 2013. It is expected that some residential construction will
resume once funding is authorized and the Natomas Basin is re-mapped to the A99 flood zone, which is
anticipated to happen within two to three years. Infrastructure improvements to prepare residential sites in
the Natomas Basin can be made concurrently with flood improvements. While this presents a constraint on
the development of housing within Natomas for the next few years, there is sufficient capacity in other areas
of the city to meet the annual housing need for the first part of the planning period. The sites within
Natomas will be available within the eight-year Housing Element planning period.
As described in the Constraints Section, recent (August 2013) expiration of levee certifications have
potential implications for FEMA flood designations for large areas of the city of Sacramento, outside the
Natomas area. However, SAFCA is undertaking a process to certify the levees locally, and the City of
Sacramento will be working closely with SAFCA to develop the levee improvement program for recertifying
the levees to achieve 100-year flood protection in order to avoid a remapping by FEMA.
Concurrently, the City is working with SAFCA to develop flood control plans that will achieve 200-year
flood protection for the entire city by 2025 to meet the requirements of State law, established by SB 5. As a
result, housing development is not expected to be constrained due these recent State flood protection
policies.
The Housing Element includes Program 24 to monitor the impact of flood risk throughout the city on the
City’s ability to accommodate its share of the regional housing need.
Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters, referred to as “temporary residential shelters” in the City’s Zoning Code, are allowed by
right in the C-4, M-1, and M-2 zones. The City has identified 121 vacant sites of more than one acre,
totaling 926 acres, that will allow the development of emergency shelters by right. A map of these sites can
be found in Appendix H-C. The City’s standards facilitate the development of emergency shelters by
ensuring that these uses are located and constructed in a manner that best serves the shelter and supportive
service needs of homeless persons and provides for adequate sites to meet homeless needs
Development standards require that emergency shelters:
Page H 5-14   |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                     H-5
   Be located at least 1,000 feet from any other shelter and at least 500 feet from a public park, public or
    private school, church, or single-family residential zone. The city has applied these locational criteria to
    vacant parcels in zones that permit emergency shelters by right to ensure that adequate sites exist to
    allow such shelters (see Appendix C).
   Be located within 1,000 feet of a designated transit corridor or bus route, or shall provide transportation
    between the facility and transit lines and/or services.
   Provide at least one parking space per four adult bed for small shelters (24 or fewer beds) and one
    parking space per five adults beds for large shelters (more than 24 beds), plus an additional space
    designated exclusively for the manager. All parking is required to be off-street and on-site. The City has
    reviewed these parking standards and determined that they are reasonable in light of the parking demand
    generated by emergency shelters and that these standards do not hinder the ability of homeless
    providers to construct such shelters on sites identified by the City where these are permitted by right.
   Establish, maintain, and post set hours for client intake/discharge.
   Provide on-site personnel during hours of operation when clients are present.
   Include a manager's area located near the entry to the facility.
   Provide exterior lighting on pedestrian pathways and parking lot areas that reflect away from residential
    areas and public streets.
   Provide telephone(s) for use by clients and secure areas for personal property.
   Provide an enclosed or screened waiting area on the property if intake of clients is to occur onsite to
    prevent queuing in the public right-of way. Small emergency shelters must have a waiting area of at least
    100 square feet, and large shelters must have a waiting area of at least 200 square feet (unless, for large
    shelters, the director determines that additional waiting space is required to meet the needs of the
    anticipated client load). The City developed the waiting area requirements in consultation with shelter
    providers and determined that these requirements are reasonable to protect shelter clients and avoid off-
    site impacts from client intake.
   Provide on-site interior and/or exterior common or recreational space of at least 15 square feet per
    occupant or at least 100 square feet total (whichever is greater). This common space is in addition to the
    required waiting area. The City developed the common space requirements in consultation with shelter
    providers and determined that these requirements are reasonable and necessary for the well-being of
    shelter clients.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 5-15

                                       Chapter Five: LAND INVENTORY
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H 5-16   |                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Housing Program Resources                                                           H-6
6 Housing Program Resources
6.0 Key Findings
       The City’s Housing Trust Fund, adopted in 1989, has provided almost $30 million for the
        development of over 2,500 new affordable units. These fees are based on the need for affordable
        housing generated by new non-residential construction.
       SHRA’s average annual budget for Housing Choice Vouchers countywide is more than $10 million
        for over 12,000 vouchers.
       SHRA issues tax exempt mortgage revenue bonds on behalf of the City. These bonds, often coupled
        with low-income housing tax credits, provide millions of dollars of loans and equity for affordable
        housing development.
       The City and SHRA take advantage of a broad range of external funding sources, including
        competitive funding from the State and Federal government.
6.1 Introduction
This chapter presents information on funds and other resources that are available to support the City of
Sacramento’s housing programs. The City’s housing programs are funded through a variety of State, local,
and Federal sources. These funds actively support the construction of new affordable housing, encourage
housing rehabilitation, and provide various other housing services to low- and moderate-income
households.
The City, through the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA), provides development
funding, operating assistance, and mortgage assistance for a variety of affordable housing types throughout
the City. Development funding is most typically provided to developers of multifamily rental units for new
construction or rehabilitation, and leverages additional funding from other sources, including tax exempt
mortgage revenue bonds, low-income housing tax credits, and various programs administered by the State
of California and the Federal government. SHRA, primarily in its role as the Housing Authority, administers
approximately 11,000 Housing Choice Vouchers (formerly Section 8) and over 2,000 public housing units
for very low- and extremely low-income households. Finally, for lower-income homebuyers, SHRA
provides mortgage assistance, typically in a secondary position to conventional funding, to allow access to
homeownership for families who otherwise would be priced out of the market.
To help summarize resources available, Table H 6-1 presents a summary of SHRA’s historical budgeted
funding for housing programs, and Table H 6-2 projects anticipated annual funding during the Housing
Element period, based on historical averages.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H 6-1

                                                                       Chapter Six: HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES
  Table H 6-1         SHRA Budgeted Funding by Funding Source
                     Public
      Year          Housing          HCV 1      Tax Increment 2       HOME            CDBG3           HTF             TOTAL
  2011           $10,659,708 $109,741,760         $10,755,000       $3,070,188 $1,277,649 $1,042,027 $136,546,332
  2012           $10,245,315 $111,168,891                    $0     $1,871,691        $889,815      $360,528 $124,536,240
  2013           $10,056,422 $111,168,891                    $0     $1,813,096 $1,042,027           $586,528 $124,666,964
  Average        $10,320,482 $110,693,181          $3,585,000       $2,251,658 $1,069,830           $663,028 $128,582,179
  Source: SHRA, 2013.
  1
      HCV (“Housing Choice Voucher”) revenue amounts include total housing assistance payments for the entire County, including
      all incorporated cities.
  2
      Although $10,755,000 in Tax Increment revenue was realized in 2011, the funding was recaptured due to the dissolution of
      Redevelopment.
  3
      CDBG (Community Development Block Grant) amounts represented are the portion of each year’s allocation used for housing
      purposes.
Table H 6-2          SHRA Projected Funding by Funding Source, 2013-2021
                             Public                        Tax
                            Housing        HCV1        Increment2        HOME           CDBG           HTF               Total
Historical Annual        $10,320,482 $110,693,181 $3,585,000           $2,251,658 $1,069,830         $663,028       $125,582,179
Average
2013–2021                $92,884,338 $996,238,629               $0    $20,264,922 $9,628,470 $5,967,252 $1,124,983,611
Source: SHRA, 2013.
1
    Housing Choice Voucher revenue amounts include total housing assistance payments for the entire County, including all
    incorporated cities.
2 Due to the dissolution of Redevelopment, no Tax Increment revenue is anticipated.
Revenues from the HOME and Housing Trust Funds, detailed in Table 6-2, are targeted for use under the
Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency Multifamily Housing Lending Program. This program
provides assistance for developers wishing to purchase and rehabilitate or construct affordable rental
housing throughout the city. Guidelines for this program were updated in 2009, prioritizing funding towards
preservation of at-risk units and rehabilitation projects in redevelopment areas.
When considering the funding sources described in Tables H 6-1 and H 6-2 above, it is important to
recognize the limitations and regulations associated with each. Public Housing and Housing Choice
Voucher (HCV) funding represents a large amount of SHRA’s funding, but the uses of both are limited to
maintenance of existing public housing units and HCVs, and in general, do not represent funding available
for the provision of new housing units. In addition, CDBG funding is used for non-housing purposes
(although Tables H 6-1 and H 6-2 show only those funds budgeted for housing-related activities).
The City is very interested and committed to seeking additional resources for the provision of affordable
housing, and will continue to request such funding when available. Recently, the City has pursued new
funding from State funded bond programs, including Proposition 1B and 1C funds for the Downtown
Railyards and Curtis Park Railyards developments.
Page H 6-2     |                                                                                      Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Housing Program Resources                                                          H-6
6.2 Funding Sources
This section offers a summary of funding sources that are currently used by the City and SHRA, as well as
additional funding sources that are potentially available to support various housing programs.
Federal Sources of Funding
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Public Housing
The largest source of funding for affordable housing in Sacramento comes from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). HUD supports the Housing Authority’s public
housing units, new development and rehabilitation of affordable housing, and special needs housing through
the provision of operating subsidies and capital funding. The City has over 2,000 public housing units,
which house some of the poorest residents of the city, with an average income of seven percent of area
median income. Providing safe and secure housing for such an impoverished population is extremely
expensive and requires an ongoing, dedicated operating subsidy. Recent cut backs to the public housing
program at HUD are requiring public housing authorities nationwide to reconsider how they own, manage,
and maintain their public housing assets. In recognition of the declining Federal resources, the City has
approved SHRA’s asset repositioning strategy, which aims to rehabilitate and redevelop current public
housing, with no net loss of subsidized units.
Housing Choice Vouchers
In addition to public housing, HUD also funds Housing Choice Vouchers formerly known as Section 8.
Unlike public housing, which fixes the tenant’s rent to no more than 30 percent of their household income,
Housing Choice Vouchers provide a subsidy to private landlords to pay the difference between what the
tenant can afford with 30 percent of their family income and the fair market rent. The Housing Choice
Voucher program aims to provide housing choices to lower-income families, and to disperse lower-income
residents throughout the county. SHRA administers approximately 12,000 Housing Choice vouchers
throughout Sacramento County, including all its incorporated cities. The majority of these vouchers are
“tenant based” – they travel with the tenant to wherever he or she wishes to reside. However, HUD allows
housing authorities to “project base” up to 20 percent of their vouchers, ensuring that certain units within
certain complexes are available and affordable to lower-income families and enabling the development to
achieve deeper income targeting. The Housing Choice Voucher Program is a federally funded program.
The City has no control of the funding of the program. The additional homelessness that could result from
cuts to the program is concerning. SHRA is trying to mitigate the loss of funding by not filling vacancies
received through attrition (approximately 40-60 vouchers are freed up monthly). Currently no participants
have been terminated from the program, however if HUD makes additional cuts in 2014, it is possible that
some participants may lose their vouchers. SHRA’s administrative plan envisions project basing up to 15
percent of its total voucher funding.
Entitlement Funds
As an entitlement City under HUD regulations, Sacramento also receives Community Development Block
Grants (CDBG), Home Investment Partnership (HOME) funds, Emergency Shelter Grants (ESG), and
Housing for People with AIDS/HIV (HOPWA). Federal funds available in the Federal fiscal year 2013 are
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H 6-3

                                                           Chapter Six: HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES
shown in Table H 6-3. These amounts are taken from the 2013 Consolidated Action Plan, and include only
new entitlement funds. They do not include any program income or existing unspent income, which is
included in the budgeted amounts in Table H 6-1.
                       Table H 6-3      Entitlement Funds, Fiscal Year 2013
                                       Funding Source                   Amount
                       Community Development Block Grants                  $4,285,920
                       HOME                                                $1,812,849
                       Emergency Shelter Grants                              $302,145
                       Housing for People with AIDS/HIV                      $862,627
                       TOTAL                                               $7,263,541
                       Source: SHRA, 2013.
CDGB. The majority of CDBG funds are allocated for non-housing community development projects and
each HUD funding source also allows for administrative costs. For 2013, just over $1 million of the total
CDBG funding is allocated for housing development, preservation, and homeownership according to the
City’s Consolidated Plan. CDBG funds designated for housing primarily support rehabilitation and First
Time Homebuyer programs. CDBG funds are also available for public service activities supporting
homeless programs and transitional housing.
HOME. HOME funds are used exclusively for the new construction and rehabilitation of affordable
housing, covering both homeownership and rental properties. While HOME funding has fluctuated in
recent years, it has averaged about $2.2 million annually, and repayments from outstanding loans are
“revolved” back into the fund. While HOME funds are partially used to support homeownership programs,
the majority of HOME dollars are used as “gap” loans for multifamily rental development and
rehabilitation. HOME loans have been provided in eight City projects between 2008 and 2013, leveraging
millions of dollars in Federal and State funds to help produce 711 affordable rental units. During this same
timeframe, 192 downpayment assistance loans were funded by HOME throughout the city, allowing lower-
income residents to become first time homebuyers. SHRA has also set aside HOME funding for a
supportive housing loan program that it operates in conjunction with the County Department of Human
Assistance, the County Department of Health and Human Services, and Mercy Housing, serving persons
who are homeless or at risk of homelessness.
ESG and HOPWA. The Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG) program provides homeless persons with basic
shelter and essential supportive services. ESG funds can be used for a variety of activities, including:
rehabilitation or remodeling of a building used as a new shelter, operations, and maintenance of a facility,
essential supportive services, and homeless prevention. The Housing for People with AIDS/HIV
(HOPWA) program provides grant funds to design long-term, comprehensive strategies for meeting the
housing needs of low- and moderate-income people living with HIV/AIDS. HOPWA funds can be used
for acquisition, rehabilitation, or new construction of housing, rental assistance, and related supportive
services. HOPWA funds are received by the County of Sacramento for the City and counties of
Sacramento, El Dorado, Placer, and Yolo and administered by the County Department of Human
Assistance (DHA).
Page H 6-4  |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Housing Program Resources                                                                H-6
McKinney Vento Act Program Description
Funding is available on an annual basis through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Super-NOFA which is typically published in the spring of each year. Sacramento County
Department of Human Assistance (DHA) is the lead Agency (Grantee) in Sacramento County, which
coordinates the local application process. Funding is provided for services to chronically homeless
individuals residing in transitional housing and permanent supportive housing developments. Priority had
previously been for transitional housing programs; however, recent emphasis has begun to shift towards
providing funding for services through permanent supportive housing. Most existing programs are renewed
on an annual basis. Funding for new programs is typically available in two ways; the Grantee (DHA) can
apply for one new project (Samaritan Bonus) each year in addition to renewing existing programs or an
existing program can either be de-funded or request a reduction in funding and those funds can become
available to a new program.
HUD 811 and 202 Programs
The Section 811 program provides funding for the development of rental housing with the availability of
supportive services for adults with disabilities. The Section 811 program allows for persons with disabilities
to live as independently as possible in the community. The program also provides project rental assistance,
which covers the difference between the HUD-approved operating costs of the project and the tenants’
contribution toward rent. The Section 202 program provides funds to finance the construction,
rehabilitation, or acquisition with or without rehabilitation of structures that will serve as supportive housing
for very low-income elderly persons, including the frail elderly, and provides rent subsidies for the projects
to help make them affordable. It provides very low-income elderly with options that allow them to live
independently but in an environment that provides support activities such as cleaning, cooking,
transportation, and other supportive activities.
Mortgage Revenue Bonds and Low-Income Housing Tax Credits
Since 1983, SHRA has issued tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds on behalf of the City for housing
developments that restrict a portion of their units for very low-income and low-income households. The
basic Federal requirements are that 20 percent of the units must be restricted to very low-income
households (50 percent of area median income), or 40 percent of the units restricted to low-income
households at 60 percent of area median income. Agency policies require the 20 percent very low-income
restriction. The funds raised as a result of the bond sales carry below market interest rates, and are often
coupled with Low-Income Housing Tax Credits to raise the equity needed for the project’s affordability and
feasibility.
The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit program is a Federal program that provides each state an allocation
of tax credits based upon population to be used to create affordable housing for lower-income households.
First used in 1988, the tax credits are used as an incentive for private business to invest in affordable
housing. Within the Federal tax credit program, there are two programs: the four percent and the nine
percent tax credits. The nine percent tax credit program with its higher credit factor (typically around nine
percent) is more competitive and requires much deeper affordability targeting. The four percent tax credit
program is used solely in conjunction with the mortgage revenue bond program. In addition to federal tax
credits, California has created a state tax credit program to be used in conjunction with the federal credits.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H 6-5

                                                           Chapter Six: HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES
Mortgage revenue bonds with Low-Income Housing Tax Credits have been the most successful tool for
financing new construction, producing mixed-income developments with a variety of affordability levels
serving very low-income and lower-income households and preserving the affordability and useful life of the
apartment complexes terminating their HUD contracts. Use of the mortgage revenue bond and tax credit
programs allows the City to spread its limited local resources as gap loans supporting bond and tax credit
projects. This financing has been used successfully in new growth areas for family and senior developments,
and will likely be employed in downtown Sacramento’s housing expansion.
Mortgage Credit Certificates
The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program provides financial assistance to first time homebuyers for
the purchase of new or existing single-family homes. The MCC provides qualified first time homebuyers
with a Federal income tax credit, which reduces an individual’s tax payment(s) by an amount equal to the
credit. The MCC program can be used to increase homeownership, especially in targeted census tracts.
State Sources of Funding
Proposition 1B Funding
Proposition 1B authorized about $20 billion in State bond funds for transportation. The measure allocates
specific amounts of bond funding for particular transportation uses, and requires that the funding be subject
to legislative appropriation. These transportation funds can be used to assist in improvements that are
required for new development projects supporting transit, including affordable housing. The Downtown
Railyards project received $20 million in Proposition 1B funding in April 2008 to relocate and realign the
Union Pacific railroad tracks to facilitate the development of the Sacramento Valley Station. The
realignment has cleared one barrier to development of the first two phases of the Railyards project, which
will include 1,831 units as indicated in Appendix C.
Proposition 1C Funding
Proposition 1C authorized about $2.85 billion in State funding for a variety of housing programs. Potential
uses of Proposition 1C funds include brownfield cleanup and infill incentives, multifamily housing
programs, implementation of Transit Oriented Development (TOD), the State Homeowner Downpayment
Assistance program, supportive housing, farmworker housing, emergency housing assistance, and programs
for homeless youth. For the first round of this program, Sacramento received Proposition 1C funding from
both the TOD program and the infill infrastructure program to implement redevelopment projects at the
Downtown Railyards and Township 9. The City will continue to seek this type of grant funding to assist
major infill projects in the city.
Multifamily Housing Program
The Multifamily Housing Program (MHP) is used to assist in the new construction, rehabilitation, and
preservation of permanent and transitional rental housing for lower-income households. Special allocations
have been made for supportive housing with associated health and social services for low-income renters
with disabilities, or individuals or households that are moving from emergency shelters or transitional
housing, or are at risk of homelessness. MHP funding can be used by local governments, for-profit and
nonprofit corporations, limited equity housing cooperatives, and individuals to construct, rehabilitate, or
preserve permanent and transitional rental housing.
Page H 6-6  |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Housing Program Resources                                                              H-6
Mental Health Services Act Program
Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) Housing Program was established by Executive Order to fund
permanent supportive housing (PSH) projects for people with psychiatric disabilities and children with
serious emotional disturbance. In permanent housing, all services must be voluntary. PSH is defined to
include all of the following: tenant holds a lease and has rights of tenancy, tenant has a private space that is
locked and that only they have access to, and participating in supportive services is not a requirement of
tenancy. Transitional housing and emergency shelters are not eligible for funding.
Eligible uses of funds include: acquisition of vacant property, acquisition and rehabilitation of an existing
development, construction of a new development, capitalizing operating costs, and predevelopment costs
associated with an eligible project proposal. Funds can be awarded as a grant or a loan, whichever assists in
project feasibility and/or meets the requirements of other sources of funding.
There are two pools of funds that are provided in three year cycles. “One-time” funds are provided by the
State directly to the County and applications are accepted over-the-counter through SHRA and through
Sacramento County Division of Mental Health (DMH). The other source of MHSA funds are controlled by
CalHFA and applications are submitted over-the-counter to CalHFA.
Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods (BEGIN)
BEGIN funding includes grants to local public agencies to make deferred-payment second mortgage loans
to qualified buyers of new homes, including manufactured homes on permanent foundations, in projects
with affordability enhanced by local regulatory incentives or barrier reductions. These grants are used to
increase homeownership among low- and moderate-income residents.
Housing Enabling Local Partnerships (HELP)
HELP funding is provided to local government entities to tailor the affordable housing activities and
priorities of the particular jurisdiction. HELP Program funds can be used for a wide variety of housing
programs, including multifamily construction and rehabilitation and homeownership assistance. SHRA has
used the HELP program twice to assist in the funding for the acquisition and redevelopment of the Phoenix
Park (formerly Franklin Villa) neighborhood.
CalHOME
CalHOME funding includes grants to local public agencies and nonprofit corporations to assist individual
households through deferred-payment loans, as well as direct, forgivable loans to assist development
projects involving multiple ownership units, including single-family subdivisions. These grants are used to
enable low- and very low-income residents to become or remain homeowners.
Emergency Housing and Assistance Program (EHAP)
EHAP funding includes both operating grants and deferred loans for capital development. Grants can be
used for facility operations of emergency shelters, transitional housing projects, and supported services for
homeless individuals and families. Loans to local public agencies and nonprofit developers may be used for
capital development activities for emergency shelters, transitional housing, and safe havens that provide
shelter and supportive services for homeless individuals and families.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H 6-7

                                                              Chapter Six: HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES
Workforce Housing Reward Program
This program provides financial incentives to cities and counties that issue building permits for new housing
affordable to very low- or low-income households. Grants can be used for construction or acquisition of
capital assets.
Local Sources of Funding
Housing Trust Fund of the City of Sacramento
The City of Sacramento adopted a landmark local ordinance in 1989 that established an impact fee on new
non-residential construction. The fees were based on an economic nexus analysis that determined that the
construction of such commercial projects as offices, business parks, hotels, warehouses, and shopping
centers played a major role in attracting new very low- and low-income workers to Sacramento. Because the
workers are often unable to afford housing close to their work sites, the fee-generated revenue is used to
increase the supply of housing affordable to these income groups, creating the nexus or linkage between
jobs and housing.
Annually, the City Housing Trust Fund provides approximately $700,000 for new construction of housing
for people that are in or likely to be in the labor force. As of mid 2013, almost $30 million in City Housing
Trust Funds have been loaned to developers building over 2,500 new units affordable to lower-income
households. Housing Trust funds are most commonly used as “gap” loans, leveraging millions of dollars of
outside resources to create affordable housing in the city.
6.3 Institutional Resources
In addition to the external resources described above, the City has an intricate internal network of
departments that work together to coordinate housing activities. It is imperative that these departments
work under the same vision for housing in the city, and that their collective resources and expertise are
directed toward a common goal.
Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency
The Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA) is a Joint Powers Authority created as a
public agency by the City and County of Sacramento in 1973. SHRA serves two essential functions for both
the City and unincorporated County in its roles as the Housing Authority and housing department for both
jurisdictions.
In its role as the Housing Authority, SHRA owns and operates 2,462 public housing units in the city and an
additional 832 in the other parts of the county. It administers over 12,000 Housing Choice Vouchers
throughout Sacramento County. SHRA also acts as the City’s housing department, administering Federal
and State funding programs for the provision of affordable housing and implementing the City’s Mixed
Income Housing Ordinance.
Page H 6-8  |                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Housing Program Resources                                                            H-6
City of Sacramento
In addition to the lead housing role of SHRA, various City departments are involved in the planning and
delivery of housing and community development services.
The Economic Development Department’s mission is to market the City and facilitate private
investment in accordance with established economic development priorities and adopted land use plans and
policies. In addition, the Economic Development Department administers the Merged Downtown and
Richards Boulevard redevelopment areas, working collaboratively with SHRA on housing projects in these
areas.
The Community Development Department (CDD) reviews development all applications requiring
entitlements from the Planning and Design Commission and/or City Council, ensures implementation of
the State of California code requirements and City ordinances and codes, reviews development projects for
adequate infrastructure, and operates the Permit Centers that are “one stop” public information and service
centers for a number of City agencies. These development-oriented centers assist customers with planning,
engineering, building, and transportation issues.
CDD also oversees planning efforts of the City, including the General Plan and Community Plans as well as
neighborhood and specific plan area projects. CDD ensures that development is consistent with the vision
of the City and prioritizes public infrastructure investment to facilitate such development.
CDD also includes the Code Enforcement division, which promotes and maintains a safe and desirable
living and working environment. Code Enforcement maintains and improves the quality of the community
by administering a fair and unbiased enforcement program to correct violations of municipal codes and land
use requirements. The Code Enforcement division administers the rental property inspection programs and
the vacant building ordinance, ensuring proper upkeep of residential units throughout the city.
The Parks and Recreation Department provides parks and recreation services. The department maintains
more than 2,000 acres of developed parkland, operates 18 community centers and clubhouses, and provides
recreation programs at numerous department and school sites. The Neighborhood Services division helps to
connect residents to City government and to facilitate ongoing and meaningful community input.
Neighborhood Services works on a variety of neighborhood related issues, including development and
maintenance of housing.
County of Sacramento
Sacramento Steps Forward (SSF) operates the County’s welfare program and serves as the lead agency
for the ESG and HOPWA programs. SSF offers a range of services including: senior volunteer services,
welfare reform, homeless assistance, employment services, financial assistance, medical assistance, and
senior nutrition.
The Department of Health and Human Services offers a variety of services including: alcohol and drug
rehabilitation services, children’s services, family assistance, mental health services, senior services, and
shelter and homeless assistance.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                        | Page H 6-9

                                                         Chapter Six: HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES
Other Service Providers
SHRA coordinates with a variety of nonprofit organizations that coordinate or provide housing and/or
social services in the City of Sacramento. These organizations include the Mercy Housing, Volunteers of
America, Sacramento Neighborhood Housing Services, Lutheran Social Services, InfoLine Sacramento,
Self-Help Housing, Turning Point Community Programs, Transitional Living and Community Support,
Loaves and Fishes, Sacramento Veterans Resource Center, and many others.
Page H 6-10  |                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Opportunities for Residential Energy Conservation                                     H-7
7 Opportunities for Conserving
         Energy Resources in the
         Residential Sector
7.0 Key Findings
   Sacramento has two key performance goals related to energy used in buildings:
             o To achieve zero energy in all new construction by 2030; and
             o To achieve an overall 15 percent reduction in energy usage in all existing residential and
                 commercial building by 2020.
   Retrofitting Sacramento’s older, energy inefficient housing stock represents a key, largely untapped
    opportunity for reducing residential energy consumption.
   Multifamily housing typically requires less energy per dwelling unit than detached, single-family housing.
    The 2035 General Plan reduces residential energy consumption by encouraging a greater proportion of
    new growth to be energy-efficient multifamily housing.
   The Sacramento Climate Action Plan includes measures and actions to reduce energy demand, increase
    building efficiency in new and existing buildings, and increase renewable energy generation and use. At
    the time of this writing (June 2013), the Climate Action Plan is being incorporated into the 2035 General
    Plan.
   The City collaborates with SHRA, SMUD, Greenwise Joint Venture, Ygrene Energy Fund, and other
    agencies to implement energy efficiency and sustainability goals.
7.1 Introduction
State law (Government Code Part 65583[a][7]) requires Housing Elements to contain an analysis of
opportunities for residential energy conservation. According to the California Department of Housing and
Community Development, the energy conservation section of a Housing Element must inventory and
analyze the opportunities to encourage energy saving features, energy saving materials, and energy efficient
systems and design for residential development. Housing Element policies and programs should address the
environmental significance and operational benefits of employing energy conservation in the building and
retrofitting of housing.
The term “residential energy” refers to the total energy used in residential buildings, including heating,
cooling, and “plug load” from appliances, lights, and electrical devices. “Energy conservation” refers to
reducing energy use through using less of an energy service, such as lowering the thermostat in the winter.
Energy conservation differs from “energy efficiency”, which refers to using less energy without cutting back
on energy services.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H 7-1

                                                                       Chapter Seven: ENERGY CONSERVATION
Residential energy efficiency can be improved by sealing the building envelope and HVAC ducts, insulating
the attic or ceiling, walls, and floor, installing efficient heating and cooling systems, and energy efficient
lighting and appliances. Passive heating, cooling, and lighting can also be employed when designing new
buildings.
Approximately 63 percent of the housing units in the city were built before the advent of the 1978
California Energy Code. A comparison of energy consumption from homes built in the Sacramento area
confirmed that Sacramento’s older homes are indeed considerably less energy efficient than new homes. 1
Retrofitting older, less efficient housing offers a relatively high cost/benefit ratio when compared to other
energy investments, such as increasing the energy efficiency requirements of new construction.2
Housing type also makes a difference in building energy consumption. Single-family detached housing
consumes 35 percent more energy per dwelling unit for space heating and 21 percent more energy per unit
than multifamily housing of comparable size and age. 2 This is due to the self-insulating effect of shared walls
and ceilings in attached housing. In addition, single-family homes tend to be larger than multifamily homes,
adding an additional 16 percent more energy for space heating, and 13 percent for space cooling.
Reducing residential energy consumption has multiple benefits: it reduces greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
conserves limited energy resources, and reduces household energy bills. Energy efficiency and renewable
energy are key components of the City’s strategy for reducing GHG emissions and preparing for climate
change. In addition to being environmentally responsible and economically efficient, energy conservation
measures can result in lower monthly housing costs and contribute to greater long-term housing
affordability.
7.2 Strategies and Policies for Conserving Energy Resources
Energy resource conservation is a key strategy for reducing community-wide GHG emissions and creating a
sustainable city. It is one of the main themes of the General Plan and the Housing Element. The City of
Sacramento is implementing a number of strategies that will directly or indirectly conserve energy resources
and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Three important strategies for conserving residential energy are:
    Improving the energy efficiency in new buildings;
    Increasing the energy efficiency of existing buildings;
    Increasing renewable energy generation; and
    Sustainable land use and transportation.
Seven Strategies from the Sacramento Climate Action Plan
The California Legislature adopted the California Global Warming Solutions Act (Assembly Bill 32) in 2006,
which established a goal of reducing statewide GHG emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020. AB 32 set a
1 Meeting AB 32: Cost-Effective Green House Gas Reductions in the Residential Sector. A study prepared by ConSol for the
   California Home Builder’s Foundation, August, 2008.
2 Growing Cooler: The Evidence on Urban Development and Climate Change. Reid Ewing et. al. 2008, The Urban Land
   Institute.
Page H 7-2    |                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Opportunities for Residential Energy Conservation                                             H-7
mid-term GHG emissions reduction target, putting California on a trajectory to achieve an even more
aggressive long-term reduction goal set forth by Executive Order S-3-05: 80 percent below 1990 levels by
2050. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) later clarified that a minimum target of 15 percent below
2005 levels is roughly equivalent to the AB 32 target.
Recognizing the City’s part in helping to meet State GHG reduction targets, the City of Sacramento 2030
General Plan (2009) included goals and policies directing the City to be proactive in addressing climate
change, including the preparation and adoption of a climate action plan that would contain strategies and
specific actions for reducing GHG emissions and adapting to expected impacts of climate change.
The Sacramento Climate Action Plan (CAP) was adopted on February 14, 2012. It included strategies,
measures, and actions for reducing community-wide GHG emissions 15 percent below 2005 levels or 28
percent below 2020 levels, and adapting to climate change impacts. The CAP will be incorporated into the
2035 General Plan as part of the 5-year update.
The CAP is organized into seven key strategies for reducing GHG emissions from seven sectors. Since most
GHG emissions originating from human activities come from fossil fuel combustion, all seven strategies
include measures or actions that conserve energy resources:
    Sustainable land use;
    Mobility and connectivity;
    Energy efficiency and renewable energy;
    Waste reduction and recycling;
    Water conservation and wastewater efficiency;
    Climate change adaptation; and
    Community involvement and empowerment.
The second jurisdictional GHG inventory was prepared for the City in 2013 that showed GHG emissions
for the seven sectors: residential energy; commercial/industrial energy; industrial-specific; transportation
(on-road mobile); solid waste; wastewater treatment; and water consumption. The inventory shows the total
city-wide GHG emissions for 2011 to be 3,910,501 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MT
CO2e). Residential Energy accounts for 656,472 MT CO2e, or 17percent of Sacramento’s community-wide
total. 3
Increasing Energy Efficiency in Existing Buildings
The CAP includes several measures to improve energy efficiency in existing buildings, including measures
related to its partnership with utilities, and the development and adoption of a Property Assessed Clean
Energy Financing Program (PACE) to help finance energy efficiency retrofits of existing buildings.
3 City of Sacramento jurisdictional Greenhouse Gas Inventory-2011, Prepared by Ascent Environmental, 2013.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                  | Page H 7-3

                                                                    Chapter Seven: ENERGY CONSERVATION
State Energy Efficiency Requirements for New Construction
Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations contains California’s building standards for energy efficiency.
Each city and county must enforce these standards as part of its review of building plans and issuance of
building permits. The standards, prepared by the California Energy Commission, were established in 1978 in
response to a State legislative mandate to reduce California’s energy consumption. The standards are
updated periodically to consider and incorporate new energy efficiency technologies and methods. The
pending 2013 Title 24 update will increase energy efficiency requirements for nonresidential construction 25
percent above 2008 Title 24 and 20 percent above 2008 Title 24 for residential construction.
Sustainable Land Use and Transportation
Regional Blueprint for Sustainable Communities
The Metropolitan Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy (MTP/SCS) is a long-range plan
for transportation in the region built on the SACOG Blueprint (a scenario for regional growth that was
adopted in 2004). SACOG is required by Federal law to update the MTP at least every four years, and is
now required by the State of California to align transportation, housing, and other land uses to achieve per
capita GHG emission reductions of 10 percent per capita by 2020, and 16 percent per capita by 2035,
pursuant to SB 375.
City of Sacramento
2035 General Plan
The 2035 General Plan will be adopted at the completion of the 5-year update of the 2030 General Plan.
One of the changes to be made will be the integration of the Sacramento Climate Action Plan into the 2035
General Plan.
The 2035 General Plan will continue to guide future development in a manner consistent with the
MTP/SCS, which emphasizes smart land use, infill development, environmental quality, and sustainability.
The following are some of the more important principles reflected in the policies of the 2035 General Plan:
   a focus on higher density developments and mixed-use projects in areas adjacent to transit stations,
    along transit corridors and commercial corridors, near job centers, and in strategic opportunity areas
    throughout the city;
   promotion of livable and well-designed neighborhoods that are walkable and complete, with a mix of
    uses and services to support the needs of a growing population;
   promotion of developments that foster accessibility and connectivity between areas and safely and
    efficiently accommodate a mixture of cars, transit, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
   encouraging sustainable levels of energy and resource consumption through efficient land use,
    transportation, building design, construction techniques, waste management, and other infrastructure
    systems; and
   planning for housing close to jobs, services, and amenities.
Page H 7-4  |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Opportunities for Residential Energy Conservation                                      H-7
The 2035 General Plan will continue to guide development by focusing less on specific land uses and more
on “place types.” Place types are descriptions of neighborhoods and other places; their form, layout, and
function; and the general mix of land uses and densities envisioned for each place. The General Plan defines
several high-density residential neighborhoods and/or mixed-use centers that can support efforts to
conserve energy. Residential place types (neighborhoods) have maximum densities ranging from 8 to 250
dwelling units per acre, while mixed-use place types (centers and corridors) have maximum densities ranging
from 32 to 450 units per acre.
The City’s emphasis on place types and opportunities to grow in more environmentally sustainable ways is
reinforced by policies contained in several of the General Plan elements. The policy direction is summarized
below.
Land Use and Community Design Element. This element will continue to encourage compact, higher
density development to conserve land resources, protect habitat, support transit, reduce vehicle trips,
improve air quality, conserve energy and water, and diversify Sacramento’s housing stock. The City’s growth
strategy will promote infill development, redevelopment, and growth in existing urbanized areas over urban
expansion. The City will place greater emphasis on a neighborhood land use mix that promotes walkability
and reduces vehicle trips. The City will also promote sustainable building practices that reduce waste and
conserve resources, including land, water, air, and energy. Such building practices may include passive
heating and cooling, efficient water and light fixtures, drought-tolerant landscapes, permeable paving
materials, and on-site energy generation systems.
Environmental Resources Element. A major focus on the Environmental Resources Element will
continue to be the maintenance and expansion of City’s urban forest – its tree canopy. The tree canopy
reduces the urban heat island effect, which makes streets and sidewalks more pleasant places to walk and
provides shade for residences. The tree canopy contributes significantly to residential energy savings.
Mobility Element. The Mobility Element will continue to emphasize neighborhoods and centers with
highly interconnected streets that decrease travel distances and promote walkability and bicycling. .
Pedestrian and bikeway networks will be expanded to create safe, walkable environments. Residents will
continue to integrate walking and bicycling into their daily activities. The Element will also continue to
emphasize direct links between streets and major destinations such as bus stops, schools, parks, and
shopping centers, further reducing the need to use automobiles for many trips.
Utilities (Energy Resources) Element. This element will continue to include policies to improve energy
efficiency, reduce energy consumption, and increase renewable energy generation to reduce dependence on
non-renewable energy sources. The City will continue promote green building practices that meet “LEED”
(U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) and other green building
rating systems and standards. This element will continue to emphasize retrofitting of older buildings to
improve energy efficiency.
7.3 Programs and Implementation Measures
The strategies and policies for energy conservation described above can be implemented through a number
of agencies and various regulatory, voluntary, and financial assistance programs. This Section briefly
describes some of the potential ways to achieve energy savings through the regulations and programs of
various City departments, the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency, and local utility providers.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 7-5

                                                                    Chapter Seven: ENERGY CONSERVATION
Clean Energy Sacramento
The City partnered with YGrene Energy Fund to create a Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) program
that provides privately funded financing to local property owners for energy efficiency, renewable energy,
and water conservation upgrades. The loans are repaid over the assigned term via an annual assessment on
the property tax bill. This allows the borrower to “mortgage” the improvements and pay only for the
benefits they derive while they own the home.
Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA)
Housing Rehabilitation
SHRA helps pay the cost of weatherization and certain energy efficiency improvements through its housing
rehabilitation program. This program helps reduce the operating costs of housing.
Sacramento Metropolitan Utility District (SMUD)
SMUD provides technical and financial assistance for design, construction and remodeling of housing. For
new construction, SMUD offers design and technical assistance for incorporating energy efficiency features.
Incentives may be available for upgrading air conditioning, lighting, and appliances to more efficient
systems. SMUD has programs to incorporate advanced systems such as photovoltaic roof panels and
ground source heat pumps into new projects. Design assistance is available for retrofit projects.
Other ways in which SMUD works with its residential customers and local jurisdictions to promote energy
conservation include:
    1. Online home energy analysis that allows customers how to identify energy waste;
    2. Consumer information containing a variety of tips on saving energy during winter heating and
        summer cooling periods;
    3. Whole-house energy efficiency retrofit programs;
    4. Free shade trees that help cool homes naturally;
    5. The Advantage Homes program that helps homebuyers find a new, energy-saving home;
    6. The SolarSmart program that allows residential customers to purchase SolarSmart new homes and
        reduce their annual energy bills by as much as 60 percent;
    7. Consumer information on how to keep pools clean, warm, and energy efficient;
    8. The Cool Roof program in which SMUD provides rebates to residential customers who replace
        their roofs with approved materials that reflect the sun’s energy;
    9. Rebates to buy down the cost of electric appliances and products to encourage energy efficiency;
        and
    10. The Peak Corps program in which Peak Corps volunteers allow SMUD to cycle their air
        conditioners during emergency situations, thereby reducing peak electricity demand.
Page H 7-6  |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Opportunities for Residential Energy Conservation                                      H-7
City of Sacramento
Planning and Development Code
The City adopted a comprehensive update of the Zoning Code on April 9, 2013 in order to facilitate infill
development and update development standards to recognize urban and traditional neighborhood
development indentified in the General Plan.
Incentives for Green Buildings. The Planning and Development Code includes a bonus system to create
incentives for green buildings that meet or exceed CALGreen Tier I or Tier II green building standards.
Mixed Use Zones. The City’s Planning and Development Code includes several districts that promote
mixed-use development in the Central City area and along commercial corridors. These zones include the
Residential Mixed-Use (RMX) Zone, Residential-Office (RO) Zone, and the R-5 High-rise Residential
Zone, which permits non-residential uses. The comprehensive update increased the density and height in
several zones, including the RMX zone and several multifamily zones. These and other zoning districts are
described in more detail in Part 8, Constraints. Development standards associated with these zones seek to
facilitate the type of energy-efficient development patterns envisioned under the new General Plan update
and the SACOG Blueprint and MTP/SCS.
Parking Lot Tree Shading Standards. The Planning and Development Code includes standards for tree
shading in off-street parking areas. Shading reduces heat gain and energy use in nearby buildings.
Greater Emphasis on Infill. The Planning and Development Code was designed to create greater
flexibility for infill development in allowed densities, heights, and uses. For example, it allows limited retail
by right in certain office and retail zones, and limited residential uses by right in the OB zone. It also
provides for shorter review time (staff-level approval) of projects that are consistent with standards and
guidelines, and a more flexible process for deviations from development standards at director hearing level.
Infill Development, Development Fees, and Affordable Housing. To facilitate more infill and
affordable housing production and more integrated, sustainable neighborhoods, the City provides fee
reductions and waivers. The intent of these fee waivers and reductions is to reduce the burden of
development and impact fees on small residential infill development (one to four units) in targeted
residential neighborhoods and to promote affordable housing development.
Mixed Income Housing Ordinance. As described in Chapter 6, the City’s Mixed Income Housing
Ordinance seeks to ensure better income integration in new neighborhoods and potentially better proximity
of a wider range of housing to services and jobs.
Streamlined Review for Transit Priority Projects
Streamlined CEQA review and analysis is available to Transit Priority Projects (TPPs) and residential or
mixed-use residential projects that are consistent with the Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) that was
adopted by the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG), pursuant to SB 375.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H 7-7

                                                                   Chapter Seven: ENERGY CONSERVATION
Building Codes
The City of Sacramento enforces State building code standards, including standards for residential building
energy efficiency (Title 24), described above.
Other City Programs
Department of General Service. The City General Services Department implements a number of
programs to encourage composting, recycling, and water conservation, which reduce GHG emissions and
save energy.
Department of Utilities. The City Utilities Department has a number of programs to encourage indoor
and outdoor water conservation, which reduces the electricity requirements for pumping water.
Department of Public Works, Urban Forestry Program. The City Public Works Department, through
the Urban Forestry Program, provides care and maintenance support to more than 150,000 street and park
trees. The department has prepared a tree planting guide to help residents select appropriate shade and
canopy trees. The department also implements a shade tree planting program (one shade tree for each 40
feet of street frontage within the City limits). Among the benefits of the Urban Forestry Program is reduced
energy use associated with air conditioning in residential neighborhoods during summer months.
Page H 7-8  |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                          H-8
8 Constraints
8.0 Key Findings
   Recent Zoning Code amendments in 2013 have removed all governmental constraints identified in the
    2008-2013 Housing Element.
   High development costs challenge the ability of homebuilders to provide housing affordable to low- or
    moderate-income households. Such costs include:
        -    Land costs, which are beginning to increase in 2013;
        -    Materials costs (such as wood, concrete, and steel) that have also risen significantly; and
        -    Permit and development impact fees.
   Since the downturn in the housing market, consumer lending standards have tightened as has the
    general availability of credit in financial markets. However, more recently, development financing
    conditions have started to turn around, especially for multifamily development. The cost of construction
    financing is historically low, with prime rates below 5 percent in 2013 enabling many projects to pencil
    out that would not otherwise. Given recent trends, the availability of financing is likely to be less of a
    constraint on new housing construction during this Housing Element planning period than it has been
    in the recent past.
   Due to the recent collapse of the subprime mortgage market, loan qualification standards are
    considerably stricter and the availability of financing is considerably reduced. So, while mortgage rates
    remain historically low, borrowers with low credit scores and/or lower incomes may find obtaining a
    home mortgage more challenging than would have been the case several years ago.
   FEMA flood zone mapping has constrained residential development in Natomas in the past planning
    period. Current levee improvements are anticipated to allow residential development in this area for the
    majority of this Housing Element planning period.
   Outside Natomas, expiration of levee certifications have potential implications for FEMA flood
    designations for large areas of the city of Sacramento. However, SAFCA is undertaking a process to
    certify the levees locally, and the City of Sacramento will be working closely with SAFCA to develop the
    levee improvement program for recertifying the levees to achieve 100-year flood protection in order to
    avoid a remapping by FEMA.
   Concurrently, the City is working with SAFCA to develop flood control plans that will achieve 200-year
    flood protection for the entire city by 2025 to meet the requirements of State law, established by SB 5.
    As a result, housing development is not expected to be constrained due these recent State flood
    protection policies.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H 8-1

                                                                               Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
8.1 Introduction
The purpose of this section is to identify nongovernmental and governmental factors (constraints), some of
which are unique to Sacramento, that inhibit the development, maintenance, or improvement of housing.
Examples of such constraints are land and construction costs, access to credit for home loans, permit fees,
development standards, and compliance with State laws intended to facilitate housing for lower-income and
special needs households. A thorough understanding of the constraints to development can help to
structure appropriate policy and programmatic responses to mitigate constraints and to provide additional
avenues to the development of housing.
8.2 Nongovernmental Constraints
State law (California Government Code, Section 65583[a][5]) requires Housing Elements to contain an
analysis of nongovernmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for
all income levels, including the availability of financing, the price of land, and the cost of construction.
Potential nongovernmental constraints are largely determined by market conditions over which local
jurisdictions have little control. However, local governments can influence market conditions and their
associated costs, even if only indirectly. Governmental interventions that affect nongovernmental
constraints will be explored in more detail in Section 8.2.
Development Costs
The cost to develop a housing unit, whether single-family or multifamily, includes the cost of land,
construction, infrastructure, and “soft costs,” those additional non construction costs associated with
design, financing, entitlements, and sales – costs such as engineering and architectural fees, insurance,
financing, administrative costs, and marketing costs.
Land Costs
Land costs typically account for a large share of development costs, but also vary widely by market area and
market fluctuations, even within short timeframes. As with other development costs, very high land costs
may make housing development infeasible unless expected rents or sales prices are high enough to account
for such costs. Even if raw land costs are low, high site preparation costs (such as grading, dewatering, and
special engineering requirements to provide utilities to a property) can affect the cost of housing and the
feasibility of developing affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households.
In February of 2013, Keyser Marston Associates performed a market feasibility analysis for residential
development in Sacramento. Eight residential prototypes varying in tenure, location, and construction type
were analyzed. Properties zoned for single-family development between one and 40 acres ranged in price
from approximately $52,679 to approximately $258,065 per acre (between $1.21 and $5.92 per square foot).
Properties zoned for multifamily development ranged in price from approximately $48.21 per square foot
for urban infill location to $6.89 per square foot for a suburban/greenfield location. As with single-family
land costs, the variation in multifamily land costs can depend on whether properties are “shovel ready,”
which means that utilities are available and ready to be connected.
Page H 8-2   |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                           H-8
Construction Costs
The cost of construction (labor and materials) and improvements represents the largest component of
housing development costs. The greatest contributor to construction costs is the type of building. Single-
story, wood-framed structures are the least costly to build, whereas multi-story steel-reinforced, poured-in-
place concrete structures are the most expensive.
Single-Family Construction and Infrastructure Costs
The average development cost (including land, construction, infrastructure improvements, fees, and other
costs) for a 2,200 square foot single-family home can vary from $126 per square foot (in greenfield areas to
$139 in infill areas (Keyser Marston Associates, 2013). Once a vacant parcel is purchased, the contractor is
required to make site improvements before constructing a building on the property. Site improvements can
include connections to existing utility systems, rough grading, and installation of water and sewer lines. The
cost variation depends on the lot size, unit size, type of residential dwelling, primary infrastructure needed
for the site, and roadway improvements including landscaping, sound walls, and additional lanes.
Additionally, in infill areas the cost of the infrastructure improvements must be borne by the developer
alone as opposed to financing districts that can distribute the costs more evenly. In general, site
improvement costs in Sacramento average about $16 per square foot, which is included in the $126 -$139
figures above (Keyser Marston Associates, 2013).
Multifamily Construction and Infrastructure Costs
The average development cost (including land, construction, infrastructure improvements, fees and other
costs) for a multifamily projects range from $202 per square foot (for suburban apartments) to $303 for
large urban infill projects. The variation in cost is due largely to the type of materials use as noted above
(Keyser Marston Associates, 2013). As mentioned above infrastructure costs can vary depending on the
location of the project.
Soft Costs
Other costs, often called “soft costs,” include engineering and architectural fees, insurance, financing,
administrative costs, and marketing costs. For single-family development, soft costs range from about $21
to $33 per square foot. Permitting costs and impact fees payable to the local jurisdiction comprise a
substantial portion of the total soft costs. For a typical single-family residence in an infill development in the
city, permitting and impact fees are estimated at about $34,100, whereas a similar single-family residence in a
greenfield area would be subject to about $53,300 in fees. For multifamily development in the city,
permitting and impact fees range from about $18,400 per unit in an infill development to about $23,300 per
unit in a greenfield area.
Total Development Costs
Table H 8-1 summarizes total costs, including land, construction, and soft cost estimates for the eight
residential prototypes compiled by Kaiser Marston Associates. Based on the cost estimates for the
residential prototypes shown in Table H 8-1, the cost to construct a single-family home in Sacramento
ranges from approximately $220,000 for a small-lot, 1,600 square foot single-family home in an outer-edge
suburban area to $305,200 for a suburban infill 2,200 square foot single-family home, and $310,500 for an
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                              | Page H 8-3

                                                                             Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
urban infill 950 square foot condominium. The prototype small-lot single-family home in the outer-edge
suburban area would be affordable to a lower-income family of three earning roughly $55,000 per year. The
prototype urban infill condominium would be affordable to a moderate-income family of three earning
roughly $80,000 per year. However, these costs do not take developer profits into account, which would add
to the cost of the units.
The cost to construct an apartment project ranges from approximately $191,600 per unit for a 950 square
foot unit in a small suburban infill apartment to $257,400 per unit for an 850 square foot unit in a larger
urban infill project. Examples of the high cost to develop multifamily housing can be seen in the rents
charged for apartments recently built in North Natomas (a greenfield area) and midtown (an infill area). A
search of rental listings on Rent.com revealed asking rents in North Natomas that ranged from about $1,000
to $1,200 for one-bedroom units to between $1,200 and $1,500 for two-bedroom units. Recently
constructed apartments and lofts in Midtown and Downtown Sacramento had asking rents ranging from
$1,000 to $1,800 for studio or one-bedroom apartments to $1,800 to $3,000 for two-bedroom apartments.
These newly constructed apartments are affordable to some low-income and most moderate-income
households, although many of the luxury apartments in Midtown and Downtown are out of reach for
moderate-income households. A couple living in a one-bedroom apartment and paying $1,200 per month in
rent and utilities (one of the cheaper new one-bedroom units) would need an annual income of about
$48,000, which is the upper threshold of the low-income category for a family of two. Older apartments
typically have lower rent rates that are more affordable.
According to the Kaiser Marston Associates study, market sales prices and rental rates at the beginning of
2013 were too low to make most new development financially feasible. In order for a developer to achieve a
return of 10 percent of total costs, sale prices and rental rates would need to increase in the range of 5
percent to 15 percent from early 2013 values for financial feasibility, assuming development costs remain
flat.
However, the housing market is changing very rapidly as the housing market recovery is accelerating in the
first part of 2013. According to a report by CoreLogic, home prices in the Sacramento region increased by
nearly 23 percent in April 2013 compared with the same month a year earlier. From March to April 2013,
home prices rose more than 4 percent in the region. The increase in home values has been driven largely by
a low supply of homes on the market and high demand from investors and traditional home buyers, coupled
with record low mortgage rates. As the housing market recovers and home sale prices increase, the financial
feasibility of new residential development projects will improve; however, as home sale prices increase, so
will the cost of land, which will add to the development costs.
The cost to develop both single-family and multifamily housing represents a constraint to the provision of
housing affordable to lower income and many moderate-income households. In addition, land values are
beginning to increase in 2013, which will add to the costs of development. It is highly likely that in the
future home builders will require financial assistance (e.g., discounted permit and impact fees, reduced
infrastructure requirements, discounted or free land) and/or the homebuyer will require assistance (e.g.,
down payment assistance, below-market rate financing) in order for a single-family home to be affordable to
a lower income or moderate-income household.
Page H 8-4  |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                                                      H-8
   Table H 8-1        Land and Construction Costs
                                                                          Average       Average           Average                  Average
                                                                                                                       Total
   Housing Type & Size                                                    Land Value Construction         Soft Costs               Cost Per
                                                                                                                       (per sf)
                                                                          ($/sf)        Costs ($/sf)      ($/sf)                   Unit1
   Suburban Infill Small SFR Project (2,200 sf)                           $5.92         $55               $22          $139        $305,200
   Outer-edge Suburban Large SFR Project (2,200 sf)                       $1.19         $55               $21          $126        $276,800
   Outer-edge Suburban Small Lot/Cluster SFR (1,600 sf) $1.21                           $60               $23          $138        $220,000
   Suburban Infill Large Condo Project (1,200)                            $6.89         $135              $50          $224        $268,800
   Urban Infill Condo Project (950 sf)                                    $48           $191              $71          $327        $310,500
   Suburban Infill Smaller Apt Project (950 sf)                           $6.89         $125              $31          $202        $191,600
   Urban Infill Smaller Apt Project (850 sf)                              $48.21        $174              $43          $298        $253,400
   Urban Infill Larger Apt Project (850 sf)                               $45.91        $194              $48          $303        $257,400
   Sources: Keyser Marston Associates 2013.
   1
     Total development cost includes land, infrastructure improvements, construction, fees/permits, soft costs, and construction financing.
The Cost and Availability of Financing
During the recession, the tightening of credit availability severely constrained financing for new home
building. From the peak in 2007 to year-end 2012, construction and development loan volumes were down
68 percent nationally, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Single-family and small residential
development loans saw the largest declines, but larger multifamily loans are also just a fraction of their peak
levels. Since the last development boom, banks have tightened up their underwriting significantly and
construction financing is not as readily available.
However, more recently, development financing conditions have started to turn around, especially for
multifamily development. While there is more scrutiny of developer’s credentials and banks are requiring a
higher loan-to-value ratio, the cost of construction financing is historically low, with prime rates below 5
percent in 2013. Faced with a lagging housing market, the Federal Reserve has been cutting interest rates
since late 2007, enabling many projects to pencil out that would not otherwise. Where financing is available,
construction capital seems to be directed at the best transactions – those with large, established, and well-
capitalized sponsors. Given recent trends, the availability of financing is likely to be less of a constraint on
new housing construction during this Housing Element planning period than it has been in the recent past.
For those looking to purchase homes, mortgage interest rates are currently (June 2013) low, around 4.3
percent for a 30-year fixed mortgage. With a fixed-rate loan, consumers can afford a higher-priced house
when interest rates are lower. The reverse is true when interest rates are higher – monthly payments rise,
reducing the amount a buyer can afford to borrow and price the buyer can afford to pay for a home. The
current low rates make it easier for households to finance house purchases. However, due to the recent
collapse of the subprime mortgage market, loan qualification standards are considerably stricter and the
availability of financing is considerably reduced. So, while mortgage rates remain historically low, borrowers
with low credit scores and/or lower incomes may find obtaining a home mortgage more challenging than
would have been the case several years ago.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                       | Page H 8-5

                                                                                  Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
Flood Zone Designations from the Federal Emergency Management Agency
Natomas
One of the City’s primary new growth areas over the past decade has been Natomas, located north of
downtown Sacramento. Natomas is generally bound by the American River to the South, the Sacramento
River to the west, Sutter County to the North, and the Natomas East Main Drain Canal to the East. On July
20, 2006, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) decertified the levee system protecting Natomas.
Due to the decertification, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) re-mapped the area into a
floodplain (AE flood zone) on December 8, 2008, which resulted in a de-facto building moratorium due to
anticipated flood depths.
For the Natomas Levee Improvement Project, SAFCA has developed a financing plan, funded by
development impact fees and a citywide assessment. Substantial improvements to Natomas levees have
been constructed by SAFCA in cooperation with the State under the Department of Water Resources Early
Implementation Program. Further improvements to achieve 100-year and concurrently 200-year levels of
flood protection is pending Congressional authorization and funding, which is anticipated by the end of
2013. It is expected that some residential construction will resume once funding is authorized and the
Natomas Flood Insurance Rate Map designation is upgraded to the A99, which is anticipated to happen
within two to three years. While this presents a constraint on the development of housing within Natomas
for the next few years, there is sufficient capacity in other areas of the city to meet the annual housing need
for the first part of the planning period. The sites within Natomas are anticipated to be available within the
eight-year Housing Element planning period.
Levee Certification Expiration Outside of Natomas
Historically the USACE has been the agency responsible for certifying the levees in the Sacramento area.
Starting in 2007, following Hurricane Katrina, the USACE began developing new standards for levee
certification. USACE began imposing its certification criteria more uniformly across the country, no longer
allowing as much flexibility for local conditions. For example, encroachments, such as trees, fences, and
other structures that were once deemed acceptable, are now identified as threats to levee stability. USACE
application of the new criteria has resulted in the expiration of levee certifications in the Sacramento area
between May 2012 and August 2013. The affected areas include 40 miles of levees wrapping most of the city
of Sacramento on the American and Sacramento rivers. These certification expirations have potential
implications for the FEMA flood designation for large areas of the city of Sacramento. If FEMA were to
remap the city of Sacramento, many areas would potentially be within the 100-year flood zone, impacting
the ability to develop in these areas.
However, rather than relying on USACE to certify the levees as it has in the past, SAFCA is undertaking a
process to certify the levees locally. In February 2012 SAFCA retained a consultant team to determine
whether the levees protecting Sacramento along the Lower American River and Sacramento River and their
tributaries (outside Natomas) are adequate to meet established FEMA requirements for 100-year flood
protection. A secondary objective of the team was to determine whether the levees meet the State of
California’s Urban Levee Design Criteria for the 200-year flood. The team has completed the first phase of
their evaluation and concluded that up to 8 miles of the Sacramento River East levee, including the Pocket
and Little Pocket areas, 3.7 miles of levees along the north and south banks of Arcade Creek, and 2,500 feet
of erosion sites on the Sacramento River East levee need to be improved. Now that the deficiencies have
Page H 8-6   |                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                     H-8
been identified, SAFCA is developing a levee improvement program that will make the necessary
improvements to recertify the levees in this area.
FEMA flood zones remain unchanged and currently (August 2013) there is no schedule for FEMA to
remap the flood zones in the Sacramento area. The City of Sacramento will be working closely with SAFCA
to develop the levee improvement program for recertifying the levees to avoid a remapping by FEMA.
Central Valley Flood Management
Senate Bill 5
In October 2007 the State of California approved a package of bills to reduce future flood risk. SB 5
(Machado) requires the State to prepare a Central Valley Flood Protection Plan (CVFPP) and requires local
general plans and zoning to comply with the plan by 2015. This law requires a 200-year level of flood
protection for areas of more than 10,000 people. SB 5 contains several key provisions affecting local
governments including:
   The State Department of Water Resources (DWR) and the Central Valley Flood Protection Board (State
    Reclamation Board) must provide cities and counties with preliminary floodplain maps and the state
    agencies must adopt a Central Valley Flood Protection Plan (CVFPP) by 2012.
   Every city and county in the Central Valley must incorporate the new CVFPP data, policies, and
    implementation measures into their general plans within two years, and amend zoning ordinances as
    necessary during the following year.
   After 2015, local government may not approve new development in areas that do not have 200-year
    flood protection unless adequate progress is being made to achieve that level of protection. All areas of
    new development must have 200-year protection by 2025.
   Cities and counties are authorized to prepare local flood protection plans that include strategies for
    increasing flood safety, funding strategies, flood control maintenance, and emergency response.
New development would be allowed with less than 200 year protection if adequate progress is being made
between 2015 and 2025.
Senate Bill 1278
On September 25, 2012, the Governor signed SB 1278 (Wolk), which extended the start date for the DWR
and Central Valley Flood Protection Board to provide the floodplain maps, and the start of the compliance
process, to 2013.
Scheduled Timeline
The following is the scheduled timeline for requirements and City actions related to flood improvements:
 •   2013 – State 200-year floodplain maps released
 •   2015 – City to incorporate flood hazard map and 200 year floodplain policies into General Plan
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                        | Page H 8-7

                                                                                  Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
 •    2016 – City to incorporate 200 year flood protection standard into implementing ordinances
 •    2016-2025 – City must make adequate progress to achieve 200 year level of flood protection
 •    2025 – City must require 200 year level of flood protection for all new development
The City is working with SAFCA to develop flood control plans that will achieve 200-year flood protection
for the entire city by 2025. As a result, housing development is not expected to be constrained due these
recent State flood protection policies.
8.3 Governmental Constraints
Governmental policies and regulations can result in both positive and negative effects on the availability and
affordability of housing. This section describes City policies and regulations that could potentially constrain
the City’s ability to achieve its housing objectives. Potential constraints to housing include land use controls
(through General Plan policies and zoning regulations), development standards, infrastructure requirements,
residential development fees, and the development approval processes. While government policies and
regulations are intended to meet legitimate public purposes and further the public good, the City of
Sacramento recognizes that its actions can potentially constrain the availability and affordability of housing
to meet the community’s future needs.
Many of the nongovernmental constraints described in the previous section can be further exacerbated
through unintentional actions by a jurisdiction. For example, the cost of land is partially a function of the
amount of land zoned for development, intensity of zoning, and the availability of infrastructure and
services provided by local government.
The governmental constraints analysis focuses on factors the City can control and does not include State,
Federal, or other governmental policies or regulations that the City of Sacramento cannot affect or modify.
These City policies and regulations typically affect the City’s ability to meet future housing needs and secure
adequate funding for the construction of affordable housing. Historically, City fees, policies, and regulations
have most affected the availability of housing affordable to lower-income households. As land and
construction costs have increased, these policies and regulations also affect the availability of moderate-
income housing.
Land Use Controls
Zoning Code
Zoning has the most immediate impact on the construction of new housing. The City’s zoning and
development regulations establish maximum densities based on the availability of public services, constraints
on circulation, and ability to maintain neighborhood character. In 2009, the City of Sacramento updated its
General Plan, which resulted in subsequent changes to the City’s approach to defining land uses and zoning
districts. In Spring 2013, to implement the General Plan’s policy shift, the City restructured and updated the
zoning requirements under Title 17 (Zoning) of the Sacramento Municipal Code to help facilitate intensive
infill development with housing allowed by right in most zones.
Tables H 8-2, 8-3, and 8-4 provide a summary of the City’s new regulations for residential zoning, including
development standards and permitted uses, which go into effect on September 30, 2013. The City’s
conditional use permit process is used primarily to review specific uses that have a distinct impact on an area
Page H 8-8   |                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

            HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                                                                              H-8
            in which they are located, or that are capable of creating special problems for bordering properties unless
            given special attention. A conditional use permit may be granted at the discretion of the Zoning
            Administrator, Planning and Design Commission, or City Council and is not the automatic right of any
            applicant. Land uses described below that require a conditional use permit may be subject to conditions
            beyond what is described in the Sacramento Zoning Ordinance.
Table H 8-2              Development Standards in Zoning Districts that Permit Housing
                                                                           Minimum Yard Requirements
                                                             Max.                           (Feet)
                     Maximum Number         Type of                                                                     Maximum Building
        Zone                                               Height                                                                             Minimum Lot Size (square feet)
                            of Units       Land Use                                               Interior    Street      Lot Coverage
                                                            (Feet)      Front       Rear
                                                                                                    Side        Side
                                                                         (1)
         RE               1 unit per lot      SF               35            25       15               5         12.5          5-20%                         NR
                                                                         (1)        (2)                                        40% or                     5,200 (I)/
        R-1               1 unit per lot     SF, D             35            25         15             5         12.5
                                                                                                                         25,00 square feet                6,200(C)
                                                                         (1)                         (7)
       R-1A              2 units per lot     SF, D             35            25         5                0       12.5           50%                         2,900
                                                                         (1)        (2)              (7)
       R1-B              2 units per lot     SF, D             35            25         15               0       12.5           60%                         3,200
                                                                                                                                                      5,200 (I)/6,200(C)
                                                                         (1)        (2)              (7)                       40% or
        R-2              2 units per lot     SF, D             35            25         15               0       12.5
                                                                                                                         25,00 square feet
                                                                                                                                                      For Duplex Units:
                                                                                                                                                      2,600 (I)/3,100(C)
                                                                                    (2)              (7)
       R-2A          17 units per net acre SF, D, MF           35          10           15               0        10            50%                         2,500
                                                                                    (2)              (7)
       R-2B          21 units per net acre SF, D, MF           35          10           15               0        10            50%                         2,000
                                                                                    (2)              (7)
        R-3          30 units per net acre SF, D, MF           35          10           15               0        10            50%                         2,000
                                                                                    (2)              (7)
       R-3A          36 units per net acre SF, D, MF           35          10           15               0        10            60%                         2,000
                                                                                    (2)              (7)
        R-4          60 units per net acre SF, D, MF           45          10           15               0        10            60%                         2,000
                       110 units per net                                 (4)        (2)              (7)        (4)
       R-4A                   acre
                                           SF, D, MF           75            10         15               0          10          70%                         3,200
                       175 units per net                                 (4)        (2)              (7)        (4)
        R-5                   acre
                                           SF, D, MF          240            10         15               0          10          80%                         3,200
                                                                         (4)        (2)              (7)        (4)
        RMX          60 units per net acre SF, D, MF           45            10         15               0          10           NR                          NR
                                                                         (1)        (2)              (7)      (3)       60% outside of the
         RO          36 units per net acre SF, D, MF           35            20         15               0         12.5
                                                                                                                             central city
                                                                                                                                                             NR
                                (6)                                      (4)        (2)              (7)        (4)
         EC                                   MF        2-8 stories          10         15               0          10          25%                          NR
                                                                                    (2)
         OB          36 units per net acre    MF               35          NR           15             5          NR             NR                          NR
                                                                                    (2)
        C-1          30 units per net acre SF, D, MF           35          NR           15             5          NR             NR                          NR
                     36-250 units per net                    (5)                     (8)             (8)
        C-2                   acre
                                           SF, D, MF             65        NR            0               0        NR             NR                          NR
                       450 units per net                (9)                          (8)             (8)
     CBD/ C-3                 acre
                                           SF, D, MF        No Max         NR            0               0        NR             NR                          NR
                                                                                     (2)             (8)
        C-4          60 units per net acre   MF, D             75          NR            0               0        NR             NR                          NR
                                                                                       (8)            (8)
         SC          30 units per net acre SF, D, MF           35          20                                     20             NR                          NR
Source: City of Sacramento, 2013. ( I = Interior; C = Corner Lot; ft. = feet; NR = No Requirement SF = single-family, D = duplex, MF = multifamily)
 (1)                                                                                      (6)
     = 10- to 25-feet; average of two nearest buildings                                        = Maximum of 25 percent of planned unit development net acreage shall be
(2)
     = 5 feet if abuts alley                                                                      designated for residential use
 (3)                                                                                     (7)
     = Outside central city, however, inside central city, if line abuts a lot in an          = No minimum interior side-yard setback is required, unless the interior side-
        R-1 or R-1B zone, or abuts a lot containing a single-unit dwelling. Then                  yard lot line abuts a lot in an R-1 or R-1B zone, or abuts a lot containing a
        the minimum interior side-yard setback is 5 feet.                                         single-unit dwelling. Then the minimum interior side-yard setback is 5 feet.
 (4)                                                                                      (8)
     = Specified structures may extend into the minimum front and street side                  = There is no minimum rear-yard setback, unless the rear yard of a lot is
        setback area up to a maximum height of 15 feet                                              adjacent to an R-zoned or OB-zoned lot and is not separated by an alley,
(5)
     = Height dependent on distance of the R-1, R-1B, and R-2 zones                                 the minimum rear-yard setback is 5 or 15 feet.
                                                                                           (9)
                                                                                               = Height varies based on proximity to State Capitol
            Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                   | Page H 8-9
                                                                                                       Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
Table H 8-3           Permitted Land Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
Type Residential Use                   RE      R-1     R-1A    R-1B      R-2    R-2A    R-2B   R-3    R-3A    R-4 R-4A R-5    RMX     RO
Dormitory                                       3        3       3        3       3       3     3       3      2/3  2/3   2/3   3      3
Duplex                                          2        2       2        2       2       2     2       2       2    2     2    2      2
Family care facility (Group Home)               1        1       1        1       1       1     1       1       1    1     1    1      1
Farm worker housing
Fraternity house; sorority house                3        3       3        3       3       3     3       3       3    3     3    3      3
Home occupation                         1       1        1       1        1       1       1     1       1       1    1     1    1      1
Mobilehome park                         3       3        3       3        3       3       3     3       3       3    3     3           3
Model home; temporary sales
                                        2       2        2       2        2       2       2     2       2       2    2     2    2
office
Multi-unit dwelling                                                               2       2     2       2       2    2     2    2      2
Residential care facility                       3        3       3        3       3       3     3       3       3    3     3    3      3
Residential hotel-SRO                                                                                           3    3     3           3
Rooming and boarding house                                                                                                      3
Second residential unit                 1       1        1       1        1       1       1     1       1       1    1     1    1      1
Single-unit dwelling (includes
                                        2       2        2       2        2       2       2     2       2       2    2     2    2      2
manufacture homes)
Temporary residential shelter                   3        3       3        3       3       3     3       3       3    3     3    3      3
 Source: City of Sacramento Zoning Code, 2013.
 Level of discretionary approval:
 1.    Use permitted by right subject to compliance with development standards.
 2.    Use permitted by right with site plan & design review subject to compliance with development standards.
 3.    Conditional use permit approval by Planning and Design Commission.
 4.    Conditional use permit approval by Zoning Administrator
Page H 8-10       |                                                                                              Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                                                                 H-8
Table H 8-4           Permitted Residential Land Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts
Type Residential Use                     RO   HC     SC   C1    C2     C3    C4   M1    M1 (S) M2 M2(S) MIP MRD H  SPX TC A  AOS F   OB OB-2  OB-3  ARP-F
Dormitory                                  3          3    2/3   2/3     3
Duplex                                     2          3     2      2     2     4
Family care facility (Group Home)          1    1     1     1      1     1     1     1      1    1     1     1   1                    1   1     1
Farm worker housing                                                                                                        2   2
Fraternity house; sorority house           3          3     3            3
Home occupation                            1          1     1      1     1     1     1      1    1     1     1   1  1   1  1   1   1  1   1     1
Mobilehome park                            3    3     3     3      3           3     3      3    3     3
Model home; temporary sales office
Multi-unit dwelling                        2          2     2      2     2     4     4      4    4     4     3                        2   2     2
Residential care facility                  3    3     3     3      3     3     3     3      3    3     3         3                    3   3     3
Residential hotel-SRO                      3                3      3     3     3     3      3    3     3                              3   3     3
Rooming and boarding house                            3     3      3                                                                  3   3     3
Second residential unit                    1          1     1      1     1
Single-unit dwelling (includes
                                           2          3     2      2     3                                                 2   3
manufactured homes)
Temporary residential shelter              3          3     3      3     3    2/3   2/3    2/3  2/3   2/3        3  3   3             3   3     3
Source: City of Sacramento Zoning Code, 2013.
Level of discretionary approval:
1.   Use permitted by right subject to compliance with development standards.
2.   Use permitted by right with site plan & design review subject to compliance with development standards.
3.   Conditional use permit approval by Planning and Design Commission.
4.   Conditional use permit approval by Zoning Administrator
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                    | Page H 8-11
                                                                               Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
Based on analysis of the standards shown in the preceding tables, the City has concluded that it facilitates
the construction of a wide variety of housing types, including housing for special needs groups, extremely
low-income households, and persons in need of emergency shelter and transitional housing through various
zoning districts specifically designed to accommodate the development of housing. Consistent with State
law, transitional housing and supportive housing have been defined as a “dwelling” and treated accordingly
in the individual zone chapters. The 2013 Zoning Code update allowed housing by right in most
nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts to further increase housing opportunities.
Based on the analysis that follows, the City has found that permitted densities are adequate to promote a
variety of housing types in Sacramento, and that development standards associated with each zoning district
(including permitted uses, maximum height, minimum setback and yard requirements, maximum lot
coverage, minimum parking, minimum lot size, and other standards, as presented below) do not create
unnecessary impediments to the construction, conservation, modification for accessibility, or rehabilitation
of housing for all income groups and special needs households. These standards work in tandem to ensure
that allowable densities can be achieved in most cases while still providing for quality development and the
health and safety of Sacramento residents.
As described in the section on permit processing, the City has also established procedures to consider and
approve variations from the strict application of its development standards to provide for special housing
needs and alternative types of housing.
The following residential zoning districts allow the development of residential land uses:
   Rural Estates Zone (RE) is intended to accommodate very low-density residential uses. It applies primarily
    to areas impacted by high noise levels; areas within designated approach or clear zones around airports;
    areas within identified floodway and floodway fringe areas; and other areas where physical or safety
    considerations necessitate very low density residential use. This zone is designated as “RE” with a suffix
    indicating one unit per a minimum number of acres (i.e., RE-1/4, RE-1/2, RE-1/1, RE-1/.5).
   Standard Single-Family Zone (R-1) is intended to accommodate low-density residential uses composed of
    single-unit detached residences and duplex dwellings on corner lots. The minimum lot size is 52 feet by
    100 feet. This zone may also include recreational, religious, and educational facilities as the basic
    elements of a balanced neighborhood. These areas should be clearly defined and without encroachment
    by uses not performing a neighborhood function. The maximum density for the R-1 zone is one
    dwelling per lot, with an additional unit allowed on corner and through lots of 125 feet or more.
   Single-Family Alternative Zone (R-1A) is intended to permit single-unit or duplex dwellings, whether
    attached or detached, at a higher density than is permitted in the R-1 zone. Dwellings that have no
    interior side yards, such as townhouses and row houses, are allowed. A maximum density of two
    dwelling units is allowed per lot.
   Single-Family or Two Family Zone (R-1B) is intended to permit single-unit and duplex dwellings on lots
    generally located in the Central City and in North Natomas. A maximum density of two dwelling units is
    allowed per lot.
Page H 8-12  |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                         H-8
   Two Family Zone (R-2) is intended to provide a low density buffer between the R-1 zone and more
    intense land uses. This zone is intended to permit duplexes and single-unit attached or detached units. A
    maximum of two dwelling units is allowed per lot.
   Multifamily Zone (R-2A) is intended to permit garden apartments and cluster housing. This zone is
    regulated to minimize the ground area covered by structures and maximize open space. The maximum
    density is 17 dwelling units per acre.
   Multifamily Zone (R-2B) is intended to accommodate broader density flexibility as a transition from the
    garden-apartment setting to a more traditional apartment setting. The maximum density is 21 acres per
    acre.
   Multifamily Zone (R-3) is intended to accommodate traditional types of apartments. This zone is located
    outside the Central City, serving as a buffer along major streets and near shopping centers.
   Multifamily Zone (R-3A) is intended to accommodate higher density development in the Central City,
    along major commercial corridors, and in areas near major institutions and public transit facilities. The
    maximum density for the R-3A zone is 36 dwelling units per acre.
   Multifamily Zone (R-4) is intended to accommodate higher-density development in the Central City, along
    major commercial corridors, and in areas near major institutions and public transit facilities. It permits
    dwellings, institutions, and limited commercial goods and services serving the surrounding
    neighborhood. The maximum density is 110 dwelling units per acre.
   Multifamily Zone (R-5) is intended to permit dwellings, institutions, and limited commercial goods and
    services serving the surrounding neighborhood. The maximum density is 175 dwelling units per acre.
   Residential Mixed Use Zone (RMX) is intended to allow a mix of residential and limited commercial uses as
    a matter of right, and to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods while encouraging the
    development of neighborhood-oriented ground-floor retail and service uses. The maximum density is 60
    dwelling units per acre.
   Residential-Office Zone (RO) is intended to provide a medium-density multiple-family zone, generally
    located inside the Central City and in certain adjacent areas. The zone permits development of office
    and other commercial uses that are compatible with adjacent residential uses. The maximum density is
    36 dwelling units per acre
In addition to the above residential districts, the Zoning Ordinance allows residential uses in nonresidential
zones (Chapter 17.216). The following nonresidential zoning districts allow residential land uses, including a
variety of housing types such as single-family, duplex, and multifamily housing, subject to approval and
development standards as indicated in Table H 8-3. As stated previously, the 2013 Zoning Code update
allowed housing by right in most nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts.
   Office Business Mixed-Use Zones (OB, OB-2, OB-3) are intended to provide for mixed-use employment
    zones that permit business, office, institutional, or professional buildings; the sale of goods and services;
    and lodging and dwellings. OB is Office Business Low-Rise Mixed-Use Zone; OB-2 is the Office Business Mid-
    Rise Mixed-Use Zone; and OB-3 is Office Business High-Rise Mixed-Use Zone. Multifamily housing is
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H 8-13

                                                                                Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
    permitted by right at a maximum density of 36 dwelling units per acre in the OB zone, 60 units per acre
    in the OB-2 zone, and 100 units per acre in the OB-3 zone.
   Employment Center Zone (EC) is intended to provide a flexible zone for employment-generating uses in a
    pedestrian-friendly setting with ample open space. The EC zone also provides for a variety of
    supporting uses, including retail, residential (up to 25 percent of EC lands), and light industrial. The
    close proximity of supporting uses allows for pedestrian, bicycle, transit, and rideshare-connection
    opportunities, which collectively help reduce dependence on the automobile. Consequently, parking
    needs are reduced and shared parking opportunities increase.
   Limited Commercial Zone (C-1) is intended to provide for certain offices, retail stores, and commercial
    service establishments that are compatible with residential developments. This zone is intended to be
    applied to small lots that are surrounded by a residential neighborhood. Housing is permitted by right at
    a maximum density of 30 dwelling units per acre.
   General Commercial Zone (C-2) is intended to provide for the sale of goods; the performance of services,
    including repair facilities; office uses; dwellings; small wholesale stores or distributors; and limited
    processing and packaging. Housing is permitted by right at a maximum density range of 36-150 dwelling
    units per acre. The maximum density depends on the general plan designation.
   Central Business District Zone-Special Planning District (CBD or C-3), also known and referred to as the
    central business district (CBD), is intended to provide for the most intense residential, retail,
    commercial, and office developments in the city. Housing is permitted by right and there are no
    restrictions in density in the C-3 zone.
   Shopping Center Zone (SC) is intended to provide a wide range of goods and services to the community.
    However, general commercial uses that are incompatible with a retail shopping center are prohibited.
    Housing is allowed with a conditional use permit. The maximum density is 30 dwelling units per acre.
   Light Industrial Zone (M-1) is intended to provide for the manufacture or treatment of goods; however,
    the M-1 Zone also allows residential uses. Multi-unit dwellings in the Central City or less than ¼ mile
    from a light rail station are allowed with a conditional use permit. Emergency shelters of 24 or fewer
    beds are allowed by right.
   Heavy Industrial Zone (M-2) is intended to provide for the manufacture or treatment of goods; however,
    the M-1 Zone also allows residential uses. Multi-unit dwellings in the Central City or less than ¼ mile
    from a light rail station are allowed with a conditional use permit. Emergency shelters of 24 or fewer
    beds are allowed by right.
   Heavy Commercial Zone (C-4) is intended for warehousing, distribution activities, and commercial uses that
    have minimal undesirable impact upon nearby residential areas. Minimal light manufacturing and
    processing are permitted. Duplexes are allowed with a conditional use permit within ¼ mile from a light
    rail station, and multifamily housing is allowed with a conditional use permit in the Central City and/or
    within ¼ mile from a light rail station. The maximum density is 60 dwelling units per acre.
The City of Sacramento uses overlay zones that are districts encompassing one or more underlying zones.
These overlay zones establish additional regulatory incentives and development standards for residential
uses in commercial and mixed use zones. The following overlay zones allow residential land uses by right:
Page H 8-14   |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                          H-8
    Transit Overlay Zone (TO) allows a mix of moderate- to high-density residential and nonresidential uses,
     by right, to promote transit ridership within walking distance of an existing or proposed light rail transit
     station. The district is intended to promote coordinated and cohesive site planning and design that
     maximizes development that supports transit. This type of development allows for continuity of
     pedestrian-oriented streetscapes and activities throughout the district and encourages pedestrians,
     bicycles, and transit other than automobiles to be used to access employment, services, and residences.
     This overlay zone permits increased heights, densities, and intensities over the base zone for projects
     with a residential component, and encourages housing and mixed-use projects. The district also restricts
     certain uses that do not support transit ridership.
    Light Rail Station Ordinance and General Plan Amendment. The Light Rail Station General Plan Amendment
     adds policies that support the recommendations of the Transit for Livable Communities (TLC) project.
     The ordinance allows residential uses within one-quarter mile of light rail transit stations in C-4, M-1, M-
     1(s), M-2, and M-2(s) zones, subject to a conditional use permit.
Lastly, the City of Sacramento uses special planning districts (SPD) and planned unit developments (PUD)
to allow greater flexibility in design of proposed development projects and otherwise not possible through
strict application of zoning regulations. The following describes the purpose of SPDs and PUDs and how
they are established.
    Special Planning Districts (SPD) establish special processing procedures, flexible development standards, and
     incentives to regulate properties under multiple ownerships. An SPD is designated, adopted, amended, or
     removed in accordance with the provisions for rezoning. Only the City Planning and Design Commission
     and City Council may initiate the approval procedure and only as a result of a redevelopment, general, or
     community plan update or adoption. Each SPD is required to have its own design standards, development
     standards, list of permitted uses, and project review procedures. Most SPD projects are approved through
     staff level review to streamline the approval process.
    Planned Unit Developments (PUD) provide for greater flexibility in the design of integrated developments.
     The PUD regulations generally apply to large scale developments (over 100 acres) and encourage the
     design of well-planned facilities which offer a variety of housing or other land uses through creative and
     imaginative planning for various types of developments. One example of a PUD includes residential
     subdivision developments that include a variety of housing types and site plans, accessible open “green
     spaces,” common recreational areas, a community meeting place or recreational facility, and other features
     benefiting a viable and balanced community. Another example of a PUD includes mixed residential-
     business developments that combine apartments, convenience shopping facilities, motel-hotel
     combinations, offices, commercial recreation facilities, or other compatible land uses grouped in a well-
     designed and coordinated site development.
In 2007, the City Council approved development applications for the Railyards and Township 9
development projects. Both of these projects were former industrial sites close to the Central City that were
rezoned to high density, mixed use residential uses. The zones within these projects that permit residential
development are as follows:
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                            | Page H 8-15

                                                                                 Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
Township 9
   Residential Mixed Use Planned Unit Development Special Planning District (RMX-PUD-SPD) provides for both
    residential and commercial development. This district overlays both SPD and PUD requirements atop
    the RMX designation, which allows multifamily residential, office, and limited commercial uses.
    Maximum densities range from 80 dwelling units per acre to 150 dwelling units per acre, depending
    where the lot is located in the PUD.
Railyards
   Residential Commercial Mixed-Use (RCMU) provides for a wide range of residential and commercial uses,
    including retail, entertainment, and other uses, in order to facilitate the development of a 24-hour city.
    The emphasis of this designation is commercial with a residential component. Maximum density for the
    RCMU zone is 230 dwelling units per acre.
   Office Residential Mixed Use (ORMU) provides for office, residential, hospitality, and supporting retail uses
    in portions of the Railyards area immediately adjacent to the Central Business District. The emphasis for
    this designation is office and residential. Maximum density for the ORMU zone is 230 dwelling units per
    acre.
   Residential Mixed-Use (RMU) provides for an urban residential neighborhood with accompanying
    neighborhood-serving retail and restaurant uses. The emphasis for this designation is residential.
    Maximum density for the RMU zone is 310 dwelling units per acre.
Further details of the aforementioned land use designations may be found within the Railyards Specific Plan
and Township 9 PUD Guidelines.
Parking Standards
Parking requirements for residential uses are shown in Table H 8-5. Recognizing the impact of parking
requirements in achieving compact, urban infill development, the City does not require parking for homes
on small lots less than 3,200 square feet located in the Central City. No parking is required for any use in the
Central Business District. Parking requirements for multifamily housing developments range from 0.5
spaces per unit to 1.5 spaces per unit, depending on whether the project is located in an Urban, Traditional,
or Suburban Area. The City’s parking requirements are relatively low overall, both in infill and greenfield
areas, and do not in general represent a constraint to the development of housing or achievement of
permitted residential densities. Additionally parking requirements for affordable or senior housing are half
of the standard requirement.
Page H 8-16  |                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

        HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                                      H-8
Table H 8-5         Parking Standards for Residential Uses
                                     Central Business and Arts &
Land Use                                                                   Urban District      Traditional District  Suburban District
                                         Entertainment District
                                                                 1 space per dwelling unit,  1 space per             1 space per
                                                                 except on lots equal to or  dwelling unit,          dwelling unit
                                                                 less than 3,200 square feet except on lots
                                                                 in the Central City, where  equal to or less
Single-unit, duplex dwelling No minimum requirements             there is no minimum         than 3,200 square
                                                                 requirement                 feet in the Central
                                                                                             City, where there
                                                                                             is no minimum
                                                                                             requirement
                                                                 1 space per dwelling unit   1 space per             1 space per
Second residential unit            No minimum requirements
                                                                                             dwelling unit           dwelling unit
Multi-unit dwelling (3 units                                     0.5 space per dwelling unit 1 space per             1.5 spaces per
                                   No minimum requirements
or more)                                                                                     dwelling unit           dwelling unit
Fraternity or sorority house;                                    1 space per 3 occupants     1 space per 3           1 space per 3
                                   No minimum requirements
dormitory                                                                                    occupants               occupants
                                                                 1 space per 10 dwelling     1 space per 10          1 space per 10
                                                                 units, plus 1 space for     dwelling units,         dwelling units,
Residential hotel (SRO)            No minimum requirements
                                                                 manager                     plus 1 space for        plus 1 space for
                                                                                             manager                 manager
Source: City of Sacramento Zoning Code, 2013.
        Conclusions Regarding City Development Standards
        The City's development standards, such as parking, height, lot coverage, setbacks, and landscaping are fairly
        liberal and allow for the maximum densities to be achieved in each zoning district. Recent Zoning Code
        updates in 2013 have doubled the allowable densities in the R-4, R-5, and C-2 zones. Additionally, the new
        minimum parking requirements will allow more building square footage to be devoted to residential units as
        opposed to parking spaces.
        The City’s maximum building lot coverage ranges from 50 to 70 percent in residential zones (except in the
        RE, R-1, and R-2 zones), with no limits in commercial zones. Setback and yard requirements are modest in
        higher density residential zones and do not impede the achievement of maximum allowable densities. The
        2013 zoning code update removed the conditional use permit requirement for small-lot single family homes,
        row houses, condos, and other alternative housing types. These housing types are now all considered to be
        “dwelling units.” Many residential zones no longer have interior setback requirements to help facilitate this
        type of housing. Similarly, landscaping, which is required in front and side street setback areas, can be
        accommodated without reducing the permitted building lot coverage. Finally, the minimum lot area per
        dwelling unit is consistent with the maximum allowable residential density.
        In those zones that allow higher densities and building heights, the achievable density often has less to do
        with the City’s development standards than market conditions. To build to the maximum height and density
        allowed in these zones often requires more expensive construction techniques that may not be financially
        viable. For example, to build to the maximum density of 175 units per acre in the R-5 zone would require
        Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                | Page H 8-17

                                                                                           Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
steel-frame buildings of six or more stories, which may not be financially feasible under current market
conditions even with the City’s development standards.
The ability to achieve a particular density in the City of Sacramento does not seem to be an issue of concern
by the development community, particularly for affordable housing projects. Between 2003 and 2013 one
single density bonus was requested by affordable housing developers. Such a lack of demand for density
bonuses is further evidence that the City allows reasonable densities that are achievable under the City’s
development standards and sufficient to meet market demand and feasibility.
Density Bonuses
State law requires cities and counties to approve density bonuses for housing developments that contain
specified percentages of units affordable to very low- or low-income households or units restricted to
occupancy by seniors. Under state law (California Government Code, section 65915-65918), housing
developers may qualify for several types of density bonuses, up to 35 percent, based on the percentage
housing units in a development affordable to very low-income, low-income, moderate-income, or senior
households. Density bonus units must be restricted to occupancy by seniors or affordable to the targeted
income for at least 30 years. 1 Depending on the percentage of affordable units and the income level(s) to
which the units are affordable, cities and counties must also grant up to three “concessions” (i.e., additional
incentives) in addition to a density bonus. To comply with State law, the City’s density bonus requirements
were updated as part of the Zoning Code update in 2013.
Mixed-Income Housing Program
The City of Sacramento adopted the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance (Inclusionary Ordinance) in
October 2000, which requires that developments within new growth areas include at least 15 percent of
their housing units at prices affordable to low- and very low-income households. An inclusionary housing
requirement has the potential to constrain housing production by adding to the cost of building housing if
developers must provide the required affordable housing at less than cost, donate land, and/or pay in-lieu
fees. In the next planning period, the City intends to apply the Ordinance citywide in a manner that is
sensitive to the challenges and costs of infill development, as well as responsive to changes in the housing
market.
Building Codes and Code Enforcement
Building codes regulate the construction of dwellings and apply to plumbing, electrical, and mechanical
systems. The purpose of building codes and their enforcements is to protect the public from unsafe
conditions associated with faulty construction. The City of Sacramento enforces State building code
standards (Title 24) for all structures subject to the code, including the construction and rehabilitation of
housing.
Based on the minor modifications of the State building code and efforts to use code enforcement as a tool
to catch problems before they require more extensive repairs or demolition, building code and code
enforcement practices and regulations by the City of Sacramento are not considered to represent a
1 Seniors include persons aged 62 or older, or 55 and older when living in a senior citizen housing development, as defined in
  section 51.3 of the California Civil Code.
Page H 8-18   |                                                                                    Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                         H-8
constraint to the provision of housing or affordable housing in the city. Building code modifications and
City code enforcement practices are described below.
State law offers local government the option of amending the State standards based on geographical,
topological, or climate considerations. Further, State housing law provides that local building departments
can authorize the use of materials and construction methods other than those specified in the uniform code
if the proposed design is found to be satisfactory and the materials or methods are at least equivalent to that
prescribed by the building codes. The City of Sacramento adds three supplemental requirements to the State
building code standards: (1) self-illuminated house address numbers, (2) four-inch slab for all non-
engineered foundations, and (3) Class B shake and shingles for all residential structures. These amendments
to the uniform codes do not add significantly to the cost of residential development.
Building code standards are upheld through code enforcement. City enforcement of the building code to
remove hazardous and dangerous buildings has resulted in the demolition of some affordable housing.
However, the City’s Rental Housing Inspection Program has resulted in a high compliance rate for needed
repairs. The expanded use of this program has helped to address building condition issues before they
progress to conditions requiring demolition or substantial rehabilitation, and to promote the exploration of
rehabilitation opportunities before demolition.
Infrastructure Requirements
The Development Engineering and Finance Division implements on- and off-site improvement
requirements, including standards for street construction, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and, in some instances,
parking and/or bicycle lanes. Residential development may also necessitate constructing water, sewer, and
drainage improvements. All improvements are generally completed as conditions of tentative map approval
and are developer financed. Complying with certain infrastructure improvements may be perceived as a
constraint on the provision of housing for all income levels.
For infill projects, the City code requires the repair of defective sidewalks, minimum driveway lengths, and
maneuvering areas that can be difficult to build on smaller infill sites. The code also requires dedication and
improvement of full-street or alley frontages, although exceptions have been granted for existing infill lots
used exclusively for residential purposes. Furthermore, the Planning and Design Commission may approve
variances from City standards based on hardship considerations.
The Development Engineering and Finance Division adopted narrow local street standards that facilitate
pedestrian activity, parking, landscaping, and street trees, but which may also help to facilitate housing
development. For instance, residential infrastructure costs could be measurably reduced by reducing
requirements for street widths, curbs, gutters, and sidewalk widths, and by requiring sidewalks on only one
side of the street. A reduction in street widths and sidewalks could result in an increase in the number of
units that could be accommodated on any given parcel of land. This however, must be balanced with fire
safety standards to provide adequate emergency access for emergency vehicles. Nonetheless, increased
flexibility in street standards would allow greater land area and increased density, which would result in a
per-lot cost reduction. This savings could ultimately be reflected in the price of housing to the residential
consumer.
The City has become increasingly flexible in street standards for infill development. The City also allows a
41-foot right-of-way for local streets in infill areas. This is in contrast to the standard 53-foot right-of-way
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 8-19

                                                                                 Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
that has separated sidewalks with tree planters, which is required in all greenfield developments (non-infill
sites).
Although infrastructure requirements represent a cost to developing housing, the City does not believe its
improvement standards are unreasonable or represent a significant constraint. The City has reduced
infrastructure requirements to permit infill residential development and required street widths have been
reduced, helping to cut infrastructure costs. A sewer and sanitation waiver/deferral program is also used to
reduce the constraining effects of high initial infrastructure costs on affordable housing development.
Development Impact Fees
The provision of public facilities and services for new development in Sacramento is funded in part by taxes
and fees. These taxes and fees are levied against development projects in proportion to the expected fiscal
impact on the community. Development impact fees are determined as a proportional share of cost to fund
capital improvements (such as roads, schools, and utilities) needed to serve the development project.
The City of Sacramento’s impact fees typically fall at the low end of the range of charges by other
jurisdictions in the region. Economic Planning Systems (EPS) prepared a fee comparison in April 2007,
which includes several jurisdictions within the Sacramento Region. These comparisons should be used with
caution because the infrastructure items paid by fees and special taxes versus private capital may be different
for the various projects. These costs are estimates to be used only for comparison purposes.
As of January 2007, the fees charged by the cities and other agencies for a hypothetical single-family home
ranged from a low of $42,617 in Dixon to $60,976 in the City of Sacramento’s Natomas Basin and to a high
of $89,002 in the Springlake area of Woodland. In February 2007, fees for multifamily development ranged
from a low of $18,043 in Roseville to $26,918 in the City’s Natomas Basin to a high of $55,823 in Fairfield.
Tables H 8-6 and 8-7 provide typical fee breakdowns for the City of Sacramento for single-family and
multifamily projects. These totals include both citywide fees and plan area fees, which are often imposed on
local development areas in order to fund local needs.
Page H 8-20  |                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                              H-8
 Table H 8-6         Typical Single Family Fees Per Unit
                                                                                                   Single Family
                                                                    Single Family Infill Unit
 Type of Fee                                                                                       New Growth
                                                                    (16-unit development)
                                                                                              (103-unit development)
 Processing Fees and Taxes
 Admin Fee                                                                        $140.00                   $140.00
 Building Permit                                                                $2,197.24                 $2,197.24
 City Business Operations Tax                                                     $105.96                   $105.96
 Fire Department Inspection                                                       $114.00                   $114.00
 Fire Department Plan Review                                                      $296.00                   $296.00
 General Plan Maintenance                                                         $529.82                   $529.82
 Green Building                                                                     $10.60                    $10.60
 Neighborhood Parks Maintenance District Annexation                               $123.44                    $ 61.41
 North Natomas Development Fees (Transit Fee, Public Facilities
                                                                            Not Required                    $16,295
 Fee, Land Acquisition Fee, Regional Park Fee, Admin Fee)
 Plan Review Fee                                                                  $461.42                   $461.42
 Public Works (Development Engineering) Review                                    $577.50                      $2.91
 Residential Construction Tax                                                     $385.00                   $385.00
 Residential Construction Water Use Fee                                             $53.55                    $53.55
 Strong Motion                                                                      $26.49                    $26.49
 Technology                                                                       $212.69                   $212.69
 Utilities Review                                                                 $122.50                     $90.39
 Utilities – Erosion and Sediment Control                                       $1,620.00                     $84.56
 City Impact Fees
 Construction Excise Tax                                                  $2,119.28                       $2,119.28
 Downtown/Railyards/Richards Transportation Impact Fee                 Not Required                   Not Required
 Park Development Impact (PIF)                                            $5,516.00                       $5,516.00
                                                                                               Land Dedication by
 Quimby Fee                                                                     $1,877.40        Master Developer
 Sewer – Combined Sewer Development                                               $148.53             Not Required
 Water Development                                                              $2,622.48                 $2,622.48
 Water Meter                                                                      $457.00                   $457.00
 Outside Agency Impact Fees
 Regional Sanitation Fee (SRCSD)                                                $2,800.00                 $9,950.00
 Sacramento Transportation Authority (STA) Fee                                  $1,093.44                 $1,093.44
 SAFCA Development Impact Fee (Flood Control)                                   $4,004.00                 $4,004.00
 School Fees                                                                    $6,534.00                 $6,534.00
 Total Fees                                                                 $544.133.56              $5,482,521.26
 Total Fees Per Unit                                                    $34,008.35                       $53,223.88
 Source: City of Sacramento Community Development Department, 2013.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                               | Page H 8-21

                                                                                           Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
       Table H 8-7         Typical Multifamily Fees Per Unit (150-unit Project)
       Type of Fee                                                        Multifamily Infill Multifamily New Growth
       Processing Fees and Taxes
       Admin Fee                                                                  $140.00                   $140.00
       Building Permit                                                      $130,623.73                $125,993.15
       City Business Operations Tax                                             $5,000.00                 $5,000.00
       Fire Department Inspection                                               $7,609.50                 $8,850.20
       Fire Department Plan Review                                              $2,100.00                 $5,600.00
       General Plan Maintenance                                               $20,000.00                 $47,002.20
       Green Building                                                             $976.13                   $940.04
       Landscape Review                                                            $50.00                    $50.00
       Neighborhood Parks Maintenance District Annexation                       $7,500.00                 $7,500.00
       Plan Review Fee                                                      $106,863.52                $103,074.62
       Public Works (Development Engineering) Review                            $3,080.00                 $1,400.00
       Residential Construction Tax                                           $47,250.00                 $47,250.00
       Sign Permit                                                              $1,806.00                 $1,986.00
       Strong Motion                                                            $2,440.32                 $4,935.23
       Technology                                                             $18,998.98                 $18,325.42
       Utilities Review                                                         $2,100.00                 $1,400.00
       Utilities – Erosion and Sediment Control                                 $1,800.00                 $1,800.00
       City Impact Fees
       Construction Excise Tax                                              $195,225.76                $188,008.80
       Downtown/Railyards/Richards Transportation Impact Fee                $135,627.00               Not Required
       Park Development Impact (PIF)                                        $227,250.00                $487,500.00
       Sewer – Combined Sewer Development                                   $263,811.50                   $1,331.99
       Water Development                                                      $76,074.60                 $76,074.60
       Water Meter                                                              $3,258.00                 $3,258.00
       Water Supply Test                                                          $774.00                   $774.00
       Outside Agency Impact Fees
       Regional Sanitation Fee (SRCSD)                                      $315,000.00                $315,000.00
       Sacramento Transportation Authority (STA) Fee                        $114,750.00                $114,750.00
       SAFCA Development Impact Fee (Flood Control)                           $61,149.00               $260,400.00
       School Fees                                                          $448,800.00              $1,083,450.00
       Total Fees                                                         $2,200,058.04              $2,910,880.25
       Total Fees Per Unit                                                    $14,667.05                 $19,411.96
       Source: City of Sacramento Community Development Department, 2013.
Page H 8-22   |                                                                                    Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                       H-8
The City’s development fees represent a significant cost, especially as a proportion of the total development
cost of affordable housing. Because subsidized affordable housing is restricted in the rent or sales price that
can be charged, development fees impact the cost of providing that affordable housing more than market
housing, which can seek to recoup excessive costs through price increases to the homebuyer or renter.
Higher fees add to development cost, requiring additional subsidies or other funding for an affordable
project. For non-subsidized projects designed to provide “entry level” housing, fees can also represent a
significant proportion of the total cost of the unit.
However, the City’s fees remain relatively low compared to other jurisdictions in the region. In addition, the
City has programs in place that have the potential to reduce or waive fees where necessary to help provide
affordable housing. The Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA) administers a fee waiver
and deferral program for affordable housing projects throughout Sacramento County that allows for waivers
and deferrals of regional sewer and sanitation fees. Additionally the City has a program in the Housing
Element to establish a fee deferral program for affordable housing. The City’s development fees are
therefore not considered to represent a constraint on housing production.
Permit Processing
The City of Sacramento meets State-required timelines for the approval of development permits, as shown
in Table H 8-8. The time required for development approval is not generally a constraint or substantial cost
to housing developers. An overly lengthy review process, however, could adversely affect an affordable
housing project if the time required to obtain approval affects the applicant’s ability to access funding for
the project (e.g., government loans, low-income housing tax credits, mortgage revenue bonds). For this
reason, expedited permit review can provide an additional level of certainty that the amount of time required
for project approval will not adversely affect the developer’s ability to access funding. Review of the City’s
permit processing and requirements for obtaining use permits does not indicate any significant impediments
to cost or time required for approval of residential development.
                     Table H 8-8         Permit Processing
                                                                                Estimated
                     Application Type                                         Approval Time
                     Conditional use permit (zoning administrator)           2 months
                     Site plan and design review (director level)            3 months
                     Conditional use permit/tentative map (Planning and      5 months
                     Design Commission)
                     Rezone/planned unit development                         8 months
                     Community plan amendment/General Plan amendment         8 months
                     Environmental impact report                             10 months
                     Source: City of Sacramento, 2013.
Further descriptions of permits and their processing procedures are provided in the following subsections.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H 8-23

                                                                                 Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
Design Review and Historic Preservation
The City of Sacramento requires design review according to the standards of one of 15 districts, or of the
citywide design standards in areas that do not fall within the boundaries of the districts. In addition, historic
districts have been designated, primarily in the Central City and Oak Park areas. These districts include
restrictions, including requirements for certificates of appropriateness, which have the potential to limit new
development.
Design review occurs concurrently with other permit processing, and does not typically add to overall
processing times, although design review can add expense to a project. The City’s design standards are
comprehensive and well documented, and the process is predictable and standardized. Since project design
is a significant source of community opposition to projects, the City’s standardized design review can
neutralize this opposition, streamlining project approval.
With the 2013 Zoning Code updates, design review will be applied citywide through a new entitlement
called Site Plan and Design Review. Prior to the code update, a development project would be subject to
design review, preservation review, plan review, design checklists, and alternative-design standards,
depending on where the project was located. Now, a single entitlement will be used for compliance with the
City’s development standards and design guidelines making the development review process more
predictable. Site Plan and Design Review will also allow staff level approval for projects less than 150
dwelling units, less than 125,000 square feet, or less than 60 feet in height. Projects that exceed any of those
three criteria will be reviewed by the Planning and Design Commission.
Site Plan and Design Review will ensure that a proposed development is consistent with the General Plan
and any applicable community or specific plans. In addition, this review ensures that utilities and
infrastructure are sufficient to support the proposed development and are compatible with City standards
and that the design of the proposed development is compatible with surrounding development. Use
compatibility is not considered in Site Plan and Design Review. Compatibility is determined using design
guidelines and General Plan consistency. Conditional use permits, described below, consider the
appropriateness of a use for a specific area.
Additionally, deviations from development standards would be considered through Site Plan and Design
Review as opposed to variances. In such a case the entitlement would be heard at the director or
commission level, depending on the severity of the deviation. For example, a building could exceed the
maximum height of the zone up to 50 percent with a director-level hearing. Otherwise, the project would
have to be heard by the commission if additional height was desired. When a project is not in substantial
compliance with design guidelines it is heard at the director-level.
Conditional Use Permit Process
The conditional use permit (CUP) process is described in the City’s Zoning Ordinance under Title 17. A
CUP is a zoning instrument used primarily to review the location, site development, or conduct of certain
land uses. These are uses that generally have a distinct impact on the area in which they are located, or are
capable of creating special problems for bordering properties unless given special attention. A CUP may be
granted at the discretion of the zoning administrator, Planning and Design Commission or City Council and
is not the automatic right of any applicant.
Page H 8-24   |                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                        H-8
CUPs are only required for single-family or multifamily units in the Shopping Center, Heavy Commercial,
and Industrial Zones. CUPs are no longer required for alternative ownership units (e.g., townhouses, patio
homes). These housing types are now considered “dwellings.” CUPs are required for temporary and
permanent emergency shelters, but only when defined development standards (1,000 foot separation
between shelters, 500 foot separation from churches, schools, parks, and single-family areas, location within
1,000 feet of a transit line or shuttle) are not met.
Environmental Review Process
The City’s Environmental Planning Services Division (EPS) is responsible for major analyses required by
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
EPS prepares and/or oversees the preparation of all environmental documents, technical studies, and
associated permit applications required in compliance with CEQA and NEPA before the City approves the
project. Discussion related to environmental impact review focuses on CEQA because the majority of
residential development projects are required to meet requirements of CEQA and do not involve any
Federal related component that would require the project to also comply with NEPA.
The City requirement for conducting environmental impact review in compliance with CEQA is applicable
to all development projects and the City does not require any procedures beyond what is required by
CEQA. There is no evidence that the requirement for conducting environmental impact review for projects
in the City of Sacramento presents a constraint to the production of housing in Sacramento.
Provision for a Variety of Housing Types
The City of Sacramento encourages and facilitates the development of a variety of housing types, including
emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive housing, housing for agricultural employees and single-
room-occupancy (SRO). The following analysis explains how the City facilitates these housing types.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities and Supportive Service Needs
Persons with special needs or disabilities have a number of housing needs related to accessibility of dwelling
units, access to transportation, employment and commercial services, and alternative living arrangements
that include on-site or nearby supportive living services. The City ensures that new housing developments
comply with California building standards (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), including
handicapped accessibility requirements.
The City of Sacramento Zoning Ordinance allows specialized housing use types for persons with disabilities.
The City permits care facilities, home occupations, residential hotels, and second residential units as types of
residences that could benefit persons with disabilities in residential and some nonresidential zoning districts
(see Tables H 8-3 and 8-4).
Group homes (called “family care facilities” in the City code) with six or fewer residents are permitted by
right in residential and commercial districts (including districts R-E, R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3,
R-3A, R-4, R-5, R-0, C-1, C-2, and C-3). “Family care facility” is defined as a facility that provides primarily
nonmedical resident services to six or fewer individuals in need of personal assistance for daily activities.
Family care facilities require a conditional use permit in RMX zone.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 8-25

                                                                                 Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
Group homes with more than six residents (defined by the City code as “residential care facilities”) are
permitted in all residential zones R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4, and R-5 with a
conditional use permit. (The conditional use permit process is described above.)
Reasonable Accommodations
The City of Sacramento has a program to ensure that reasonable accommodations are made for persons
with disabilities. The process has been established to provide people with disabilities a way to ensure that
their needs are met by the City’s zoning, building, and permitting process. One average, one or two
applications are submitted each year and they have provided much needed flexibility in accommodating the
homeowners’ access needs.
ADA Retrofit
The City adheres to the standards set forth by Chapter 11 of the California Building Code regarding
accessibility. The City does not check plans for compliance with ADA guidelines, but instead the City
checks plans for compliance with 2001 California Building Code, Chapter 11 (Accessibility) Compliance.
If someone wants to or has to retrofit residential units to make them accessible, the owner and the owner’s
architect are responsible for complying with the building code and making the appropriate modifications.
The City issues building permits and inspects the modifications based on the requirements set forth by the
California Building Code, Chapter 11 (Accessibility) Compliance. The owner and architect are liable for
whether or not his or her residential building is accessible or compliant with ADA guidelines.
Emergency Shelter and Transitional/Supportive Housing
Emergency homeless shelters are defined as temporary residential shelters in the City code. Temporary
residential shelters housing fewer than 24 individuals and meeting certain location requirements and
development standards are permitted by right in the C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-1(S), M-2, M-2(S) zones (or in
the zones R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4, and R-5 with a Planning and Design
Commission conditional use permit). Temporary residential shelters that house more than 24 individuals are
allowed in the same zones, but always require a conditional use permit. Conditional use permits for
temporary residential shelters housing more than 24 individuals require staff-level review with a 100 foot
noticing requirement. Location requirements for temporary residential shelters specify a 1,000 foot
separation between temporary residential shelters, although multiple programs are permitted on a single
parcel.
Supportive and transitional housing are now defined in the Zoning Code as a dwelling and subject only to
those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
Sacramento does not limit the number of occupants in a dwelling beyond the number allowed by the
Uniform Housing Code. Occupancy standards in the Zoning Code refer to families as individuals living as a
single housekeeping unit. Rooming and boarding houses are distinguished from family care facilities,
residential care facilities, and residential hotels in the Zoning Code.
The City’s regulations provide for group homes, homeless shelters, transitional housing, and housing with
supportive services by right or with limited conditional use permit requirements. Overall these regulations
do not present a constraint to their development.
Page H 8-26   |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Constraints
                                                                                                         H-8
Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing
Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) facilities, defined as residential hotels in the City code, are permitted in the
R-4, R-4A, R-5, RMX, R0, OB, OB-2, OB-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-1(S), M-2, and M-2(S) zones with a
conditional use permit. The purpose of the conditional use permit is to ensure compliance with definitional
and development standards for SRO units contained in Title 17 of the City code. These standards include:
   A minimum of 220 square feet of floor area plus an additional 100 square feet of floor area for each
    occupant of an SRO unit in excess of two;
   A separate closet for each SRO unit;
   A kitchen sink, cooking appliance, refrigeration facilities, and light and ventilation conforming to City
    code requirement;
   A separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower; and
   One parking space per 10 units plus one space for the building manager.
The City considers these standards the minimum necessary to ensure the health and safety of occupants and
does not believe these standards create unreasonable constraints to the production of SRO-type housing.
In fact, the City, in partnership with SHRA, has a proactive strategy to encourage the development of SRO
units. On September 26, 2006, the City Council adopted a SRO Preservation/Replacement Action Plan and
committed $15 million to the preservation of existing SRO units and the construction of new SRO units.
During the last planning period the following SRO projects were constructed:
   Hotel Berry, 103 units
   YWCA, 32 units
   Budget Inn/Boulevard Court, 75 units
   7th and H, 150 units
As part of the strategy, SRO units will be developed as efficiency units. These units are similar to studio
apartments and offer greater privacy to residents, private bathrooms, and individual cooking facilities.
Housing for Agricultural Workers
As noted in Chapter H-3, farmworkers represent a small fraction of the City’s labor force. Although little
agricultural activity remains within the Sacramento City limits, the region includes significant agricultural
activity that attracts farmworkers and their families. The most likely alternative housing need would be for
seasonal agricultural workers who reside in the Sacramento region temporarily during those times of year
when crop harvesting and processing occur. Such workers need access to group housing or temporary (non-
emergency) shelter. The City permits employee housing by right in agricultural zones according to the
requirements of the Employee Housing Act (sections 17000 – 170652.5 of the California Health and Safety
Code).
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                          | Page H 8-27

                                                                                    Chapter Eight: CONSTRAINTS
Second Units
Second units are attached or detached dwelling units for one or more persons located on the same lot as the
main house (i.e., primary residence). A second unit is permitted by right in all residential zones subject to
compliance with development and design standards. Second units are permitted on all lots containing a
permanent single-family dwelling. The following development standards apply to second units (for full
details see Sacramento Municipal Code, Title 17):
   Only one second unit is allowed per lot.
   The area of a detached second unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. The area of an attached second
    unit shall not exceed 30 percent of the floor area of the primary residence.
   At least one off-street parking space must be provided. Tandem parking on a driveway is permitted
   Design of the second unit must be compatible with the primary residence
Manufactured Homes and Mobile Home Parks
State law requires that cities and counties allow the placement of manufactured homes (also referred to as
factory-built homes and modular homes) meeting Federal construction standards and manufactured home
subdivisions in single-family neighborhoods. 2 Government Code Sections 65852.3 through 65852.5 require
that manufactured homes be permitted in single-family districts subject to the same land use regulations as
conventional homes. Government Code Section 65852.7 requires that cities and counties allow mobile
home parks (including condominium and cooperative parks) in all residential zones.
In keeping with State law, the City’s Zoning Code allows manufactured homes on permanent foundations in
the same residential zones as dwellings. The code defines manufactured homes as a dwelling and they are
subject to the same development standards.
Sacramento allows mobile home parks in nearly all residential and many nonresidential zoning districts,
subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the planning and design commission. In addition, the
Zoning Ordinance currently regulates the development and maintenance of mobile home parks. The
regulations restrict mobile home parks to a minimum five-acre site and a maximum density of 10 mobile
home spaces per acre. The City’s standards for mobile home parks do not pose constraints to the placement
or development of these housing types.
2 The National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (also referred to as the Manufactured
  Home Act of 1974).
Page H 8-28  |                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                         H-9
HOUSING
Sustainable, Stable, and Integrated
Communities
Sustainable development is not only environmentally sustainable but also socially and economically stable.
Housing is an integral component of sustainable development and the new policies and programs of the
2013-2021 Housing Element will compliment larger efforts in other elements of the General Plan.
Stable neighborhoods are envisioned to include a variety of housing types and densities, complimenting
non-residential uses throughout the city. Measures of stability vary for greenfield and infill areas, but both
should include housing for all economic groups, a balance between homeownership and rental, accessible
public transit, access to jobs, and basic retail services.
Integration of neighborhoods and communities throughout the city contemplates a vibrant and diverse
population. Housing, along with other key components in the built environment, plays an important role in
the extent of integration one finds in neighborhoods and throughout the larger community.
GOAL H-1.1
Sustainable Communities. Develop and rehabilitate housing and neighborhoods to be environmentally
sustainable.
Policies
H-1.1.1          Sustainable Housing Practices. The City shall promote sustainable housing practices that
                 incorporate a “whole system” approach to siting, designing and constructing housing that is
                 integrated into the building site, consume less energy, water, and other resources, and are
                 healthier, safer, more comfortable, and durable. (RDR)
GOAL H-1.2
Housing Diversity. Provide a variety of quality housing types to encourage neighborhood stability.
H-1.2.1          Variety of Housing. The City shall encourage the development and revitalization of
                 neighborhoods that include a variety of housing tenure, size and types, such as second units,
                 carriage homes, lofts, live-work spaces, cottages, and manufactured/modular housing.
                 (RDR)
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                         | Page H 9-1

                                                       Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
H-1.2.2       Compatibility with Single Family Neighborhoods. The City shall encourage a variety of
              housing types and sizes to diversify, yet maintain compatibility with, single-family
              neighborhoods. (RDR)
H-1.2.3       Proper Management and Maintenance. The City shall encourage property management
              and maintenance of residential development through the development review process to
              foster public safety and reduce crime. (RDR)
H-1.2.4       Mix of Uses. The City shall actively support and encourage mixed-use retail, employment,
              and residential development around existing and future transit stations, centers and
              corridors. (RDR)
H-1.2.5       Neighborhood Input on Development. The City shall continue to work with
              neighborhood associations and residents through the planning and delivery of residential
              development to ensure that neighborhoods are safe, decent, and pleasant places to live and
              work. (RDR)
H-1.2.6       Mortgage Default and Foreclosures. The City shall support efforts to alleviate the
              individual and community problems associated with mortgage default and foreclosures.
              (SO/RDR)
H-1.2.7       Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design. The City shall continue to include
              the Police Department in the review of development projects to adequately address crime
              and safety, and to promote the implementation of Crime Prevention through Environmental
              Design (CPTED) strategies that include proper siting, landscaping and housing design.
              (RDR/IGC)
H-1.2.8       Housing Choice Vouchers. The City shall continue to educate and market the Housing
              Choice Vouchers program to landlords to provide affordable housing opportunities.
              (SO/PI)
H-1.2.9       Capital Area Development Authority. The City shall continue to work with Capital Area
              Development Authority (CADA) and the State of California, a major employer in
              Sacramento, to support the production and preservation of affordable and workforce
              housing, especially in and around downtown. (IGC)
GOAL H-1.3
Balanced Communities. Promote racial, economic, and demographic integration in new and existing
neighborhoods
Policies
H-1.3.1       Social Equity. The City shall encourage economic and racial integration, fair housing
              opportunity, and the elimination of discrimination. (PI)
H-1.3.2       Economic Integration. The City shall consider the economic integration of neighborhoods
              when financing new multifamily affordable housing projects. (FB)
Page H 9-2 |                                                                     Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                       H-9
H-1.3.3        Fair Housing. The City shall support fair housing education programs offered by local
               organizations such as the Apartment Owner’s Association and the Board of Realtors. (JP)
H-1.3.4        A Range of Housing Opportunities. The City shall encourage a range of housing
               opportunities for all segments of the community. (RDR)
H-1.3.5        Housing Type Distribution. The City shall promote an equitable distribution of housing
               types for all income groups throughout the city and promote mixed income neighborhoods
               rather than creating concentrations of below-market-rate housing in certain areas. (RDR)
H-1.3.6        Asset Building Programs. The City shall support asset building programs, including those
               administered by the Housing Authority, for lower income residents especially in City or
               SHRA funded multifamily developments. (IGC)
H-1.3.7        Responsible Banking Practices. To help reduce predatory and subprime lending practices
               in Sacramento, the City shall require partner banks and lending institutions to invest in the
               community in a responsible manner. (FB)
Production
The Housing Element must demonstrate sufficient land with adequate zoning and infrastructure to meet the
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). The RHNA reflects anticipated household growth in the
region and the “share” of that growth expected in each jurisdiction by income level.
Construction of housing units is not mandated in the Housing Element; however, historically the City has
been able to meet the production goals of its RHNA primarily through new development in greenfield areas
when market production was strong. Affordable housing development in these areas worked in concert with
market rate development through inclusionary policies.
During the past Housing Element planning period (2008-2013), the Great Recession which resulted in a
steep drop in home prices and low rent levels coupled with the building moratorium for the Natomas area
led to a dramatic decline in new housing production in Sacramento. The test for the future is addressing
market issues and current development constraints as the market focus shifts to infill development where
production is more restricted, expensive and complex. Furthermore, the loss of redevelopment funding,
which was one of the City’s primary tools for developing affordable housing in infill areas, no longer exists.
Sacramento’s challenge is how to encourage infill development and affordable housing in a more complex
and uncertain funding environment.
GOAL H-2.1
Adequate Sites. Provide adequate housing sites and opportunities for all households.
Policies
H-2.1.1        Adequate Supply of Land. The City shall maintain an adequate supply of appropriately
               zoned land with public services to accommodate the projected housing needs in accordance
               with the General Plan. (RDR/SO)
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                        | Page H 9-3

                                                        Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
H-2.1.2      Affordable Housing Throughout the Region. The City shall work with the Sacramento
             Area Council of Governments (SACOG) and other regional entities to develop a regional
             approach that facilitates the equitable distribution of affordable housing throughout the
             region. (IGC)
H-2.1.3      Housing Element Annual Report. The City shall monitor and annually report on
             implementation of Housing Element objectives. (PSR)
H-2.1.4      Pre-development Loans. The City shall continue to provide pre-development loans to
             non-profit organizations for affordable housing developments under the Sacramento
             Housing and Redevelopment Agency’s (SHRA) Multifamily Lending Guidelines. (FB)
GOAL H-2.2
Development. Assist in creating housing to meet current and future needs.
Policies
H-2.2.1      Quality Infill Development. The City shall promote quality residential infill development
             by maintaining and implementing flexible development standards. (RDR)
H-2.2.2      Financial Tools to Diversify Residential Infill Development. To the extent resources are
             available, the City shall use financial tools to diversify market developments with affordable
             units, especially in infill areas. (FB)
H-2.2.3      Offsetting Development Costs for Affordable Housing. The City shall defer fees to
             Certificate of Occupancy (COO) to help offset development costs for affordable housing
             and will offer other financial incentives including, but not limited to, water development fee
             waivers and sewer credits. (FB/SO)
H-2.2.4      Funding for Affordable Housing. The City shall pursue and maximize the use of all
             appropriate state, federal, local and private funding for the development, preservation, and
             rehabilitation of housing affordable for extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-
             income households, while maintaining economic competitiveness in the region. (FB)
H-2.2.5      Review and Reduce Fees for Affordable Housing. The City shall work with affordable
             housing developers as well as other agencies and districts to review and reduce applicable
             processing and development impact fees for very low- and low-income housing units. (SO)
H-2.2.6      Update the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance. The City shall revise its Mixed-Income
             Housing Ordinance to promote affordable housing citywide and to require developers to
             contribute towards production of housing affordable to lower- and moderate-income
             households. (RDR)
H-2.2.7      Suburban Infill and Secondary Units. The City shall continue to support efforts to
             provide more varied housing opportunities in existing suburban neighborhoods through
             infill and intensification on existing available sites, by allowing secondary units on single-
             family lots, and allowing for additional development on excessively large lots. (RDR)
Page H 9-4 |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                       H-9
GOAL H-2.3
Constraints. Remove constraints to the development housing.
Policies
H-2.3.1        Avoiding Unnecessary Costs to Housing. The City shall ensure that its policies,
               regulations, and procedures do not add unnecessary costs to housing and do not act as an
               obstacle to new housing development. (RDR)
H-2.3.2        Streamlined Application and Building Process. The City shall continue to facilitate
               interdepartmental review of development applications, encourage pre-application meetings
               with planning and building staff, and streamline the overall planning application and building
               process for all development types. (RDR)
H-2.3.3        Early Notification and Consultation with Neighborhood Associations. The City shall
               provide for early notification and consultation with appropriate neighborhood organizations
               to facilitate resolution of land use issues that hinder new housing development. (RDR)
H-2.3.4        Requiring Adequate Flood Protection. The City shall continue to require adequate flood
               protection when approving new residential development. (RDR)
H-2.3.5        Clear Development Standards and Approval Procedures. The City shall maintain and
               administer clear development standards, and approval procedures for a variety of housing
               types, including, but not limited to, multifamily housing and emergency shelters. (RDR)
H-2.3.6        New Sources of Infrastructure Financing. The City shall continue to seek new sources of
               financing for necessary infrastructure improvements for new development to facilitate new
               housing development. (FB)
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                        | Page H 9-5
                                                          Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Extremely Low-Income and Special
Needs
Creating housing opportunities for extremely low-income (ELI) and special needs households, especially
when compared to production-driven affordable housing, requires a greater effort, higher level of
investment, consistent political support, and greater financing innovation. While the housing needs and
strategies for each of these groups are not identical, a greater City role that drives development and
investment is envisioned to serve each group. The City has already demonstrated its high level of
commitment in adopting the Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Strategy, Ten-Year Plan to End Chronic
Homelessness, Preservation Ordinance, and its approval of the public housing asset repositioning strategy.
GOAL H-3.1
Extremely Low-Income. Provide a variety of housing options for extremely low-income (ELI)
households.
Policy
H-3.1.1         Promote Extremely Low Income Housing. The City shall promote the siting,
                production, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing for ELI households, including non-
                traditional housing types. (RDR)
GOAL H-3.2
Special Needs. Provide housing choices appropriate for “special needs” populations, including homeless,
youth, female-headed households, seniors, and persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
Policies
H-3.2.1         Encourage Senior Housing. The City shall encourage the development, rehabilitation, and
                preservation of senior housing, particularly in neighborhoods that are accessible to public
                transit, commercial services, and health and community facilities. (RDR)
H-3.2.2         Community Based Non-profit Organizations. The City shall continue to work with
                community-based non-profit organizations that develop affordable housing and provide
                supportive services for special needs populations. (JP/FB)
H-3.2.3         Ten-Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness and the Continuum of Care. The City
                shall support the efforts of Sacramento Steps Forward to implement and update the
                Sacramento City and County Ten-Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness and the
                Continuum of Care to meet the needs of homeless families and individuals. (JP/SO/FB)
H-3.2.4         Public and Private Social Service Agencies. The City shall cooperate with public and
                private social service agencies to site facilities that address the human service needs of the
                City’s special needs populations. (JP/IGC)
Page H 9-6  |                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                           H-9
H-3.2.5          Emergency Shelter Facilities. The City shall continue to provide assistance to emergency
                 shelter facilities for the homeless population, including alcohol and drug recovery programs.
                 (JP/IGC)
H-3.2.6          Information and Referral Services. The City shall continue to provide information and
                 referral services for affordable housing opportunities through resources such as the
                 Community Services Planning Council’s beehive and “2-1-1” information line, and Self Help
                 Housing’s referral program. (PI)
H-3.2.7          Dispute Resolution for Tenant and Neighborhood Conflicts. The City shall continue to
                 provide dispute resolution services for tenant and neighborhood conflicts including ongoing
                 referrals to the McGeorge School of Law Mediation Center. (SO)
H-3.2.8          Permanent Supportive Housing. The City shall continue to provide funding and other
                 resources for permanent supportive housing. (FB)
H-3.2.9          Special Needs Housing Prioritized. The City shall prioritize development and
                 acquisition/rehabilitation projects designed and programmed to serve special needs tenants
                 such as chronically homeless individuals or families for available local affordable housing
                 financing as set forth in the City’s Multifamily Lending and Mortgage Revenue Bond
                 Policies. Projects that augment or safeguard the City’s inventory of single room occupancy
                 units will also have the same priority. (FB)
Rehabilitation
The City of Sacramento is a City with many vibrant and diverse neighborhoods. To preserve the character
and vitality of the housing in these existing neighborhoods, the City will focus rental rehabilitation efforts on
properties needing substantial rehabilitation in areas targeted for reinvestment. On a limited basis, properties
may be acquired and rehabilitated in areas to increase diversity where there is limited opportunity to develop
new affordable housing. The City will also explore how to rehabilitate vacant properties, such as those that
have been foreclosed, as a means to facilitate and expedite the sale to new owner-occupants and to stabilize
neighborhoods.
GOAL H-4
Rehabilitation. Preserve, maintain, and rehabilitate existing housing to ensure neighborhood livability and
promote housing affordability.
Policies
H-4.1            Prevent Blight and Deterioration. The City shall work to prevent blight and deterioration
                 of housing units resulting from deferred maintenance. (SO)
H-4.2            Acquisition and Rehabilitation. The City shall use acquisition and rehabilitation as a tool
                 to improve distressed neighborhoods or achieve economic integration. (FB)
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                            | Page H 9-7

                                                          Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
H-4.3           Preservation of Affordable Housing. The City shall continue to administer its
                Preservation Ordinance to ensure no loss of regulated multifamily rental units. (FB)
H-4.4           Well Maintained Mobile Home Parks. The City shall promote well maintained mobile
                home parks in viable condition for continued use. (SO)
H-4.5           Minimize Impact of Closure of Existing Mobile Home Parks. The City shall minimize
                the impact of potential closures of existing mobile home parks by ensuring compliance with
                State of California mobile home park regulations. (SO)
H-4.6           Condominium Conversions. The City shall ensure the conversion of rental housing to
                condominiums does not adversely impact the rental housing supply. (RDR)
Accessibility
Historically, City development reflected State and Federal fair housing law that, in general, required
accessible common areas and routes of travel in all multifamily housing. When federal financing is used,
typically for affordable developments, a percentage of accessible units is incorporated in multifamily
housing. Additionally the California Building Code has adaptability requirement for specified multifamily
units. Recognizing the importance of accessible housing as the population ages, the City will act proactively
to encourage or create accessibility in new development through modifications to local development
standards and practices to ensure accessibility options in all new housing.
GOAL H-5
Accessibility. Promote, preserve and create accessible residential development.
Policies
H-5.1           Universal Design in New Housing. The City shall encourage universal design in new
                housing and integration of accessibility features in existing housing and neighborhoods.
                (RDR)
H-5.2           Equal Access to Development Process. The City shall ensure equal access to its
                development policies, practices, and procedures. (RDR)
H-5.3           Accessibility Requirements and Opportunities. The City shall increase awareness of
                accessibility requirements and opportunities for developers and residents. (PI)
H-5.4           Funding for Accessibility Retrofits. The City shall provide funding to residents to retrofit
                their homes to improve accessibility. (FB)
Page H 9-8  |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                      H-9
Homeownership
Notwithstanding current home prices, the City recognizes that the market may not be able to produce for-
sale homes that are affordable or available to moderate-income families over the Housing Element cycle.
Policies and programs under this theme focus on modifying existing programs and include efforts to create
“modest” income homeownership. Modest income includes those households making too much to access
affordable housing financing (over 80 of percent area median income), but have difficulty affording a house
on the open market.
GOAL H-6
Homeownership. Provide ownership opportunities and preserve housing for Sacramento’s modest income
workers.
Policies
H-6.1          Promoting Homeownership in Distressed Areas. The City shall promote
               homeownership opportunities in areas with a significantly high proportion of rental housing,
               and areas distressed by foreclosures. (RDR)
H-6.2          Homeownership Among Low and Moderate-Income Households. The City shall
               support homeownership among low- and moderate-income households through a variety of
               homebuyer assistance programs. (FB/SO)
H-6.3          Affordable Housing Types. The City shall promote modest income homeownership
               opportunities through alternative construction methods and ownership models, employer
               assisted housing and amendments to the Mixed-Income Housing Ordinance. (RDR)
H-6.4          Executive Housing .The City shall encourage development of housing to meet the needs
               of executives to encourage economic growth and new businesses in the city. (RDR)
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                      | Page H 9-9

                                                                       Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Quantified Objectives
As required by State law governing Housing Elements, Table H 9-1 lays out the City’s quantified objectives
for the development, improvement, maintenance, and preservation of housing for the period 2013-2021.
                 Table H 9-1            Quantified Objectives for 2013-2021
                                                       1                                            Above
                                                   ELI          VLI           LI         Mod                      Total
                                                                                                     Mod
                 New Construction
                 Single-family                       0           0          100        1,617        4,800        6,517
                 Multifamily                        20          30          610        1,088        3,200        4,948
                                      2
                 Rehabilitation
                 Single-family                       0         300          130            0           0          430
                 Multifamily                        30          60          200            0           0          290
                                    2
                 Preservation
                                                     5          10           35            0           0           50
                 Owner Assistance
                                                     0           0          230           70           0          300
                 Special Needs
                 New                                10           0            0            0           0           10
                 Rehabilitation                     50           0            0            0           0           50
                 Total Production                  115         400         1,305       2,775        8,000       12,595
                 1
                   Extremely low-income (ELI) units include those with project based vouchers, which limits
                   occupancy and affordability to families of extremely low-income, but allows for collection of rent
                   (including that rent associated with the voucher subsidy) to exceed ELI rent limits.
                 2
                   All rehabilitation and preservation units are included in the quantified objectives, regardless of the
                   amount of rehabilitation required or the proportion of rehabilitation to new construction.
The Sacramento Area Council of Government’s (SACOG) Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
covers a nearly nine-year period (i.e., January 1, 2013, to October 31, 2021), while the Housing Element
planning period covers only a portion of the RHNA timeframe (i.e., an eight-year period). The objectives
contained in the following table cover the Housing Element period of October 31, 2013, to October 31,
2021.
While the RHNA lays out the City’s anticipated new growth and outlines the City’s obligation to
accommodate that growth, the quantified objectives speak more to the City’s program and policy objectives
to promote housing development and access to affordable housing, particularly for lower-income
households. Finally, the quantified objectives are prepared in the context of funding availability, community
desires and programmatic limitations, allowing for a more comprehensive understanding of how the City
anticipates balancing affordable housing development.
Page H 9-10  |                                                                                                  Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                     H-9
Table H 9-2 is the Housing Element Program Matrix, providing a list of all the Housing Element programs
and the associated responsible entity, timeframe, and objective for each program. Many of the programs are
linked to others. For example, preservation of multifamily units is a specific objective of an overall
rehabilitation strategy. Funding for many of the programs is prioritized in the Council-adopted Multifamily
Lending and Mortgage Revenue Bond Policies. Table H 9-1 takes the overlapping programs and
summarizes the overall production expectations from the parts of the whole. In addition, each program may
implement multiple policies, and many policies have overlapping goals. Overlapping programs have been
noted with multiple policy references.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                     | Page H 9-11
                                                                                              Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Table H 9-2      Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                           Administration                                           2013 -   2016 -  2018 -    2020 -     On-
                                      Implementation Programs                                        2015     2017    2019      2021    going
1. The City shall revise its Mixed-Income Housing Ordinance to promote affordable housing
   citywide and will require: 1) an affordable housing impact fee for all new housing units, and
   2) large, single-family subdivisions to provide housing for a variety of incomes and family
   types.
    Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.3.5, H-2.2.4, H-2.2.6                                          X
    Responsible Department: Community Development; SHRA
    Objective: Adapt the current Mixed Income Ordinance to create new affordable
        housing opportunities and mixed income communities while being flexible, market
        sensitive, and responsive to the challenges of infill development.
2. The City shall update its residential design guidelines to include Crime Prevention Through
   Environmental Design (CPTED) strategies.
    Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.2.3; H-1.2.7
    Responsible Department: Community Development (primary) and Police.                              X
    Objective: Ensure CPTED principles are incorporated into and consistent with the
        City’s residential design guidelines.
3. To ensure on-going safety and security, the City through SHRA will annually inspect SHRA
   financed multifamily projects for compliance with security, maintenance, and social service
   requirements.
    Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.2.3
                                                                                                                                           X
    Responsible Department: SHRA; Police; Community Development
    Objective: Ensure that SHRA-financed multifamily projects are safe, viable and
        attractive assets to the community and for the residents living in them.
4. The City shall provide Housing Choice Vouchers to very low- and extremely low-income
   Sacramento households in the City and County in order to continue to provide housing
   options to those most in need.
                                                                                                                                           X
    Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.2.8
    Responsible Department: SHRA
    Objective: Provide approximately 12,400 vouchers.
 Page H 9-12   |                                                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

 HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                                                      H-9
Table H 9-2      Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                           Administration                                         2013 - 2016 - 2018 - 2020 -     On-
                                      Implementation Programs                                      2015   2017   2019   2021     going
5. Prepare a new Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI) in order to assess the
   City’s efforts at reducing housing discrimination and enforcing fair housing laws.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.3.1
                                                                                                           X
     Responsible Department: SHRA
     Objective: Prepare a new Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI).
6. The City shall disseminate fair-housing information by making the information available in
   appropriate public locations and events, such as the public counter at the Community
   Development Department, community centers, City-sponsored events, and on SHRA’s
   website. The Community Development Department shall work with other departments,
   such as Neighborhood Services and Parks and Recreation, and with services providers to
   disseminate fair housing information.                                                                                           X
    Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.3.1
    Responsible Department: Community Development; SHRA
    Objective: Educate the public and developers about fair housing requirements and
        reduce housing discrimination.
7. The City shall engage the Sacramento Area Council of Governments and other regional
   entities to develop a regional plan to pool local funding and staff capacity together in order
   to develop affordable, transit-oriented development in key locations in the region.
    Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.1.2
                                                                                                    X
    Responsible Department: SHRA (primary); Community Development
    Objective: Work with cities, counties, and regional agencies in the SACOG region to
        increase the development of affordable housing throughout the region.
8. Consistent with Government Code § 65863, the City shall consider the impacts of rezones
   and general plan amendments of residential sites on the City’s ability to meet its share of
   the regional housing need.
    Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.1.1                                                                                         X
    Responsible Department: Community Development
    Objective: Ensure that rezoning does not reduce the City’s ability and capacity to meet
        its share of the regional housing needs.
 Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                  | Page H 9-13

                                                                                               Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Table H 9-2       Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                           Administration                                            2013 -   2016 -  2018 -    2020 -     On-
                                      Implementation Programs                                         2015     2017    2019      2021    going
9. The City shall maintain a land inventory for housing production which identifies infill and
    greenfield sites.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.1.1
                                                                                                                                            X
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Update land inventory regularly to ensure the City’s ongoing ability to meet
         its share of regional housing needs.
10. The City shall amend financing plans as needed to ensure that adequate funding is
    available to provide infrastructure improvements for new development. To ensure funding
    for large new developments, the City shall complete Mitigation Fee Act compliant finance
    plans for the 65thStreet area.                                                                     X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.3.6
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Ensure adequate infrastructure to support for new development.
11. The City shall develop a strategic investment plan to prioritize infrastructure financing
    consistent with the General Plan and focus funding in key infill areas.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.2.4; H-1.3.1; H-2.3.6                                          X                X
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Ensure adequate infrastructure to support infill development.
12. The City shall review and update the City’s Emergency Shelter Site inventory every three
    years to determine if the sites are adequate, accessible, appropriate, and developable.
    New shelters, land uses, and rezones shall be considered when updating the inventory.
    The new inventory shall be posted on the 2013-2021 Housing Element website.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.3.5                                                                     X                 X
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Ensure the availability of accessible, appropriate, and developable sites for
         emergency shelters.
 Page H 9-14   |                                                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

 HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                                                    H-9
Table H 9-2      Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                            Administration                                      2013 - 2016 - 2018 - 2020 -     On-
                                       Implementation Programs                                   2015   2017   2019   2021     going
13. The City shall prepare an annual report to the City Council on implementation of City
    housing programs and recommend revisions to the implementation strategies as
    appropriate.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.1.3
                                                                                                                                 X
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: To increase the effectiveness of the City’s housing programs through an
        annual evaluation of program achievements and appropriate revisions to those
        programs.
14. The City may assist non-profit organizations with predevelopment loans in conjunction with
    applications for permanent supportive housing.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.1.4
      Responsible Department: SHRA                                                                                              X
      Objective: At least one loan during the planning period for permanent supportive
         housing projects.
15. The City shall submit an annual report to the City Council that evaluates implementation of
    the General Plan and recommends appropriate revisions.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.1.3
     Responsible Department: Community Development                                                                              X
     Objective: Increase the success of the City’s strategy of encouraging infill through
        ongoing monitoring and appropriate modifications to the General Plan and related
        implementation efforts.
16. The City shall encourage and facilitate transit-oriented affordable housing development in
    key locations by maintaining a webpage with a map of sites in transit priority areas, near
    services/amenities for TCAC scoring, and/or sites owned by the former redevelopment
    agency. City Staff shall also conduct a seminar with affordable housing developers to
    discuss these priority sites as well as promote new development standards and programs
    that help facilitate affordable housing.                                                             X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.1.1; H-1.2.4
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Promote affordable housing near transit facilities by increasing awareness
        of available sites and regulatory incentives.
 Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                | Page H 9-15

                                                                                               Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Table H 9-2      Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                           Administration                                            2013 -   2016 -  2018 -    2020 -     On-
                                      Implementation Programs                                         2015     2017    2019      2021    going
17. The City shall encourage infill development by reducing barriers through infrastructure
    improvements and assistance to ensure that adequate infrastructure is in place to serve
    higher density and mixed use development in key opportunity areas.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.1                                                                                                 X
     Responsible Department: Community Development (primary); SHRA;, Economic
        Development
     Objective: Encourage the production of infill units.
18. The City shall pursue grant funding, including the State Department of Housing and
    Community Development Housing-Related Parks Program, Community Design Grant
    Program, and other revenue sources to provide critical amenities/services in infill areas to
    promote complete neighborhoods. Examples include:
             Park Improvements;
             Sidewalk widening, streetscape improvements and street lighting; and                                                          X
             Other infrastructure improvements.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.3.6
     Responsible Department: Community Development; Parks and Recreation
     Objective: Obtain grant funding to assist with infill development including amenities
        and services in infill areas.
19. The City shall issue waivers for sewer and sanitation development fees for projects in
    which at least 10 percent are affordable to very low-income households.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.3                                                                                                X
      Responsible Department: Utilities
      Objective: Provide fee waivers for residential units annually.
20. The City shall use sewer credits to assist with infill and affordable housing.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.3
      Responsible Department: Economic Development; Sacramento Area Sanitation                                                             X
        District
      Objective: Provide sewer credits annually.
 Page H 9-16  |                                                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

 HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                                                    H-9
Table H 9-2     Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                          Administration                                        2013 - 2016 - 2018 - 2020 -     On-
                                     Implementation Programs                                     2015   2017   2019   2021     going
21. The City shall provide water development fee waivers to residential infill projects.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.3
                                                                                                                                 X
      Responsible Department: Community Development, Utilities
      Objective: Provide water development fee waivers annually.
22. Through the Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Collaborative, the City shall coordinate
    with the Sacramento Area Council of Governments, Sacramento County, SHRA and other
    Agencies to develop funding sources and strategies to develop housing near transit.
                                                                                                  X
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.1.1; H-1.2.4; H-2.2.4
      Responsible Department: Community Development, SHRA
      Objective: Facilitate housing development near transit facilities.
23. The City shall apply for new and existing Federal, State and local funding sources, such as
    Proposition 1C funds, HELP, BEGIN, and MHSA.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.4
                                                                                                                                 X
      Responsible Department: SHRA (primary); Community Development ; Economic
         Development
      Objective: Seek a variety of funding to increase the supply of affordable housing.
24. The City shall convene a working group made up of building industry and affordable
    housing experts to explore new funding sources for affordable housing, such as former
    redevelopment (boomerang) funds. City staff shall make recommendations to the City
    Council based on the working group meetings.
                                                                                                  X
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.4
      Responsible Department: SHRA (primary); Community Development
      Objective: Identify potential new funding sources to support the development of
         affordable housing.
 Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                | Page H 9-17

                                                                                               Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Table H 9-2        Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                            Administration                                           2013 -   2016 -  2018 -    2020 -     On-
                                       Implementation Programs                                        2015     2017    2019      2021    going
25. The City shall support applications for Tax Exempt Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Low Income
    Housing Tax Credits, State of California Multifamily Housing Program, other federal and
    state programs and local funding sources to assist affordable housing programs and
    projects. The SHRA website and Multifamily Lending guidelines include an inventory of
    available funding sources.                                                                                                              X
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.4
      Responsible Department: SHRA (primary); Community Development ; Economic
          Development
      Objective: Seek a variety of funding to increase the supply of affordable housing.
26. The City shall streamline the Housing Trust Fund Ordinance to apply the fees equally
    throughout the City and modify aspects of the ordinance that have proven to be ineffective
    over the years.
     Implements Which Policy: H-2.2.2; H-2.2.4
                                                                                                       X
     Responsible Department: Community Development; SHRA
     Objective: Amend the City Zoning Code to improve and clarify the implementation of
         the Housing Trust Fund and ensure economic competitiveness with surrounding
         jurisdictions.
27. Each year the City shall evaluate the effectiveness of its development process streamlining
    efforts in order to ensure a high level of customer service.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.3.1, H-2.3.2
                                                                                                                                            X
      Responsible Department: Community Development
      Objective: Remain in the top 5 of Business Journal rankings for jurisdictions in the
          Sacramento Region that are considered the most development friendly.
28. The City shall continue to implement the preliminary review process whereby City staff and
    neighborhood groups provide comments and advise the applicant of policy and technical
    areas that need to be addressed prior to the formal application review. This is an existing
    program that helps to identify planning and community issues early in the process so that
    problems can be identified and addressed and processing time is shortened.                                                              X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.2.5; H-2.3.3
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Streamline the development approval process through early identification of
        City and neighborhood concerns and feasible methods to address those concerns.
 Page H 9-18    |                                                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

 HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                                                          H-9
Table H 9-2       Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                            Administration                                            2013 - 2016 - 2018 - 2020 -     On-
                                       Implementation Programs                                         2015   2017   2019   2021     going
29. The City shall work with SAFCA and other responsible agencies to achieve increases in
    flood protection to the City and surrounding areas so that City and other land use agencies
    can proceed with development plans and meet Federal Emergency Management Agency
    (FEMA) and State requirements for flood protection in 100-year and 200-year flood plains,
    respectively. Actions include: (1) finishing Folsom Dam spillway modifications, and
    supporting and implementing subsequent raising of Folsom Dam; (2) finishing construction
    of improvements along the perimeter levee system protecting Natomas; (3) accomplishing
    improvements needed to meet FEMA levee accreditation requirements for lands in the
    Sacramento area protected by levees; and (4) supporting development and implementation
    of plans for progressively improving the level of flood protection in Sacramento area to 200-
    year urban level of protection. The City shall monitor flood risk in the city and, in 2017, shall          X                       X
    analyze the impact of flooding on the City’s ability to accommodate its share of the regional
    housing needs. If flooding is found to impact the City’s ability to accommodate the
    remaining RHNA, the City shall strive to identify additional sites with residential
    development capacity that are not impacted by flood risk. The City shall report the findings
    of analysis to HCD in the 2017 Housing Element Annual Progress Report.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.3.4
     Responsible Department: SAFCA (primary); Utilities
     Objective: Expedite the completion of improvements that will increase flood protection
         in the City and allow Sacramento to accommodate its share of regional housing needs.
30. The City shall prepare a study recommending new financing options to provide for
    infrastructure in infill areas. New sources of financing could include state and federal
    grants, the General Fund, the use of impact fees, bond measures, and financing sources.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.3.6                                                                           X
     Responsible Department: Community Development (primary), SHRA
     Objective: Address infrastructure improvement needs in advance of, or concurrent
         with, new development in key opportunity areas.
 Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                      | Page H 9-19

                                                                                              Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Table H 9-2      Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                           Administration                                           2013 -   2016 -  2018 -    2020 -     On-
                                      Implementation Programs                                        2015     2017    2019      2021    going
31. The City shall implement the Asset Repositioning of the City’s public housing units through
    acquisition and rehabilitating Housing Authority properties. These activities will be
    implemented through a joint venture between the nonprofit organization established by the
    Housing Authority and an established non-profit developer. Projects will utilize a
    combination of mortgage revenue bonds, low income housing tax credits, and gap
    financing from SHRA’s funding resources to ensure no net loss of ELI units.
                                                                                                                                           X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.1.1; H-3.2.9
     Responsible Department: SHRA
     Objective: Ensure the on-going viability of the City’s public housing through strategic
        investment and rehabilitation, increasing the supply of affordable and mixed-income
        housing with no net loss of ELI.
32. The City shall continue to implement the Single Room Occupancy (SRO) ordinance,
    ensuring no net loss of Downtown SRO units and providing funding and other resources for
    the rehabilitation of existing SRO units and the construction of new SRO units in the City.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.1.1                                                                                                X
     Responsible Department: SHRA (primary); Community Development
     Objective: Construct and rehabilitate SROs and ensure no net loss of existing SRO
        units downtown.
33. The City shall use available housing resources, including project based rental subsidies,
    such as local Housing Choice Vouchers, federal Housing Assistance Payment vouchers,
    and state Mental Health Services Act Vouchers for the provision of housing for extremely
    low-income households.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.1.1                                                                                                X
     Responsible Department: SHRA
     Objective: Ensure the availability and choice of housing for extremely low-income
        households.
34. The City shall continue to provide assistance to senior affordable housing projects.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.2.1
     Responsible Department: SHRA                                                                                                         X
     Objective: Use housing resources to construct new affordable senior units and
        rehabilitate/preserve additional affordable senior units.
 Page H 9-20  |                                                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

 HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                                                  H-9
Table H 9-2      Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                           Administration                                     2013 - 2016 - 2018 - 2020 -     On-
                                      Implementation Programs                                  2015   2017   2019   2021     going
35. Over the next five years, the City shall work with service providers to improve linkages
    between emergency shelters, transitional housing and supportive services.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.2.6
      Responsible Department: SHRA (primary); Sacramento Steps Forward; DHA; and                                              X
         Community Development
      Objective: Increase numbers of referrals of homeless and formerly homeless to
         service providers.
36. The City shall provide funding and other resources for permanent supportive housing
    located both in leased units and affordable housing developments.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.2.3                                                                                    X
     Responsible Department: SHRA
     Objective: Provide funding for permanent supportive housing, developing new units.
37. The City shall implement the Ten Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness, including the
    “Housing First” strategy. Focuses of the “Housing First” strategy include:
     Providing support for permanent housing that offers disabled homeless individuals a
        home without expecting them to have resolved their addictions or mental health
        problems.
     Providing supportive services and treatment in such housing to assist tenants return to
        health and ability to stay housed.                                                                                     X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.2.3
     Responsible Department: Sacramento Steps Forward (primary), SHRA; Community
        Development
     Objective: Provide support for permanent supportive housing and services related to
        the development of new permanent supportive housing units and units through leasing.
 Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                              | Page H 9-21

                                                                                                 Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Table H 9-2       Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                            Administration                                             2013 -   2016 -  2018 -    2020 -     On-
                                       Implementation Programs                                          2015     2017    2019      2021    going
38. Through the McGeorge School of Law Mediation Center, the City shall provide fair housing
    assistance and dispute resolution services in order to resolve tenant and neighborhood
    conflicts.
      Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.2.7
                                                                                                                                              X
      Responsible Department: McGeorge School of Law Mediation Center; SHRA; Code
          Enforcement
      Objective: Provide fair housing assistance and dispute resolution services to
          residents.
39. The City shall encourage the preservation of regulated affordable rental developments that
    are converting to market rate. The City will continue to implement the City’s Preservation
    Ordinance, which requires notification to SHRA of proposed conversion of affordable units,
    and allows SHRA priority to work with affordable developers to preserve such projects.
    SHRA shall continue to provide financial assistance, as available, and technical assistance,
    as needed to aid in the preservation of at-risk units, and shall reach out to non-profit and
    other affordable housing developers that have the capacity to preserve at-risk units. In
    addition, the City will ensure compliance with the “no net loss” provisions of the adopted                                                X
    Housing Authority Repositioning Strategy, ensuring that, during rehabilitation and
    revitalization of public housing properties, there is no net loss of units affordable to
    extremely low income families.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-4.3
     Responsible Department: SHRA
     Objective: Assist in the preservation of privately owned affordable housing units and
         public housing units.
40. The City and SHRA shall seek to preserve, convert, and/or rehabilitate privately owned
    multifamily rental housing to assure its ongoing affordability for lower-income residents.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-4.2
     Responsible Department: SHRA                                                                                                            X
     Objective: Assist in the preservation, conversion, and/rehabilitation of multifamily
         rental housing.
 Page H 9-22    |                                                                                                           Adopted December 17, 2013

 HOUSING ELEMENT: Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                                                    H-9
Table H 9-2      Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                            Administration                                      2013 - 2016 - 2018 - 2020 -     On-
                                       Implementation Programs                                   2015   2017   2019   2021     going
41. The City shall continue to implement the citywide Rental Housing Inspection Program
    (RHIP) where building inspectors inspect rental properties for interior and exterior code
    violations and issue corrective notices.
                                                                                                                                 X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-4.1; H-1.2.3
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Improve the quality of rental housing in the city.
42. The City shall modify the Condominium Conversion Ordinance to make the process and
    regulations clearer to staff, applicants, and affected tenants, while maintaining a similar
    level of oversight in order to avoid adverse impacts to the rental stock and tenants.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-4.6
                                                                                                                X
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Encourage the development of a variety of housing types by making the
         Condominium Conversion Ordinance easier to understand, administer, and use by
         developers.
43. The City shall continue to apply for homebuyer assistance programs from the State’s
    Housing and Community Development Department, the California Housing Finance
    Agency and the California Debt Limit Allocation Committee. These programs currently
    include the following: CalHome First-time Homebuyer Mortgage Assistance Program
    (CalHome), Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods Program (BEGIN), and                                                  X
    Mortgage Credit Certificate Program (MCC)..
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-6.2
     Responsible Department: SHRA (primary); Community Development
     Objective: Promote the development of single-family units in infill areas.
44. The City shall provide grants for low and very low income residents with grants for
    emergency repairs and/or accessibility modifications to their homes.
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-4.1; H-6.2                                                                                 X
     Responsible Department: SHRA
     Objective: Assist in the rehabilitation of low- and very low-income single-family homes.
 Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                | Page H 9-23

                                                                                             Chapter Nine: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Table H 9-2        Housing Element 2013-2021 Programs
                                             Administration                                        2013 -   2016 -  2018 -    2020 -     On-
                                       Implementation Programs                                      2015     2017    2019      2021    going
45. The City shall establish a fee deferral program for affordable housing to defer fees to
    certificate of occupancy, recognizing the complexities and time needed to complete an
    affordable housing development.
                                                                                                     X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-2.2.3
     Responsible Department: Community Development
     Objective: Extend fee deferral period for affordable housing development.
46. The City shall establish a Responsible Banking Ordinance that would require banks that
    receive City deposits to report mortgage lending practices, small business lending, and
    other investments in the community. The ordinance shall in no way restrict the investment
    activities of the City Treasurer or the Administration, Investment and Fiscal Management
    Board.                                                                                                    X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-1.3.7
     Responsible Department: City Treasurer (Primary), Community Development,
         Economic Development, SHRA
     Objective: Promote responsible lending and investment in the City.
47. The City shall work with the Alta Regional Center to implement an outreach program that
    informs families within the City on housing and services available for persons with
    developmental disabilities. The program could include the development of an informational
    brochure, including information on services on the City’s website, and providing housing-
    related training for individuals/families through workshops.                                                      X
     Implements Which Policy(ies): H-3.2.2
     Responsible Department: SHRA, Community Development
     Objective: Inform families of housing and services available for persons with
         developmental disabilities.
 Page H 9-24   |                                                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation
                                       H-A
Appendix A: Program Evaluation
Adopted December 17, 2013           | Page H A-1
                                       Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H A-2   |                                       Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                               H-A
 Table HA-1            Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                    Program                                        Status                                    Evaluation                                   Recommendation
 1.  The City shall require energy efficiency standards in all SHRA funded     Complete/   The majority of SHRA funded multifamily new development is financed           This is a policy
     new construction multi-family projects above Title 24 through the         Ongoing     using Low Income Housing Tax Credits. Consistent with the California Tax      statement, not a
     multi-family lending guidelines. Energy efficiency will also be                       Credit Allocation Committee (TCAC), SHRA funded new construction              program. Delete
     encouraged to the extent feasible in rehabilitation projects funded by                projects typically exceeding Title 24 energy standards by at least 10         program.
     SHRA.                                                                                 percent. To codify the requirements and to ensure that all SHRA financed
                                                                                           projects incorporate sustainability features, SHRA modified the Multifamily
                                                                                           Lending and Mortgage Revenue Bond Policies. The Policies require that
                                                                                           new construction projects qualify for at least five points and rehabilitation
                                                                                           for at least three points under the nine percent TCAC sustainability
                                                                                           scoring criteria. These requirements will ensure that new construction
                                                                                           projects exceed Title 24 and that rehabilitation projects incorporate
                                                                                           sustainability measures. This is a policy statement, not a program.
 2.  The City shall research housing types and developments that               Incomplete  Due to a lack of staff resources, this program will not be completed.         Delete program.
     accommodate the use of neighborhood electric vehicles (NEV),
     particularly those that meet the mobility needs of seniors and persons
     with disabilities. A report will be produced summarizing the research
     and will recommend ways to facilitate or encourage their use in
     housing.
 3.  The City shall develop guidelines for large residential developments      Incomplete  The General Plan provides the necessary guidance to ensure a variety of       Delete program.
     over 10 acres as well as master planned communities to ensure a                       housing types in new developments. In addition, recommendations for the
     variety of densities and housing types.                                               new Mixed Income Housing Ordinance have included requirements and
                                                                                           incentives for a mix of housing types for large residential developments.
                                                                                           This program is not necessary.
 4.  The City shall amend the Artist’s Live/Work Space Ordinance to            Complete    The City adopted the new Planning and Development Code in April 2013,         Delete program.
     allow a broader definition of live-work units in all multifamily and most             which takes effect on September 30, 2013. The code allows for live/work
     residential zones subject to comply with developmental standards.                     uses by right in many commercial, mixed-use, and high density residential
     The City shall remove “Artist” from the title of the ordinance.                       zones.
 5.  The City values inclusionary housing and is interested in expanding it    In Progress The City reviewed the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance in light of the          Replace with a
     citywide. Staff is directed to work with all stakeholders, and report                 current state of the housing market and community concerns about the          program to revise
     back within one year to Council to determine whether it is feasible to                overconcentration of affordable housing in some areas of the city. The key    the Mixed income
     extend the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance citywide, and if so, in                     objective was a citywide approach that will result in quality affordable      Housing
     what manner. The City shall use an economic analysis to evaluate                      housing that is well-integrated into our communities. The Mixed Income        Ordinance.
     the impact, timing and process of incorporating inclusionary housing                  Housing Ordinance is being updated simultaneously as part of the
     obligations on areas not currently subject to the Mixed Income                        Housing Element update process which began in August 2012. The City
     Housing Ordinance.                                                                    has been conducting a robust outreach process that will take into account
                                                                                           the perspectives and interests of all stakeholders, throughout the city.
                                                                                           The City has conducted a public workshop, several stakeholder meetings,
                                                                                           four workshops with the Planning and Design Commission, and an
                                                                                           electronic public survey on the Housing Element and Mixed Income
                                                                                           Housing Ordinance revisions.
 6.  The City shall evaluate and implement changes necessary in the            Complete    The City treats manufactured housing the same as other comparable             Delete program.
     City’s Zoning Code and building review process to encourage the                       structures and the new Planning and Development Code continues to do
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                                    | Page H A-3

                                                                                                                                          Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1           Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                     Status                                    Evaluation                                       Recommendation
     use of manufactured housing as a quality affordable housing                       so. The Code does not create obstacles to manufactured housing. This
     alternative housing type in urban centers, corridors and near transit             program is not necessary.
     stations.
 7.  The City shall amend the Zoning Code to change the parking            Complete    The City updated its parking requirements to allow one parking space per          Delete program.
     requirement for second residential units (“granny flats”) from one                unit in October 2012.
     space per bedroom to one space per unit.
 8.  The City shall conduct a study to research housing types and          Incomplete  The State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in 2011,                 Delete program.
     affordability programs that may accommodate lower income                          eliminating an important source of funding for housing. Due to the
     populations such as limited equity housing cooperatives,                          limitation of available funding sources to pay for staff, SHRA has not been
     manufactured housing, land trusts, boarding homes, rooming houses                 able to conduct this research. The City has several other policies and
     and shared housing, determine if these housing types are                          programs to ensure a variety of housing types.
     appropriate, and define and clarify the permitting process for these
     housing types.
 9.  The City shall develop a study proposing best practices for           In progress The City plans to update the residential design guidelines in 2014 to             Replace with a
     incorporating multifamily developments with other surrounding uses                encourage developers to be sensitive to surrounding uses and housing              program to update
     and housing types. The study will analyze the feasibility of building             types when designing multifamily projects.                                        the Residential
     smaller apartment complexes and how to integrate this housing type                                                                                                  Design Guidelines.
     in areas with predominantly single-family homes. The study would
     also determine what building and site design features are optimal
     both for transitioning from lower density to higher density
     development, and creating a distinct identity for each multifamily
     development.
 10. The City shall update the Single-Family Residential Design Checklist  Incomplete  In 2009 Community Development Staff, in cooperation with the Police,              Retain program.
     and the Multifamily Residential Guidelines to include CPTED                       Development Services, and Utilities Departments, made
     strategies.                                                                       recommendations for improving these design guidelines. However, due to
                                                                                       a lack of staff resources, this project was not completed. It is anticipated
                                                                                       to be completed in 2015.
 11. The City shall revise SHRA’s Multifamily Lending Guidelines to        Complete    On March 17, 2009, the City Council adopted the revised Multifamily               Delete program.
     develop siting criteria for new multifamily and permanent supportive              Lending Guidelines for SHRA financed multifamily housing. The
     housing developments and to ensure that all SHRA financed                         guidelines include project priorities that reflect siting criteria and specific
     multifamily rental projects (new construction and rehabilitation)                 security requirements.
     incorporate security measures such as installation of security
     camera, enhanced lighting and roving security patrols.
 12. To ensure on-going safety and security, the City through SHRA will    Ongoing     The SHRA Portfolio Management Department is responsible for ensuring              Retain program.
     annually inspect SHRA financed multifamily projects for compliance                ongoing compliance with funding requirements, security, maintenance,
     with security, maintenance, and social service requirements.                      and social services in all SHRA-funded projects. Prior to project approval,
                                                                                       developers must have SHRA approval of a management company and
                                                                                       management plan, appropriate security measures, and financing plan to
                                                                                       ensure ongoing operations. In addition, all projects must submit a resident
                                                                                       services plan prior to funding approval with appropriate on-site services
                                                                                       provided at least 15 hours a week. Annually, the Portfolio Management
                                                                                       Department inspects each property to ensure that it meets Housing
Page H A-4    |                                                                                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                           H-A
 Table HA-1            Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                    Program                                        Status                                      Evaluation                             Recommendation
                                                                                           Quality Standards, provides social services, and keeps up-to-date
                                                                                           records. SHRA may perform additional compliance audits, at its sole
                                                                                           discretion.
 13. As part of the General Plan implementation process the City shall          Complete   In Fall 2009 the City rezoned 1,668 parcels for consistency with the 2030  Delete program.
     rezone sites adjacent to light rail stations (consistent with the City’s              General Plan. Many of these sites are located within one quarter mile of a
     light rail station ordinance) in order to promote transit oriented, higher            light rail station. Additionally, the Shovel Ready Sites Program (Program
     density, and mixed use residential development.                                       5) involved rezoning sites to encourage transit oriented development.
                                                                                           On March 15, 2011, the City adopted the Northeast Line Implementation
                                                                                           Plan. This was a planning effort to promote reinvestment, redevelopment,
                                                                                           and revitalization along the light rail corridor including the Globe,
                                                                                           Arden/Del Paso, and Royal Oaks Stations. The Plan included land use
                                                                                           changes to better streamline uses that support an active and safe
                                                                                           commercial corridor such as mixed use and mixed density housing, as
                                                                                           well as office and general commercial uses. Additionally, the Plan
                                                                                           recommends infrastructure improvements focused on key areas along the
                                                                                           light rail corridor to encourage catalyst and near-term development in the
                                                                                           area.
 14. The City shall work with residential developers to submit applications     Complete   In 2008 and 2009, the City received approximately $135 million in          Delete program.
     to the Proposition 1C Transit Oriented Development Housing                            Proposition 1C funding for the Downtown Railyards, Township 9, Curtis
     Program through the California Department of Housing and                              Park Village, La Valentina Station, Capitol Lofts, and Broadway Lofts.
     Community Development.                                                                These projects include a substantial amount of affordable housing.
                                                                                           Construction has begun for the Capitol Lofts and infrastructure
                                                                                           improvements have been completed for the Railyards project. The
                                                                                           Railyards project is currently (2013) in the development process.
 15. The City shall develop and expand incentive programs to improve            Incomplete Staff reductions in the Police and Code Enforcement Departments have       Delete program.
     management and maintenance of privately owned rental housing                          made the implementation of this program infeasible. However, the City’s
     within older neighborhoods and commercial corridors, particularly                     Rental Inspection Program (Program 77 in this report) is making
     four-plexes and apartments. Program elements may include                              significant progress in maintaining and inventorying the rental housing
     improved coordination with neighborhood code enforcement,                             stock.
     problem-oriented policing efforts, property management districts, and
     other proactive efforts along commercial corridors in affiliation with
     business and neighborhood associations.
 16. The City shall make planning and policy documents more easily              Complete   In 2009 the City eliminated unnecessary or redundant web pages on the      Delete program.
     accessible, such as placing items on the City’s website, and shall                    Community Development Department website in order to make policy
     promote additional opportunities for community participation.                         documents and current outreach opportunities more readily available for
                                                                                           the public to view. The City also launched Envision Sacramento, an
                                                                                           interactive online forum for community engagement.
 17. The City shall involve residents and conduct public outreach for           Complete/  SHRA actively involves the community at large in all planning activities.  Delete program.
     updates of the Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI),        Ongoing    SHRA is in the first year of the 2013-2017 Consolidated Plan and
     the redevelopment implementation plan updates, and future                             completed an update to the Analysis of Impediments of Fair Housing
     consolidated plan updates.                                                            Choice in Fall 2011. In the development of the Consolidated Plan, SHRA
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                                 | Page H A-5

                                                                                                                                          Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1          Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                 Program                                       Status                                      Evaluation                                   Recommendation
                                                                                         partnered with the United States Department of Housing and Urban
                                                                                         Development (HUD) to pilot the new Consolidated Plan Tool. SHRA held
                                                                                         community meetings as appropriate, and solicited input through working in
                                                                                         partnership with external advocacy groups, social service providers, and
                                                                                         City departments.
                                                                                         The City updated many of its redevelopment implementation plans in
                                                                                         2009 and made a concerted effort was made to involve a wide spectrum
                                                                                         of the public.
                                                                                         This is a policy statement rather than a program.
 18. The City shall map the placement and licensing of new group homes,     Complete/    In 2009 Community Development staff began collecting data on                   Delete program.
     placement of emergency shelters, and other supportive housing and      Ongoing      supportive housing and other social services. However, due to a lack of
     social services and shall coordinate with the Community Care                        staff resources, this program will not be completed.
     Licensing Division of the State of California to ensure that such uses
     are provided throughout the City and not concentrated in any one
     neighborhood.
 19. The City shall address the foreclosure crisis using a variety of       Complete/    Between 2007 and 2012 SHRA worked with both the City and County to             Delete program.
     approaches including pre-foreclosure intervention aimed to keep        Discontinued implement a comprehensive strategy aimed at eliminating neighborhood
     homeowners in their homes and neighborhood reinvestment                             blight and stemming the decline of home values caused by the foreclosure
     strategies aimed to occupy homes left vacant due to foreclosure                     crisis in Sacramento. In conjunction with HUD allocation of approximately
     while using on-going federal and state legislative advocacy and data                $40.2 million in grant funding ($17M for the City and $23.2M for the
     analysis to inform the approaches.                                                  County) under the Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) rounds one
                                                                                         (NSP-1) and three (NSP-3) in early 2009, the City Council approved the
                                                                                         plan for program development and expenditures to return vacant,
                                                                                         foreclosed, or abandoned residential properties to occupancy; revitalize
                                                                                         neighborhoods through strategic redevelopment and reuse efforts; and
                                                                                         provide affordable rental opportunities to Sacramento households.
                                                                                         SHRA's plan involved three unique programs consisting of: 1) the Vacant
                                                                                         Properties Program (VPP), which provides financing incentives to
                                                                                         encourage for-profit and non-profit builders to purchase, rehabilitate, and
                                                                                         sell foreclosed single-family homes within identified target areas; 2) the
                                                                                         Block Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program (Block Program), which
                                                                                         works with established developers to acquire, rehabilitate (or demolish
                                                                                         and rebuild), and maintain multifamily dwelling units as common rental
                                                                                         property in areas where foreclosures and vacant properties have
                                                                                         intensified blight issues; and (3) the Property Recycling Program (PRP),
                                                                                         which allows SHRA to engage in strategic investments and partnerships
                                                                                         to remove the blight of foreclosed and vacant properties through
                                                                                         redevelopment activities; the acquisition and rehabilitation of single family
                                                                                         homes; and the acquisition, rehabilitation, and occupancy of affordable
                                                                                         rental housing. Through these programs, SHRA rehabilitated and sold 342
                                                                                         single-family and multifamily units, and retained or created an estimated
Page H A-6   |                                                                                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                              H-A
 Table HA-1          Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                  Program                                         Status                                      Evaluation                                 Recommendation
                                                                                            900 jobs. The City allocated all NSP funds by the end of 2012.
 20. The City shall provide Housing Choice Vouchers to approximately           Ongoing      SHRA, in its role as the Housing Authority for both the City and County of  Modify program to
     11,000 Sacramento households in the City and County in order to                        Sacramento, administers approximately 12,000 Housing Choice                 remove numerical
     continue to provide housing options to very low- and extremely low-                    Vouchers. Housing Choice Vouchers cover the portion of fair market rent     goals, as these are
     income residents.                                                                      above the tenant’s share which is set at approximately 30 percent of their  identified in the
                                                                                            income. The 2012 average annual household income for the Housing            quantified
                                                                                            Choice Vouchers was $13,821. Since 2008, SHRA has maintained a              objectives.
                                                                                            leasing percentage of about 99 percent for available vouchers and has
                                                                                            used 100 percent or more of the available funding for vouchers.
 21. With the support of SHRA, the Human Rights/Fair Housing                   Discontinued SHRA supported the Human Rights/Fair Housing Commission with annual         Delete program.
     Commission will conduct annual fair housing audits to track                            CDBG funding through 2011. The Human Rights/Fair Housing
     compliance, enforce fair housing law, and help to eliminate housing                    Commission provides direct assistance to persons who have faced
     discrimination.                                                                        housing or other forms of discrimination and refers those complaints either
                                                                                            to legal aid centers, the Federal Housing and Urban Development, or the
                                                                                            State Department of Fair Employment and Housing. From 2008 to 2010,
                                                                                            the Human Rights/Fair Housing Commission conducted 386 audits.
                                                                                            However, the State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in
                                                                                            2011, eliminating an important source of funding for this action. Due to
                                                                                            budget constraints SHRA can no longer fund the Human Rights/Fair
                                                                                            Housing Commission, but will continue to affirmatively further fair housing
                                                                                            through policy and program activities.
 22. Prepare a new Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI)         Complete     The SHRA Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Department                Retain program.
     in order to assess the City’s efforts at reducing housing                              completed the update to Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice
     discrimination and enforcing fair housing laws.                                        in 2011. SHRA plans to update the Analysis of Impediments to Fair
                                                                                            Housing Choice during this next Housing Element cycle.
 23. The City shall develop a report that will examine indicators of           Incomplete   The State of California eliminated redevelopment agencies in 2011,          Delete program.
     economic and social balance and evaluate housing needs. Housing                        eliminating an important source of funding for this action. Due to the
     needs would include those of different ethnic groups and cultures.                     limitation of available funding sources to pay for staff, SHRA has no
     The report would also analyze the production and investment in                         immediate plans to develop this report.
     housing from the neighborhood to the regional level.
 24. The City shall provide for fair-housing information in appropriate        Ongoing      SHRA will continue to provide periodic updates on their website to          Retain program.
     public locations and disseminate such information in different                         educate the public and developers about fair housing requirements.
     languages.
 25. The City shall participate in efforts to address regional equity and fair Ongoing      City staff initiated discussions with SACOG staff on how to report on       Modify program to
     share issues through education and coalition building.                                 regional housing production and consider strategies to encourage            advocate for a
                                                                                            affordable housing development in each jurisdiction.                        regional housing
                                                                                                                                                                        plan.
                                                                                            SACOG, in collaboration with jurisdictions throughout the region, is
                                                                                            currently developing a Housing Work Plan which includes:
                                                                                            .
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                                   | Page H A-7

                                                                                                                                          Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1          Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                  Program                                      Status                                      Evaluation                                   Recommendation
                                                                                                    an assessment of existing conditions affecting housing -
                                                                                                     demographics, market conditions, housing stock;
                                                                                                    an inventory of housing policies and funding;
                                                                                                    a review of region’s existing analyses of impediments to fair
                                                                                                     housing;
                                                                                                    a jobs-housing fit measure; and
                                                                                                    a combined housing and transportation cost analysis.
 26. In conjunction with the Human Rights/Fair Housing Commission, the      Discontinued City and SHRA staff provided referrals to the Human Rights/Fair Housing       Delete program.
     City shall provide information and technical assistance to support the              Commission to persons who have fair housing questions or concerns.
     efforts of the Sacramento Apartment Owner’s Association, the local                  However, the State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in
     Board of Realtors, and other organizations to increase awareness of                 2011, eliminating an important source of funding for this action. Due to
     fair housing laws.                                                                  budget constraints SHRA can no longer fund the Human Rights/Fair
                                                                                         Housing Commission, but will continue to promote fair housing through
                                                                                         policy and program activities.
 27. The City shall continue to administer Section 17.190 of the Zoning     Complete/    SHRA and the City Community Development Department collaboratively            Replace with a
     Code, the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance.                              Ongoing      administer the City's Mixed Income Housing Ordinance, which was               program to revise
                                                                                         adopted in October 2000. A May 2007 assessment of the ordinance found         the Mixed income
                                                                                         that since inception, over 1,500 inclusionary units had been approved         Housing
                                                                                         and/or built. Since that assessment, the residential market has slowed        Ordinance.
                                                                                         down, leading to a decline in the number of inclusionary housing plans
                                                                                         reviewed and approved. A total of 56 affordable units were built under the
                                                                                         Mixed Income Housing Ordinance between 2008 and 2013.SHRA's
                                                                                         portfolio management department continues to handle the ongoing
                                                                                         monitoring of all the inclusionary units that have been produced to date.
                                                                                         The City has conducted a public workshop, several stakeholder meetings,
                                                                                         four workshops with the Planning and Design Commission, and an
                                                                                         electronic public survey on the Housing Element and Mixed Income
                                                                                         Housing Ordinance revisions. Staff anticipates updating the Ordinance to
                                                                                         incorporate a mix of affordable housing fees, affordable-by-design units,
                                                                                         and land dedication that would be adjusted based on project size.
                                                                                         Affordable-by-design units such as apartments, second units, and
                                                                                         duplexes, are market-rate units that are generally more likely to be
                                                                                         affordable to low- and moderate-income households in a community
                                                                                         compared to a standard single-family home.
 28. The City shall amend its multifamily lending guidelines to allow asset Complete     On March 17, 2009, the City Council adopted revised Multifamily Lending       Delete program.
     building programs as an option to fulfill the requirement for social                and Mortgage Revenue Bond Policies. The guidelines include
     services in SHRA funded projects.                                                   requirements for resident services in all SHRA-financed projects. These
                                                                                         guidelines specifically call out both education and enrichment classes as
                                                                                         appropriate service types. All applicants are required to provide a detailed
                                                                                         narrative of the proposed program (prior to financing approval), and
                                                                                         encouraged to provide asset-building services, such as financial
                                                                                         education classes.
Page H A-8    |                                                                                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                        H-A
 Table HA-1             Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                    Program                                  Status                                    Evaluation                                  Recommendation
 29. Consistent with Government Code § 65863, the City shall consider      Ongoing   Community Development staff has developed a system of tracking all            Retain program.
     the impacts of rezones and general plan amendments of residential               rezones and general plan amendments that are approved by council.
     sites on the City’s ability to meet its share of the regional housing           In the Fall 2009 the City rezoned 1,668 parcels for consistency with the
     need.                                                                           2030 General Plan, including 14 parcels in the Housing Element vacant
                                                                                     land inventory. The result was a net increase in the land inventory’s
                                                                                     capacity to provide housing to lower-income households.
 30. The City shall maintain a land inventory for housing production which Ongoing   Community Development staff has continued to monitor rezones to               Retain program.
     identifies infill and greenfield sites.                                         ensure that the land inventory has adequate sites to meet the city’s share
                                                                                     of the regional housing need.
 31. The City shall amend financing plans as needed to ensure that         Ongoing   The Panhandle, Greenbriar, Delta Shores, Railyards and River District         Modify program to
                                                                                                                                                                                  th
     adequate funding is available to provide infrastructure improvements            Finance Plans are complete. The 65th Street Finance Plan is underway          address the 65
     for new development. To ensure funding for large new                            and is expected to be completed in late 2013.                                 Street Finance
     developments, the City shall complete Mitigation Fee Act compliant                                                                                            Plan.
     comprehensive plans for the Panhandle, Greenbriar, Delta Shores,
     and Railyards/River District areas.
 32. The City shall report annually to the Sacramento Area Council of      Complete/ The City will continue to send SACOG the Housing Element Progress             Delete program.
     Governments (SACOG) on its affordable production achievements,        Ongoing   Report. However, SACOG is also developing a Regional Housing Work
     in compliance with the SACOG Regional Housing Compact. The City                 Plan, mentioned in Program 25, which eliminates the need for this action.
     shall also request that SACOG produce an annual report on the
     region’s achievements under the compact.
 33. The City shall develop Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) programs to     Ongoing   Community Development staff continue to work with other City                  Retain program.
     coordinate infrastructure financing with the General Plan and focus             departments to coordinate CIP funding in priority infill areas. Additionally,
     funding in key infill areas.                                                    criteria contained in the City Transportation Department’s programming
                                                                                     guide (funding guidelines) prioritize projects that are consistent with the
                                                                                     General Plan. Lastly, the City Planning and Design Commission conducts
                                                                                     an annual review of CIP projects to determine consistency with the
                                                                                     General Plan.
 34. The City shall review and update the City’s Emergency Shelter Site    Complete/ As part of the 2008-2013 Housing Element update, the City updated the         Retain program.
     inventory to determine if the sites are adequate, accessible,         Ongoing   emergency shelter sites inventory. The City updated the inventory for the
     appropriate, and developable.                                                   2013-2021 update and will continue to do so as new emergency shelters
                                                                                     are constructed.
 35. The City shall prepare an annual report to the City Council on        Complete/ City staff has and will continue to prepare annual housing reports for the    Retain program.
     implementation of City housing programs and recommend revisions       Ongoing   City Council.
     to the implementation strategies as appropriate.
 36. The City may assist non-profit organizations with predevelopment      Ongoing   SHRA continues to offer, in limited circumstances, predevelopment loans       Retain program.
     loans in conjunction with applications for permanent supportive                 to non-profit organizations. The revised Multifamily Lending and Mortgage
     housing.                                                                        Revenue Bond Policies, adopted March 17, 2009, describe the details and
                                                                                     parameters for these loans.
                                                                                     In 2008, SHRA approved three predevelopment loans totaling $530,000
                                                                                     for the non-profit developers of the YWCA and Budget Inn. Together,
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                              | Page H A-9

                                                                                                                                            Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1            Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                        Status                                    Evaluation                                       Recommendation
                                                                                          these projects provide 105 permanent supportive housing units. In 2009
                                                                                          and 2010 SHRA also approved predevelopment loans for the 7th and H
                                                                                          project totaling $1,985,000. This project provides 150 permanent
                                                                                          supportive housing units.
 37. The City shall amend the City Zoning Code (Sacramento City Code           Complete   The new Planning and Development Code adopted in April 2013 defines               Delete program.
     Title 17) as needed to ensure that "transitional housing" and                        “transitional housing” and “supportive housing.” The definitions clarify that
     "supportive housing," as those terms are defined in California                       transitional and supportive housing is to be considered in the same
     Government Code section 65582, are treated as residential uses                       manner as single-family and multifamily dwellings.
     subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses
     of the same type in the same zone, in conformance with section
     65583 of the California Government Code.
 38. The City shall prepare a comprehensive update of the Infill Strategy,     Incomplete The General Plan is updated every five years and includes the City’s              Delete program.
     which would include reducing planning and development fees in infill                 policies and programs for infill development.
     target areas and integrating the City’s Commercial Corridor
     Revitalization Strategy into the Infill Strategy, to address obstacles to
     development in target infill areas, commercial corridors, and key
     opportunity sites.
 39. The City shall submit an annual report to the City Council that           Complete/  The City merged the annual report on infill development with the General          Modify program to
     evaluates implementation of the Infill Strategy and recommends            Ongoing    Plan Annual Report, which is shared with the City Council each year.              reflect the merger
     appropriate revisions.                                                                                                                                                 of the annual report
                                                                                                                                                                            on infill
                                                                                                                                                                            development with
                                                                                                                                                                            the General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                            annual report.
 40. The City shall encourage infill development by reducing barriers          Complete/  The 2030 General Plan, adopted in 2009, increased densities and                   Modify program to
     through the following actions:                                            Ongoing    flexibility for land uses in many infill areas. Between 2009 and 2010, the        reflect the
                                                                                          City rezoned over 2,000 parcels to be consistent with the new land use            completed Zoning
                Zoning Code updates and streamlining, especially as it                   designations. The City is currently (2013) conducting a three phase               Code Update and
                 relates to standards for the City’s mixed use, residential               update of the Planning and Development Code to provide a predictable,             maintain a focus on
                 mixed use, and higher density zoning districts;                          clear, and consolidated direction for development that focuses on                 infrastructure
                proactive zoning that encourages mixed use and higher                    traditional neighborhoods while reinvigorating others. The City completed         improvements.
                 density development in key opportunity areas such as                     the first phase of the update on April 9, 2013, to provide flexibility in
                 those near light rail stations and along commercial                      development standards for infill lots, to recognize urban and traditional
                 corridors; and                                                           development patterns identified in the General Plan, and to create a
                                                                                          consistent citywide site plan and design review process. The City plans to
                infrastructure improvements and assistance to ensure that
                                                                                          complete the second phase of the update in late 2013 to revise the Mixed
                 adequate infrastructure is in place to serve higher density
                                                                                          Income Housing Ordinance, Housing Trust Fund Ordinance, Subdivision
                 and mixed use development in key opportunity areas.
                                                                                          Ordinance, and Flood Ordinance. Finally, the City plans to complete the
                                                                                          third phase in 2014 to complete the Sign Ordinance, update the citywide
                                                                                          design guidelines, and update the energy efficiency standards to support
                                                                                          the Climate Action Plan.
                                                                                          Additionally, in 2010 the Community Development Department
Page H A-10     |                                                                                                                                                  Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                        H-A
 Table HA-1           Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                  Status                                      Evaluation                                 Recommendation
                                                                                      implemented the Shovel Ready Sites Program for the River District, Florin
                                                                                      Corridor, 65th Street Area, and Northeast Light Rail Line. The goal of the
                                                                                      program is to address infrastructure needs as well as tackle contamination
                                                                                      and access issues.
 41. The City shall pursue grant funding, including the State Department Ongoing      As indicated in Program 14, the City acquired approximately $135 million     Retain program.
     of Housing and Community Development Workforce Housing                           in Prop 1C and 1B funding in 2008 and 2009. The City also used Federal
     Program, Community Design Grant Program, and other revenue                       Stimulus Funding, including $400,000 in EPA Brownfield money for the
     sources to provide critical amenities/services in infill areas to                City’s Brownfield Revolving Loan Fund. Currently, due to the State budget
     promote complete neighborhoods. Examples include:                                crisis, some funding programs, such as the workforce housing grant
                                                                                      program, are currently not accepting applications. The California
               Park Improvements;                                                    Sustainable Strategies Pilot Program has entitled Township 9 for
               Sidewalk widening, streetscape improvements and street                additional points in the State and Federal grant applications.
                lighting; and
               Other infrastructure improvements.
 42. The City shall promote and expand the use of pre-approved house     Complete     In 2010 the Community Development Department, through a grant from           Delete program
     plans in targeted residential infill areas.                                      SMUD, expanded and improved the infill housing plan program to include:
                                                                                                  New models
                                                                                                  Value engineering
                                                                                                  Green homes
                                                                                                  Universal design
                                                                                      Three homes were completed during 2012 and 2013. The updated
                                                                                      California building code will become effective January 2014. Due to the
                                                                                      costs of updating the pre-approved plans the program will be
                                                                                      discontinued.
 43. The City shall implement the Downtown Housing Investment            Discontinued The City adopted an ordinance in October 2008, which established a           Delete program.
     Strategy. The primary purpose of the Downtown Housing Investment                 Development Fee Deferral Program as part of an economic incentive plan
     Strategy is to establish priorities for the expenditure of downtown              to alleviate impediments and create incentives to foster downtown
     housing set-aside funds. This will help ensure the production of a               housing. As part of the initiative to safeguard existing affordable housing,
     broad range of housing types for all income levels and support                   SHRA approved $5 million to fund the immediate repair needs of
     improved economic vitality within the Downtown Redevelopment                     Riverview Plaza, a 120-unit senior affordable downtown high rise. SHRA
     Area. The four major goals of the Downtown Housing Investment                    assistance to Riverview Plaza restricted 33 units at 50 percent of the area
     Strategy include:                                                                median income for an additional 55 years. SHRA also worked with the
                                                                                      owner of Pioneer Towers to assist with the rehabilitation of the 198-unit
               Alleviating impediments and create incentives to foster               senior downtown high-rise to ensure long-term affordability.
                downtown housing
               Encouraging both market-rate and affordable housing                   The Downtown Housing Strategy for the Central City identified the JKL
                                                                                      corridor as the primary focus area, and called for a Notice of Funding
                development.
                                                                                      Availability (NOFA) for $25 million. Three sites were submitted as part of
               Safeguarding existing affordable housing                              that process: 11th and J Streets, 16th and J Streets, and the 700 and 800
               Maintaining commitment to the Single Room Occupancy                   Block of K Streets. In 2010 the latter site at the 700 and 800 Block of K
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                            | Page H A-11

                                                                                                                                         Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1             Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                    Program                                    Status                                    Evaluation                                      Recommendation
                  Strategy.                                                            Street was subject to an Exclusive Right to Negotiate Agreement as
                                                                                       SHRA was working with two mixed-use mixed income projects to bring
     This strategy will be supported by Notice of Funding Availability and             forward development proposals in Summer 2011. While the 700 Block
     by City policies targeting infill development.                                    was approved in 2011, the City and SHRA were unable to come to
                                                                                       agreement with the developer of the 800 Block. However, two downtown
                                                                                       projects were recently completed (between 2011 and 2013): the
                                                                                       renovations of the 32-unit Maydestone (15th and J Streets) and the
                                                                                       construction of the 150-unit 7th and H project (7th and H Streets).
                                                                                       The State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in 2011,
                                                                                       eliminating funding for this action. Due to a lack of resources, this program
                                                                                       will be discontinued.
 44. The City shall conduct a study regarding the use of property liens for Incomplete The State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in 2011,                Delete program.
     delinquent properties in order to encourage infill housing                        eliminating funding for this action. Due to staff reductions, this program
     development.                                                                      will not be completed.
 45. The City shall issue waivers for sewer and sanitation development      Ongoing    Through the Regional Sanitation Board’s fee waiver and deferral program,         Retain program.
     fees for projects in which at least 10% are affordable to very low-               SHRA provided fee waivers and deferrals to 530 affordable units in the
     income households.                                                                City and County between 2008 and 2012.
 46. The City shall support Sacramento County’s efforts to amend the        Complete   On January 14, 2009, the County, the Regional Sanitation Board, and the          Delete program.
     enacting ordinances for the County Fee Waiver and Deferral                        Water Board amended the ordinances enacting the County Fee Waiver
     Program to extend the deferral period recognizing the complexities                and Deferral Program. In addition to removing all sunset dates from the
     and time needed to complete an affordable housing development.                    program, the amendments extended the fee deferral period to 24 months,
                                                                                       and the waiver compliance period to 36 months maximum.
 47. The City shall use sewer credits to assist at least 200 units annually Ongoing    The Economic Development Department issued 995.67 sewer credits                  Modify program to
     for infill and affordable housing.                                                from 2008 to 2012. Since 2010, these sewer credits have helped create            remove numerical
                                                                                       1,632 new jobs and 313 low-income and infill housing units.                      goals, as these are
                                                                                                                                                                        identified in the
                                                                                                                                                                        quantified
                                                                                                                                                                        objectives.
 48. The City shall produce a study on alternative housing products,        Incomplete The State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in 2011,                Delete program.
     materials, and designs that support affordability “by design” through             eliminating funding for this action. Due to the limitation of available funding
     cost savings at the planning and development stages. The study will               sources to pay for staff, SHRA has not been able to conduct this study.
     recommend how these housing products can be encouraged by the
     City.
 49. The City shall update the Zoning Code to reflect recent changes to     Complete   The new Planning and Development Code, adopted in April 2013,                    Delete program.
     State law pertaining to density bonuses and impact fee deferrals for              includes a density bonus chapter that is consistent with State law.
     affordable housing.
 50. The City shall update SHRA’s Multi-family Lending Guidelines for the   Complete   On March 17, 2009, the City Council adopted revised Multifamily Lending          Delete program.
     expenditure of HOME, Housing Trust Fund, and Tax Increment                        and Mortgage Revenue Bond Policies. The guidelines include funding,
     Housing Set Aside funds for multi-family rental developments to                   underwriting, and leveraging requirements that maximize external
Page H A-12      |                                                                                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                          H-A
 Table HA-1           Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                    Status                                    Evaluation                                    Recommendation
     maximize leverage of public and private dollars and to meet the                  financing and align funding with other policy objectives. Specifically,
     goals, policies, and programs of the Consolidated Plan,                          Section 2.3 requires that the SHRA loan amount shall not exceed the
     Redevelopment Implementation Plans and the Housing Element.                      difference between total development cost and the maximum potential
                                                                                      equity and debt raised from private and public sources other than SHRA.
                                                                                      In addition, the guidelines clarify that the total loan amount, including hard
                                                                                      and soft debt, shall not exceed 90 percent combined loan to value.
                                                                                      Furthermore, the introduction to the guidelines clearly states the goals of
                                                                                      the program, which include increasing and preserving the supply of
                                                                                      affordable housing, revitalizing communities, encouraging economic
                                                                                      integration, and maintaining sustainable living environments, all of which
                                                                                      are larger goals of City housing policies and programs, including the
                                                                                      Housing Element.
 51. The City shall apply for new and existing Federal and State funding  Ongoing     In 2009 SHRA approved gap funding for seven multifamily affordable             Retain program.
     sources, such as Proposition 1C funds, HELP, BEGIN, and MHSA,                    housing developments and 36 permanent supportive housing units in two
     and will support applications for Tax Exempt Mortgage Revenue                    developments financed with MHSA funding. In addition, SHRA assisted in
     Bonds, Low Income Housing Tax Credits, State of California Multi-                the sale of 11 homes financed through the BEGIN program.
     family Housing Program, and other such federal and state programs
     to assist affordable housing programs and projects.                              In 2010 SHRA received a $2 million Housing Trust Fund Award from the
                                                                                      State of California. SHRA used the funding to assist the 7th and H project.
                                                                                      In addition, SHRA supported three projects that received an allocation of
                                                                                      nine percent tax credits, including: La Valentina (81 units), Forest Palms
                                                                                      (40 units), and 7th and H (150 units). All three have been completed,
                                                                                      creating 271 new or preserved affordable housing units in the city.
                                                                                      In 2011 SHRA approved financing for the Kelsey Village project, a 20-unit
                                                                                      newly constructed permanent supportive housing project. The project,
                                                                                      which is already under construction, will be financed with HUD 811
                                                                                      proceeds, bonds, and four percent tax credits. SHRA also began
                                                                                      construction on two additional projects funded with NSP: Coral Gables (4
                                                                                      units) and 3535 Del Paso Boulevard (17 units).
                                                                                      In 2012 SHRA supported three projects in the City: Township 9 (180
                                                                                      units), Ridgeway Hotel (22 units), and Taylor Terrace (168 units), all of
                                                                                      which are currently under construction.
 52. The City shall explore “in-lieu” fee equivalents using the economic  In progress The City is considering an affordable housing impact fee as part of the        Replace with a
     impact analysis described in Program 5 for market developers under               Mixed Income Housing Ordinance update.                                         program to revise
     the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance for consideration by the City                                                                                                the Mixed income
     Council. Uses of collected fees may include funding of the Extremely                                                                                            Housing
     Low-Income (ELI) Buydown Program and maintaining affordability of                                                                                               Ordinance.
     inclusionary ownership units.
 53. The City shall make technical changes to the Housing Trust Fund      In progress City staff has developed draft revisions to the ordinance. The City            Retain program.
     Ordinance to apply the fees equally throughout the City and modify               anticipates completing the ordinance revisions by early 2014.
     aspects of the ordinance that have proven to be ineffective over the
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                               | Page H A-13

                                                                                                                                      Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1            Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                  Program                                    Status                                    Evaluation                                  Recommendation
     years.
 54. The City shall use the remaining funds in the Affordable Housing Fee  Complete  In 2009 the City redirected funds from the Affordable Housing Fee             Delete program.
     Reduction Program to assist developments required through the                   Reduction Program to fund the Shovel Ready Sites Program. The
     Mixed Income Ordinance. The City shall also assess the feasibility of           program was not used much from 2004 to 2008 because it triggers
     the program in light of State prevailing wage requirements and may              prevailing wage requirements. Prevailing wage requirements can often
     revise the program to better serve affordable housing development.              dramatically increase development costs for projects that use these City
                                                                                     funds. In 2008, SHRA identified that there were no projects on the horizon
                                                                                     that could or wanted to take advantage of the funds.
                                                                                     The Shovel-Ready Sites Program has a specific emphasis on preparing
                                                                                     areas that can have a near-term return on investment for the City,
                                                                                     especially infill areas. This type of planning and economic development
                                                                                     work was especially needed during the recession, because of the City’s
                                                                                     dependence upon revenue from processing development (e.g., building
                                                                                     permit fees). With an emphasis on job-creation, retail, and office
                                                                                     attraction, the Shovel-Ready Sites Program efforts help increase sales tax
                                                                                     and property tax revenues, thereby increasing the General Fund.
 55. The City shall prepare a study recommending additional incentives     Complete  In April 2013 the City comprehensively updated its zoning and                 Delete program.
     for small infill projects.                                                      development codes to encourage sustainable infill development by
                                                                                     restructuring and improving processes in the development code (e.g.,
                                                                                     parking regulations, design review, urban development standards) to
                                                                                     make sustainable infill development economically feasible.
 56. Each year the City shall evaluate the effectiveness of the MATRIX     Ongoing   In the most recent poll by the Business Journal, the City of Sacramento       Retain program.
     program and other development process streamlining efforts in order             was ranked fifth out of the seven most business-friendly jurisdictions in the
     to ensure a high level of customer service.                                     region.
 57. The City shall continue to implement the preliminary review process   Ongoing   The Community Development Department has continued to implement               Retain program.
     whereby City staff and neighborhood groups provide comments and                 the preliminary review process.
     advise the applicant of policy and technical areas that need to be
     addressed prior to the formal application review. This is an existing
     program that helps to identify planning and community issues early in
     the process so that problems can be identified and addressed and
     processing time is shortened.
 58. The City shall work with SAFCA and other responsible agencies to      Complete/ The Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency (SAFCA), with the support of         Retain program.
     achieve increases in flood protection to the City and surrounding     Ongoing   the City of Sacramento and in cooperation with the U.S. Army Corps of
     areas so that City and other land use agencies can proceed with                 Engineers (USACE), U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (USBR), and the
     development plans and meet Federal Emergency Management                         Central Valley Flood Protection Board (CVFPB), are working to
     Agency (FEMA) and State requirements for flood protection in 100-               progressively increase the level of flood protection in the Sacramento area
     year and 200-year flood plains, respectively. Actions include: (1)              to 200-year flood protection from major rivers and streams.
     finishing Folsom Dam spillway modifications, and supporting and
     implementing subsequent raising of Folsom Dam; (2) finishing                    SAFCA is evaluating the levee systems protecting portions of northern
     construction of improvements along the perimeter levee system                   and southern Sacramento to determine if the levees meet the criteria
     protecting Natomas; (3) accomplishing improvements needed to                    established by Federal Emergency Management Agency for levee
Page H A-14    |                                                                                                                                          Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                H-A
 Table HA-1         Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                  Program                               Status                                    Evaluation                                 Recommendation
     meet FEMA levee accreditation requirements for lands in the               accreditation by the National Flood Insurance Program. These evaluations
     Sacramento area protected by levees; and (4) supporting                   are expected to be finalized in 2013.
     development and implementation of plans for progressively
     improving the level of flood protection in Sacramento area to 200-        State law requires urban areas to have 200-year level of protection by
     year urban level of protection.                                           July 2016, or to have made adequate progress on construction of facilities
                                                                               that would achieve this level of protection by 2025. By July 2016, a city or
                                                                               county within the Sacramento-San Joaquin Valley is not to enter into a
                                                                               development agreement, issue a permit for construction of a residence, or
                                                                               approve a tentative map for property located in a flood hazard zone in an
                                                                               urban area, unless it finds that the property is protected by facilities that
                                                                               provide a 200-year level of protection, it has placed conditions on the
                                                                               development that will ensure that the development is protected to 200-
                                                                               year level of protection, or the flood management agency is making
                                                                               adequate progress toward providing 200-year level of protection.
                                                                               Major ongoing flood protection activities include those described below:
                                                                                       Improvements to Folsom Dam and maintenance of and
                                                                                        improvements to the levee systems protecting Natomas, North
                                                                                        Sacramento, and South Sacramento continue.
                                                                                       Improvements to the Folsom Dam spillway by USBR and USACE
                                                                                        are scheduled to be complete in late 2017. Construction of up to
                                                                                        a 3.5-foot raise of Folsom Dam is also planned.
                                                                                       SAFCA has completed substantial improvements to Natomas
                                                                                        levees in cooperation with the State under the Department of
                                                                                        Water Resources Early Implementation Program. SAFCA is
                                                                                        currently (2013) completing additional improvements to achieve
                                                                                        100-year and subsequently 200-year levels of flood protection.
                                                                                       USACE, in cooperation with CVFPB and SAFCA, is developing
                                                                                        plans for further improvements to levee systems protecting
                                                                                        portions of northern and southern Sacramento to progressively
                                                                                        increase the level of flood protection to the 200-year level for
                                                                                        urban flood protection. Congress authorized these plans in 2010,
                                                                                        which are currently scheduled for completion in 2014
                                                                                       The South Sacramento Streams project addresses flood
                                                                                        protection for the south part of the city. USACE completed
                                                                                        construction of the last reach of improvements along the creeks
                                                                                        west of Franklin Boulevard in 2012. SAFCA, in partnership with
                                                                                        the City, constructed improvements without Federal participation
                                                                                        to Unionhouse Creek east of Franklin Boulevard to Highway 99 in
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                      | Page H A-15

                                                                                                                                           Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1           Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                       Status                                    Evaluation                                   Recommendation
                                                                                                   2012 to provide a 100-year level of protection. USACE and
                                                                                                   SAFCA are developing plans for flood control improvements on
                                                                                                   Florin Creek from Franklin Boulevard east to Highway 99, with
                                                                                                   construction tentatively scheduled for summer of 2014 or 2015,
                                                                                                   contingent upon availability of funding.
 59. The City shall revise the Zoning Code to reduce the parking             Complete    The City modified the parking requirements for affordable, senior, and         Delete program.
     requirement for senior and efficiency units from 1.5 parking spaces                 other multifamily residential units as part of a comprehensive update to its
     per unit to one parking space per unit outside the Central City area.               parking regulations adopted on October 30, 2012.
 60. The City shall prepare a study recommending new financing options       In progress These efforts are being largely carried out through the City’s Shovel          Retain program.
     to provide for infrastructure in infill areas. New sources of financing             Ready Sites Program, which identified key infrastructure investments to
     could include state and federal grants, the General Fund, the use of                support catalyst development (see Program 40).
     impact fees, bond measures, and tax increment financing.
 61. The City shall implement the Asset Repositioning of the City’s public   Ongoing     As a result of on-going reductions in capital and operating funding from       Retain program.
     housing units through land use regulations and with local resources,                the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the City
     ensuring no net loss of ELI units.                                                  adopted the Asset Repositioning Study in July 2007. This study set the
                                                                                         stage for the implementation of a proactive strategy to "reposition"
                                                                                         SHRA's public housing units to reduce dependence on HUD and eliminate
                                                                                         capital and operating deficits.
                                                                                         On March 10, 2009, the City Council approved the disposition and transfer
                                                                                         of two properties known as Sutterview and Washington Plaza totaling 153
                                                                                         units of affordable senior housing to a related nonprofit for the purpose of
                                                                                         obtaining the financing and tax credits necessary to complete major
                                                                                         rehabilitations of both. HUD approval was subsequently received on
                                                                                         October 8, 2009, and the properties transferred July 8, 2010. Pre-
                                                                                         construction due diligence is complete and financing applications are now
                                                                                         in process. Construction is anticipated to begin by January of 2014.
                                                                                         On August 10, 2010, the City Council approved the disposition of a
                                                                                         second set of three properties under this strategy. On July 18, 2012, HUD
                                                                                         approved one of these for disposition and transfer from public housing,
                                                                                         the 78-unit senior housing property known as Sierra Vista. This property is
                                                                                         anticipated to transfer by June 30, 2013. Pre-construction due diligence
                                                                                         has already been completed and financing applications will be submitted
                                                                                         upon transfer to nonprofit. Construction is anticipated to begin by March
                                                                                         2014. The first two of these properties have received project-based
                                                                                         housing vouchers which allow the current residents to remain in place
                                                                                         while paying a maximum of 30 percent of their annual income towards
                                                                                         rent. An application for vouchers for the third property has been submitted
                                                                                         and anticipated to be approved by June 30, 2013.
 62. The City shall study the feasibility of a voluntary ELI “buy-down”      Incomplete  The State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in 2011,              Delete program.
     program. For all new multifamily rental housing developments with                   eliminating an important source of funding for this action. Due to the
     SHRA funding, SHRA will have the right to buy down affordable                       limitation of available funding sources to staff this effort, SHRA has no
Page H A-16     |                                                                                                                                              Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                    H-A
 Table HA-1          Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                 Program                                   Status                                   Evaluation                                 Recommendation
     units. The buy-down program provides a subsidy to provide                    immediate plans to research the feasibility of this option.
     affordable units to extremely low-income households. Approval and
     implementation of the program is dependent on identification of an
     on-going local funding source.
 63. The City shall continue to implement the Single Room Occupancy      Ongoing  The City adopted the SRO strategy in 2006, with a goal of no further loss   Modify program to
     (SRO) strategy, ensuring no net loss of Downtown SRO units and               of SRO units downtown and building new and rehabilitating existing SRO      remove numerical
     providing funding and other resources for the rehabilitation of 100          units. Since adoption of the ordnance, 32 SRO units have been               goals, as these are
     existing SRO units and the construction of 200 new SRO units in the          rehabilitated at the YWCA, the 104 SRO units at the Hotel Berry were        identified in the
     City.                                                                        renovated, and the 150-unit 7th and H project was constructed.              quantified
                                                                                                                                                              objectives.
 64. The City shall use available housing resources, including project   Ongoing  The City maintains its commitment to providing extremely low income         Retain program.
     based rental subsidies, such as local Housing Choice Vouchers,               (ELI) housing. The Housing Choice Voucher Program remains the most
     federal Housing Assistance Payment vouchers, and state Mental                efficient way to provide housing for extremely low-income households.
     Health Services Act Vouchers for the provision of housing for                Since 2008, SHRA has maintained at least 99 percent occupancy in the
     extremely low-income households.                                             Housing Choice Voucher Program and used at least 100 percent of
                                                                                  available program funds. Most recently in 2012, SHRA administered
                                                                                  11,840 Housing Choice Vouchers with a 99.05 percent lease up, and
                                                                                  used 100 percent of available funding.
                                                                                  SHRA funded the preservation of four projects with 300 HAP vouchers.
                                                                                  Two City projects received Mental Health Services Act Vouchers: 25 in
                                                                                  the Budget Inn and 11 at the YWCA. However, due to a freeze in the tax
                                                                                  credit market, the developer was forced to return tax credits in November
                                                                                  2008. SHRA also preserved Southcrest Apartments, a 32-unit complex,
                                                                                  with project-based Section 8.
                                                                                  SHRA purchased the Hotel Berry and through its affiliate, Norwood
                                                                                  Avenue Housing Corporation submitted and was awarded a tax credit
                                                                                  allocation in Summer 2009. In 2010, the Hotel Berry received Mental
                                                                                  Health Services Act Funding from SHRA resulting in 10 MHSA units.
                                                                                  Finally, the 150-unit 7th and H project, which serves extremely low-
                                                                                  income individuals, received its tax credit funding. By 2013 both the Hotel
                                                                                  Berry and the 7th and H project were completed.
 65. The City shall continue to provide assistance to senior affordable  Ongoing  In accordance with Program 67, SHRA will be preparing a report on senior    Retain program.
     housing projects.                                                            housing needs and options, which will help inform lending policies for
                                                                                  senior affordable housing. In the meantime, SHRA continues to support
                                                                                  construction and rehabilitation of senior apartments throughout the city.
                                                                                  SHRA assisted in the renovation and completion of four senior apartment
                                                                                  complexes with 285 total units: Broadway Seniors Apartments, Casa De
                                                                                  Angelo Apartments, Rio Linda Manor, and Forrest Palms. In addition
                                                                                  SHRA provided financial assistance to Southcrest Apartments. In 2010,
                                                                                  SHRA assisted the rehabilitation of the 108-unit senior apartment complex
                                                                                  at 626 I Street. In 2011 this project was under construction, with an
                                                                                  anticipated completion date of winter 2013.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                        | Page H A-17
                                                                                                                                              Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1            Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                        Status                                      Evaluation                                      Recommendation
 66. Over the next five years, the City shall work with the County             Ongoing      Through the Interagency Council (see program 70 below), SHRA and the             Modify program to
     Department of Human Assistance (DHA) and service providers to                          City and County of Sacramento work together to provide a range of                remove reference
     improve linkages between emergency shelters, transitional housing                      services for homeless families and individuals. The County "continuum of         to DHA.
     and supportive services.                                                               care" (CoC) model covers an array of services from prevention and
                                                                                            services to housing. Historically, the Community Services Planning
                                                                                            Council staffs the Ten Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness,
                                                                                            coordinating closely with DHA, who has been the recipient of most of the
                                                                                            Federal funding for homeless services. Due to funding shortages, the
                                                                                            structure of DHA and the administration of the CoC underwent a
                                                                                            transformation in 2010. The Board of Supervisors approved a homeless
                                                                                            sustainability plan based on a new public-private Homeless Continuum of
                                                                                            Care (CoC) structure that includes the County of Sacramento, the City of
                                                                                            Sacramento, other jurisdictions, and private sector partners. Since that
                                                                                            time, a new nonprofit, the Sacramento Steps Forward Nonprofit
                                                                                            Corporation (SSFNC), has incorporated. In July 2011 the transition of the
                                                                                            CoC from DHA to the SSFNC became effective.
 67. The City shall report on senior housing options, including:               Incomplete   The State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in 2011,                Delete program.
                independent living, assisted living, and at-home care                      eliminating funding for this action. Due to the limitation of available funding
                                                                                            sources to staff this effort, SHRA has no immediate plans to complete this
                strategies for creating accessibility to health-related                    report.
                 services that are not available on site (to provide aging-in-
                 place options)
                gaps in affordability
                recommended solutions.
     The report will also describe different types of senior housing such as
     clustered cottages, motel conversions and intergenerational housing
     in transit-oriented developments.
 68. Through the City’s contract with Mercy Housing, provide technical         Discontinued SHRA provided Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds to                  Delete program.
     assistance and capacity building for non-profit agencies seeking to                    Mercy Housing through 2011 in order to provide technical assistance to
     develop affordable housing in Sacramento.                                              social service providers that wish to develop supportive housing for
                                                                                            special needs groups, such as emancipated foster youths and persons
                                                                                            with HIV/AIDS. This funding has proven to be effective in enhancing the
                                                                                            capacity of service providers to own, manage, and develop permanent
                                                                                            supportive housing.
                                                                                            However, the State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in
                                                                                            2011, eliminating funding for this action. Due to the lack of resources this
                                                                                            program has been discontinued.
 69. The City shall provide funding and other resources for permanent          Ongoing      Please see Program 70 (below) for information regarding permanent                Retain program.
     supportive housing located both in leased units and affordable                         supportive housing units and leased housing units developed under the
     housing developments.                                                                  Ten Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness.
 70. The City shall implement the Ten Year Plan to End Chronic                 Ongoing      The Sacramento City Council and County Board of Supervisors adopted              Retain program.
Page H A-18     |                                                                                                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                               H-A
 Table HA-1          Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                  Program                                         Status                                      Evaluation                                  Recommendation
     Homelessness, including the “Housing First” strategy. Focuses of the                   the Ten Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness in Fall 2006, calling for
     “Housing First” strategy include:                                                      providing permanent supportive housing for all of Sacramento’s
                                                                                            chronically homeless population. Within the first year of adoption, 171
               Providing support for permanent housing that offers                         chronically homeless people were housed in units through leasing and
                disabled homeless individuals a home without expecting                      139 new permanent supporting housing units were under construction in
                them to have resolved their addictions or mental health                     three different projects. In 2008, with the approval of the Budget Inn, the
                problems.                                                                   number of permanent supporting housing units approved rose to 260,
               Providing supportive services and treatment in such                         which was just 20 units shy of the five-year goal of 280 (in only two years).
                                                                                            In 2009 approximately 130 people were housed in units through leasing.
                housing to assist tenants return to health and ability to stay
                housed.
                                                                                            In 2010 SHRA was involved in several projects and activities that
                                                                                            advanced supportive housing activities. The Keys to Hope program
                                                                                            provides lease assistance in scattered sites throughout Sacramento
                                                                                            County to chronically homeless individuals. Keys To Hope programs
                                                                                            provided assistance to 130 extremely low income individuals. In addition,
                                                                                            as of the end of 2012, a total of 11 permanent supportive housing projects
                                                                                            had been approved including: Colonia San Martin, MLK Village, YWCA,
                                                                                            Mutual at Highlands, Boulevard Ct., Hotel Berry, VOA Living Center, 7th
                                                                                            and H, and Kelsey Village. Collectively these projects increase the
                                                                                            number of newly developed permanent supporting housing units to 447.
 71. Annually provide information to Community Services Planning               Discontinued SHRA staff sat on the interagency council, staffed by the Community           Delete program.
     Council’s Beehive and “211” information line, and Self Help                            Services Planning Council, and actively participated in its efforts to
     Housing’s referral program to insure up-to-date affordable housing                     connect Sacramento residents with housing information and referrals,
     information for these referral services.                                               including the Beehive and "211" information line. SHRA staff provided
                                                                                            information to the referral programs as programs changed or were
                                                                                            updated.
                                                                                            However, the State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in
                                                                                            2011, eliminating funding for this action. Due to the lack of resources
                                                                                            SHRA no longer funds this program.
 72. Through the Human Rights/Fair Housing Commission, the City shall          Complete/    City and SHRA staff provided referrals to the Human Rights/Fair Housing       Retain program.
     provide fair housing assistance and dispute resolution services in        Ongoing      Commission to person with fair housing questions or concerns.
     order to resolve tenant and neighborhood conflicts.
 73. Working together with Mercy Housing and the Sacramento County             Discontinued See detail on Program 70 (above) on permanent supportive housing              Delete program.
     departments of Human Assistance (DHA) and Health and Human                             projects funded under the Ten Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness.
     Services (HHS), provide assistance to permanent supportive housing                     Each of the seven permanent supportive housing projects (i.e., Mutual at
     projects through the supportive loan program.                                          Highlands, Budget Inn/Boulevard Court, Hotel Berry, 7th and H, Folsom
                                                                                            Oaks, VOA North Highlands, YWCA) approved in the City and County use
                                                                                            a variety of public funding sources to ensure the capital and operating
                                                                                            expenses of the project are met. Many have used the Mental Health
                                                                                            Services Act (MHSA) Prop. 63 funds to bring long-term operating
                                                                                            subsidies to the project. Others have received operating guarantees from
                                                                                            SHRA in the form of a 15-year operating deficit reserve.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                                   | Page H A-19

                                                                                                                                                 Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1            Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                         Status                                        Evaluation                                   Recommendation
                                                                                             However, the State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in
                                                                                             2011, eliminating funding for this action. Due to the lack of resources this
                                                                                             program will be discontinued.
 74. The City shall encourage the preservation of regulated affordable          Ongoing      In 2004 the City Council adopted a Housing Preservation Ordinance               Retain program.
     rental developments that are converting to market rate. The City will                   aimed at preserving Federally-subsidized projects at risk of conversion to
     continue to implement the City’s Preservation Ordinance, which                          market rate. SHRA has been the lead Agency implementing the
     requires notification to SHRA of proposed conversion of affordable                      ordinance. In addition, SHRA has provided low-cost financing to preserve
     units, and allows SHRA priority to work with affordable developers to                   several at risk projects since 2004. In 2008 SHRA financed the
     preserve such projects. In addition, the City will ensure compliance                    preservation of three projects in the city with 285 total units: Broadway
     with the “no net loss” provisions of the adopted Housing Authority                      Seniors Apartments, Casa De Angelo, and Forest Palms. All three
     Repositioning Strategy, ensuring that, during rehabilitation and                        projects have been completed.
     revitalization of public housing properties, there is no net loss of units
     affordable to extremely low income families.
 75. The City and SHRA will seek to preserve, convert, and/or rehabilitate      Complete/    SHRA entered into legal loan agreements with all three properties in            Modify program to
     privately owned multifamily rental housing to assure its ongoing           Ongoing      2008: Casa De Angelo (September 18), Broadway Seniors (September                remove references
     affordability for lower-income residents. Specifically, the following                   26), and Forrest Palms (October 22). Casa De Angelo Apartment,                  to specific projects.
     projects will be preserved or rehabilitated and converted to affordable                 Broadway Seniors, and Forest Palms are all completed. In 2009 SHRA
     rental housing:                                                                         preserved Southcrest Apartments, a 32-unit complex with project-based
                                                                                             Section 8. SHRA also began construction on two additional projects
     a.    The City shall enter into a legally enforceable loan agreement                    funded through NSP: Coral Gables (4 units) and 3535 Del Paso
           with Dawson Holdings, Inc. for up to $3,495,000 in HOME and                       Boulevard (17 units).
           tax increment funding to preserve the Casa De Angelo
           Apartments.
     b.    The City shall enter into a legally enforceable loan agreement
           with Community Housing Opportunities Corporation for up to
           $1,900,000 in HOME and tax increment funding to preserve the
           Forrest Palms Apartments.
     c.    The City shall enter into a legally enforceable loan agreement
           with DHI Broadway Associates, L.P. for up to $2,100,000 in
           HOME and tax increment funding to preserve the Broadway
           Senior Center Apartments.
     d.    d. The City shall report to HCD on the financing and
           construction timeline for the three preservation projects,
           described above, that will be used to fulfill the Alternative
           Adequate Sites Program.
 76. The City shall continue to implement the Problem-Oriented Policing         Discontinued The City continued to fund the POP program, despite budget concerns,            Delete program.
     (POP) Program, which emphasizes preventing crime and abating                            from 2008 to 2012. Most recently, the City staffed the program with four
     various code violations by engaging the community, other public                         officers and one sergeant. However, due to a lack of resources, this
     agencies, and the private sector to address a problem.                                  program was discontinued.              Police officers have incorporated POP
                                                                                             principles in their all their patrols.
Page H A-20     |                                                                                                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                               H-A
 Table HA-1           Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                     Status                                       Evaluation                                    Recommendation
 77. The City shall implement the citywide rental inspection program        Complete/    The Rental Housing Inspection Program has completed the fourth year of           Retain program.
     where building inspectors will go door to door surveying rental        Ongoing      inspections. From 2008 to 2012, the City performed nearly 20,000 initial
     properties for interior and exterior code violations and issue                      inspections. Other program accomplishments include:
     corrective notices.
                                                                                                •    Batched billing and payment update processes are up and
                                                                                                     running.
                                                                                                •    Batch scanning process as part of City’s Content Management
                                                                                                     Project has allowed inspectors to develop paperless case files,
                                                                                                     start and finish job duties in the field.
                                                                                                •    Inspectors use a mobile web-based inspection application with
                                                                                                     performance reporting capability.
                                                                                                •    4th year (2011) top three corrections were: 978 faulty or
                                                                                                     improperly installed water heaters, 804 cases of faulty wiring,
                                                                                                     and 701 unsafe/faulty front entry doors.
                                                                                                •    70 percent of the identified rental properties are registered; staff
                                                                                                     send a reminder notice, warning notice, and if necessary, send
                                                                                                     administrative penalties to owners of rental properties that are
                                                                                                     occupied and not registered.
                                                                                         Staff has seen a decrease in the number of complaints from tenants of
                                                                                         rental properties, as compared to the previous five year average.
 78. The City shall continue the use of the SHRA Boarded/Vacant Home        Complete/Dis The SHRA Homeownership Services Department administered the                      Delete program.
     program. This program provides developer subsidies to qualified        continued    Boarded and Vacant Home Program. In 2009 SHRA assisted three
     developers purchasing, rehabilitating and selling single-family                     developers through the Boarded and Vacant Program. In 2010 and 2011,
     boarded and vacant homes. Award of the subsidy is contingent on                     SHRA acquired, rehabilitated, and sold 68 vacant and foreclosed single
     sale of the home to a low- or moderate-income family and                            family properties to low- to moderate-income families. However, SHRA
     recordation of affordability covenants.                                             discontinued this program once NSP funding was exhausted in 2011.
 79. The City, in an effort to have the most significant impact in blighted Complete/    On March 17, 2009, the City Council adopted revised Multifamily Lending          Delete program.
     areas, shall focus its rehabilitation funding and programs to rental   Ongoing      and Mortgage Revenue Bond Policies. The guidelines outline SHRA
     properties in need of substantial rehabilitation in redevelopment and               funding priorities. SHRA's top priorities for over the counter projects are
     other target areas.                                                                 preserving and recapitalizing projects that are already affordable, but that
                                                                                         are nearing the end of their affordability period and/or are in need of
                                                                                         renovations to operate. A portion of these projects are located in
                                                                                         redevelopment areas. SHRA preference in the guidelines has been given
                                                                                         to projects located in redevelopment areas. This preference will
                                                                                         encourage affordable housing developers to reinvest in projects that are
                                                                                         located in blighted areas. In addition, SHRA has many SHRA and City
                                                                                         initiatives such as the SRO Preservation Policy, the Ten Year Plan to End
                                                                                         Chronic Homelessness, the Downtown NOFA, and redevelopment area
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                                   | Page H A-21

                                                                                                                                             Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1           Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                       Status                                       Evaluation                                    Recommendation
                                                                                           implementation plans. In general, all of the projects under these initiatives
                                                                                           are in redevelopment areas or other target areas.
                                                                                           As of February 1, 2012, Assembly Bill 1X26 all redevelopment agencies in
                                                                                           the State of California are dissolved. However, existing redevelopment
                                                                                           plan areas are still in effect while the City and County Successor Agencies
                                                                                           wind down the activities of their former redevelopment agencies. SHRA is
                                                                                           providing project delivery services for existing projects in some
                                                                                           redevelopment plan areas until the projects are completed. This is a policy
                                                                                           statement rather than a program.
 80. The City, on a limited basis, shall provide funding for acquisition and  Discontinued SHRA has provided projects that are in need of minor renovations with            Delete program.
     minor rehabilitation to multi-family properties to increase diversity in              access to the Mortgage Revenue Bond Program. In addition to these
     established areas where there is limited opportunity to develop new                   private activities, the City adopted the Public Housing Asset Repositioning
     affordable housing.                                                                   Strategy in 2007, which seeks to preserve and rehabilitate public housing
                                                                                           assets throughout the City. Many of these units are in older areas of the
                                                                                           city with little opportunity for new development, and the City's commitment
                                                                                           to preservation is another way to meet the objectives of this program.
                                                                                           However, the State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in
                                                                                           2011, eliminating an important source of funding for this action. Due to the
                                                                                           lack of resources this program will be discontinued.
 81. In an effort to make the Investment Property Improvement Loan            Incomplete   The State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in 2011,                Delete program.
     Program more marketable, the City shall conduct a study of similar                    eliminating funding for this action. Due to the limitation of available funding
     efforts and programs in other jurisdictions to inform future                          sources to staff this effort, SHRA has no immediate plans to conduct this
     modifications to the existing program.                                                study.
 82. The City shall modify the Condominium Conversion Ordinance to            Incomplete   Due to staff reductions this program was not implemented during the              Retain program
     make the process and regulations clearer to staff, applicants, and                    previous Housing Element planning period, but will be carried forward in
     affected tenants, while maintaining a similar level of oversight in                   the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
     order to avoid adverse impacts to the rental stock and tenants.
 83. The City shall adopt a Universal Design Ordinance, consistent with       Complete     On February 16, 2010, the City Council adopted the Universal Design              Delete program.
     the State of California Department of Housing and Community                           Ordinance. The ordinance took effect on August 16, 2010.
     Development’s model ordinance.
 84. The City shall adopt a reasonable accommodation ordinance that           Complete     On August 25, 2009, the City Council adopted the Reasonable                      Delete program.
     streamlines and formalizes City procedures related to accessibility                   Accommodation Ordinance.
     and adaptability accommodations for development.
 85. The City shall educate the public, developers and public officials on    Discontinued SHRA continued to work with Human Rights/Fair Housing Commission                 Delete program.
     fair housing, anti-”NIMBY,” and accessibility issues. Educational                     (see programs 26 and 72, above) on fair housing issues. In addition,
     opportunities will include information available at the                               SHRA provides funds to the Sacramento Housing Alliance to educate the
     planning/building counter, supporting and promoting the anti-NIMBY                    public on affordable housing and other anti-"NIMBY" issues. During the
     campaign of the Sacramento Housing Alliance and staff,                                City's adoption of the reasonable accommodation ordinance (see program
     commissioner, and council training on fair housing.                                   84) and Universal Design Ordinance (see program 83), the City
                                                                                           conducted outreach to the disabled community, affordable housing
Page H A-22    |                                                                                                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Program Evaluation                                                                                                                                             H-A
 Table HA-1          Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                   Program                                     Status                                     Evaluation                                  Recommendation
                                                                                       advocates, and other stakeholders about accessibility needs and
                                                                                       challenges.
                                                                                       However, the State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in
                                                                                       2011, eliminating funding for this action. Due to a lack of resources, this
                                                                                       program will be discontinued.
 86. The City shall develop a checklist for considering information needs    Complete  The Community Development Department has gathered considerable                 Delete program.
     and accessibility to meetings when conducting public outreach.                    information on accessibility of public outreach meetings.
 87. The City shall conduct a study researching the incorporation of “visit- Complete  On February 16, 2010, the City Council adopted the Universal Design            Delete program.
     ability” standards into the residential building code.                            Ordinance. The ordinance, which took effect on August 16, 2010, requires
                                                                                       for-sale homes to offer features to potential buyers that would make the
                                                                                       home visitable.
 88. The City shall implement the Citywide Infill Strategy to encourage      Complete/ The City continues to successfully encourage single family housing in infill   Delete program.
     targeted single-family housing within residential neighborhoods.        Ongoing   areas. Between 2008 and 2013 there were 1,285 homes built in
                                                                                       residential infill target areas. The General Plan includes the City’s policies
                                                                                       and programs for infill development.
 89. The City shall amend SHRA’s existing first-time homebuyer               Complete/ In 2008 SHRA convened an internal team of policy, redevelopment, and           Modify program to
     programs to target distressed properties and/or areas, including        Ongoing   homeownership staff to explore the most strategic uses of homebuyer            reflect discontinued
     homes in Redevelopment Areas, foreclosed homes and new                            programs. The homebuyer program guidelines and procedures were                 use of
     ownership units built under the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance.                   modified to reflect the recommendations made by the team to target             redevelopment
                                                                                       homebuyer assistance programs to specific areas. However, production in        areas and remove
                                                                                       SHRA homebuyer assistance programs demonstrates that the programs              reference to the
                                                                                       are targeted naturally as a result the location of homes affordable to low-    Mixed Income
                                                                                       income buyers. For example, from 2008 to June 2013, SHRA assisted              Housing
                                                                                       212 homebuyers in the City with homebuyer assistance loans: 81 of the          Ordinance.
                                                                                       homes assisted were foreclosed properties; 110 of the homes assisted
                                                                                       were in Redevelopment Areas; an additional 92 of the homes assisted
                                                                                       were in other distressed areas of the city.
                                                                                       In December 2008, SHRA was awarded an allocation of the 2008 Housing
                                                                                       Act Volume Cap for a Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program specific
                                                                                       only to foreclosed properties. From 2009 to 2011, SHRA assisted 67
                                                                                       homebuyers purchase of foreclosed homes through the MCC REO
                                                                                       Program, an allocation of the 2008 Housing Act Volume Cap. In addition
                                                                                       to these homebuyer assistance loans, one homebuyer purchased a home
                                                                                       built under the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance in 2009.
                                                                                       The State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in 2011,
                                                                                       eliminating redevelopment areas; however, SHRA’s homebuyer
                                                                                       assistance programs are ongoing.
 90. The City shall amend SHRA’s existing single-family rehabilitation       Complete/ From 2008 to 2012, SHRA assisted 411low- and very low-income                   Modify program to
     program to target distressed properties and/or areas, including         Ongoing   residents with grants for emergency repairs and/or accessibility               reflect the loss of
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                                                                | Page H A-23

                                                                                                                                       Appendix A: PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Table HA-1          Evaluation of 2008-2013 City of Sacramento Housing Element Programs
                                 Program                                     Status                                    Evaluation                                     Recommendation
     homes in redevelopment areas and homes left vacant due to                       modifications to their homes. During the same time frame, SHRA assisted          redevelopment and
     foreclosure.                                                                    25 homeowners with rehabilitation loans. Most of the homes assisted              replace the loan
                                                                                     were in Redevelopment Areas or other distressed areas of the city.               program with a
                                                                                     However, the State of California abolished Redevelopment Agencies in             grant program for
                                                                                     2011, eliminating funding for this action, and the program was suspended.        minor repairs for
                                                                                                                                                                      emergencies or
                                                                                                                                                                      accessibility.
 91. The City shall amend the Zoning Code to clarify that limited equity In Progress The City updated its Zoning Code in 2013 to treat all alternative housing        Delete program.
     housing cooperatives are to be defined as apartments and governed               types as “dwellings” subject to the same use regulations..
     by the same standards as nonprofit affordable housing.
 92. The City shall conduct a study on local and regional employer       Incomplete  The State of California abolished redevelopment agencies in 2011,                Delete program.
     assisted housing programs to help employees find affordable                     eliminating funding for this action. Due to the limitation of available funding
     housing near their workplace, which may result in reduced employee              sources to staff this effort, SHRA has no immediate plans to conduct this
     turnover and commuting times.                                                   study.
 93. Using the economic impact analysis described in Program 5, the City In process  During the 2008 Housing Element workshops, the City Council agreed               Delete program.
     shall recommend modifications in homeownership income targets in                that income targets for inclusionary homeownership units should be
     the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance to promote development of                    increased, to better incentivize affordable homeownership. On February
     inclusionary ownership housing.                                                 10, 2009, SHRA held a workshop on the Mixed Income Housing
                                                                                     (Inclusionary) Ordinance with the City Council. As part of the presentation,
                                                                                     the results of an independent economic impact analysis were shared. At
                                                                                     the conclusion of the meeting, Council directed staff to organize a
                                                                                     stakeholder group to evaluate potential changes to the ordinance,
                                                                                     including modifications to encourage affordable homeownership options.
                                                                                     Staff anticipates updating the Mixed-Income Housing Ordinance to
                                                                                     incorporate a mix of affordable housing fees, affordable-by-design units,
                                                                                     and land dedication that would be adjusted based on project size.
                                                                                     Affordable-by-design units such as apartments, second units, and
                                                                                     duplexes, are market-rate units that are generally more likely to be
                                                                                     affordable to low- and moderate-income households in a community
                                                                                     compared to a standard single-family home.
Page H A-24    |                                                                                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Public Participation Notes                                                              H-B
Appendix B: Public Participation
        Notes
This Appendix contains meeting notes from public meetings with the Community, and City/County
Commissions. These meetings provided a forum for public input and comments which guided the preparation
of the Housing Element. Notes listed are from the following gatherings:
   City Planning and Design Commission Workshop #1 – November 15, 2013
   Community Workshop – March 13, 2013
   City Planning and Design Commission Workshop #2 – March 14, 2013
   Disabilities Advisory Commission – March 21, 2013
   SHRA Commission Workshop #1 – April 17, 2013
   Adult and Aging Commission – April 24, 2013
   City Planning and Design Commission Workshops #3 – May 23, 2013
   SHRA Commission Workshop #2 – May 29, 2013
                          City Planning and Design Commission Workshop #1
                                        November 15, 2013 (City Hall)
The City received the following comments:
   Need to tie affordable housing development to transportation corridors near transit.
   Need to encourage residential infill development.
   Support for a regional housing trust fund.
   Need to have regional equity in affordable housing development.
   The Housing Element is too quantitative. It is not just about quantity of units, it is about quality of life.
   Need housing that support social cohesion.
   Co-housing is an opportunity for infill and support neighborhoods.
   Affordable housing requirements can kill a project.
   As a project becomes denser, it becomes much more expensive.
   Need to look at issues for all citizens. There needs to be a place for all citizens.
   Homelessness is a significant issue for our community.
   Key strategy for homeless is permanent supportive housing.
   Need to discuss the progress on the 10-year plan to end chronic homelessness.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H B-1

                                                             Appendix B: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION NOTES
                                           Community Workshop
                                         March 13, 2013 (City Hall)
The City received the following comments:
  The Mixed Income Housing Ordinance should be applied citywide.
  The Mixed Income Housing Ordinance should not apply to infill but only to larger projects.
  The Mixed Income Housing Ordinance should be more flexible.
  Affordable housing requirements should adjust with market conditions.
  Affordable housing should be near services.
  Housing for extremely low-income housing should be prioritized.
  Co-housing is a great way of having multi-generational housing with a mix of incomes.
  There needs to be a greater availability of move-up housing for higher wage earners in the city.
  Gated communities should be encouraged.
  Prioritize down payment assistance with affordable housing funds.
  Need to encourage banks to renovate foreclosed homes and require them to sell them at affordable
   prices.
  Use utility rebates to improve REO’s before selling to lower income buyers.
  Focus on the economic sustainability of housing.
  Affordable housing attracts low-income people from outside of the city.
  Keep the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance the way it is. Even when the market goes down, the need
   goes up.
  The biggest obstacle to development is the City’s building permit fees.
  Concerns about overconcentration of affordable housing.
  Expand pre-approved infill housing plans to include multi-family housing, especially multi-generational
   housing.
  Concern about long term impact of affordable housing. There needs to be services.
  Property tax incentives to first-time homebuyers to buy in the city for 15 years.
  There should be mixed-income developments rather than large 100 percent affordable projects.
  Opinion was split as to whether to focus more on rehab or new construction.
  Concerns about cash investors buying up inventor and crowding out homebuyers.
Page H B-2 |                                                                         Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Public Participation Notes                                                          H-B
                          City Planning and Design Commission Workshop #2
                                          March 14, 2013 (City Hall)
The City received the following comments:
   Concern about expanding the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance citywide.
   Need to find more local funds for affordable housing.
   Need to look at inclusionary housing best practices of other cities.
   Need to rehab and sell foreclosed homes.
   Affordable housing programs should adjust with the housing market.
   Save affordable housing funding when market is high and use it when the market is low.
   Need to focus on intergenerational communities. You should not have to leave a community when you
    get older.
   Development needs to be profitable for developers.
   We are a poor city with pockets of wealth.
   Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are starting a program for foreclosed homes and selling to low-income
    households that are deed-restricted for five years.
   Apply the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance citywide.
   City needs to be competitive to attract developers and needs to offer move-up housing.
   Need to offer flexibility with the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance and use fees.
   Do not segregate or concentrate low-income housing
   Avoid large 100 percent affordable projects.
   Encourage HOAs and gated communities
   Need to focus funding on extremely-low-income housing.
                                     Disabilities Advisory Commission
                                          March 21, 2013 (City Hall)
The City received the following comments:
   Seniors and shut-ins are living in properties they cannot maintain. They become inaccessible and are also
    a fire hazard.
   Average income of an individual with a disability is $866 a month.
   ELI housing downtown is affordable but there is no place for residents to park. Cars are often the
    resident’s most valuable asset.
   There is a lot of employment and businesses leaving. The City needs to create more jobs.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                        | Page H B-3

                                                               Appendix B: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION NOTES
                                     SHRA Commission Workshop #1
                                       April 17, 2013 (SHRA Offices)
The City received the following comments:
  Flexibility for the inclusionary housing program is good.
  Let developers choose the percentage of low- vs. very low-income units to provide.
  Need to do affordable housing where land is cheap in the region.
  Concern that updating the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance will always be behind the market.
  Give developers options for Mixed Income Housing Ordinance but do not change the percentage.
       o Do not make options more attractive than building affordable housing.
       o Give lead time for the market to adjust. Maybe apply the ordinance in 2-3 years
  Need to focus on new construction.
  Apply the Mixed Income Housing Ordinance citywide but do not make it flexible in new growth areas.
                                       Adult and Aging Commission
                                       April 24, 2013 (4600 Broadway)
The City received the following comments:
  Need for housing for grandparents raising grandchildren.
  Concern about extremely low-income seniors.
  Many seniors will be homeless if they do not get section 8 vouchers.
  Need to incorporate more human services in affordable housing.
  Need more affordable infill housing
  Safe ground is looking for a plot of land for small cottages for the homeless.
  Infill housing will be challenging.
  Concerned that the housing trust fund fee is too high
  Need to look at Co-housing/shared housing
                           City Planning and Design Commission Workshop #3
                                       November 15, 2013 (City Hall)
The City received the following comments:
  A responsible lending policy is a great idea
  Growing percentage of single family homes that have been rented
  The growing number of denser developments may be changing the perception of rental.
Page H B-4 |                                                                       Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Public Participation Notes                                                         H-B
   Significant amount of foreclosed properties that were snapped up by investors. Will they come back on
    the market? A lot of people that rented lost homes and could not come back to market. Almost no
    product on the market.
   Need to have affordable housing fee indexed by area. Could cut into profit margin and not be able to
    get the financing.
   Executive housing should be promoted
   Support affordable-by-design housing. Deed-restricted for-sale housing takes advantage of the buyers.
   Conflicted on the affordable housing impact fee. Fee should be indexed. Some neighborhoods have
    significant amounts of affordable housing in it. Fee could be so high that it would make the project
    infeasible.
   The City has a good and competitive fee structure. Roseville has fees of $70-80,000 a door.
   Infill is hard to do, expensive, has infrastructure challenges.
   Concerned about current ordinance, but also concerned about making it citywide. The City will be
    driving development into the suburbs, which is not what we want.
   There should be all kinds of housing.
   Building housing units that are affordable by nature is a good way to do it.
   The City gives affordable housing developments subsidies and then charges them fees that threaten the
    project.
   Regional cooperation on affordable housing is even more important. Needs to be a regional dialog.
   Need to be creative and flexible on how we finance affordable housing.
   Need to prioritize special needs housing for funding.
                                      SHRA Commission Workshop #3
                                         May 29, 2013 (SHRA Offices)
The City received the following comments:
   Needs to be regional cooperation to create more affordable housing:
        o Should consider increasing regional housing trust fund fees or having a regional housing trust
              fund fee
        o Consider a regional approach to discourage subprime lending
        o Education and outreach on the cost/benefits of Single family homeownership
   Mixed Income Housing Ordinance should be applied citywide.
   The Rental Housing Inspection Program is important and we should have supportive language in the
    Housing Element.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H B-5

                                            Appendix B: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION NOTES
May 2013 Envision Sacramento Survey Results
Total # of Votes: 130
Total # of Votes: 51
Page H B-6 |                                                    Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Public Participation Notes     H-B
Total # of Votes: 51
Total # of Votes: 51
Adopted December 17, 2013                   | Page H B-7
                      Appendix B: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION NOTES
Total # of Votes: 51
Total # of Votes: 118
Page H B-8 |                              Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Public Participation Notes     H-B
Total # of Votes: 135
Adopted December 17, 2013                   | Page H B-9
                                       Appendix B: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION NOTES
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H B-10    |                                           Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                     H-C
Appendix C Land Inventory
Table H-C-1 provides the parcels included in the Land Inventory. Following this table are maps showing the
locations of these vacant sites throughout the city, as well as maps of Township 9, the Railyards, Delta
Shores, and other planned and approved projects. This appendix also includes maps of sites available for
Emergency Shelters and SROs.
Table H-C-1 does not include a complete inventory of lower-density residential sites, which are considered
appropriate for above moderate-income units. Instead it summarizes the capacity for lower-density
residential units. For a complete inventory of sites appropriate for above moderate-income units, please see
Table H-C-2, available on the City website: http://www.sacgp.org/housing.html.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                      | Page H C-1
                                       Appendix C: LAND INVENTORY
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H C-2    |                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
    HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                                                        H-C
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                   Inventoried Units
                                                                          Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                                 General Plan              Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                                 Land Use       Zoning   Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent        Inventoried
     Number         Acres    Community Plan Area Designation  Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)      Income-level
 22600440130000      1.00      North Natomas         RR           C-2      70-150           56.0         25%              14                Lower
 26602030310000      0.70       Arden Arcade        SCor          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%              10                Lower
 23701620100000      0.54     North Sacramento     SNLD          C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%               8                Lower
 23700920200000      6.39     North Sacramento      SCnt         C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              89                Lower
 23700910020000      2.96     North Sacramento      SCnt         C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              41                Lower
 23700920210000      0.94     North Sacramento      SCnt         C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              13                Lower
 23700920160000      2.09     North Sacramento      SCnt         C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              29                Lower
 23700920150000      4.63     North Sacramento      SCnt         C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              65                Lower
 23801010170000      0.53     North Sacramento      SCnt       C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%               7                Lower
 23801010200000      1.28     North Sacramento      SCnt       C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              18                Lower
 25100840180000      0.75     North Sacramento      SCor          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%              11                Lower
 25101250100000      0.53     North Sacramento      SCor          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%               7                Lower
 25101230150000      0.99     North Sacramento      SCor          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%              14                Lower
 25103250110000      0.56     North Sacramento      SCor          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%               8                Lower
 26502520120000      0.74     North Sacramento      SCor         C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              10                Lower
 26502420280000      0.61     North Sacramento      SCor          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%               9                Lower
 22502200650000      0.99      South Natomas        SCnt       C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              14                Lower
 22502200400000      3.90      South Natomas        SCnt       C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              55                Lower
 22502200640000     15.93      South Natomas        SCnt       C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              223               Lower
 22501400560000      2.99      North Natomas       ECMR        C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              42                Lower
 22501400570000      1.26      North Natomas       ECMR        C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              18                Lower
 22519700100000      4.04      North Natomas        TCnt       C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              57                Lower
 27401100300000      0.68      South Natomas        SCor      C-2-PC-SPD   70-150           56.0         25%               9                Lower
 27500850130000      1.73     North Sacramento     UNLD        C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              24                Lower
 27503100080000      2.16     North Sacramento      SCnt         C-2-LI    70-150           56.0         25%              30                Lower
 27503100220000      6.79     North Sacramento      SCnt       C-2-LI-PC   70-150           56.0         25%              95                Lower
 27503100070000      1.04     North Sacramento      SCnt         C-2-LI    70-150           56.0         25%              15                Lower
    Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                      | Page H C-3
                                                                                                        Appendix C: LAND INVENTORY
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                               Inventoried Units
                                                                      Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                             General Plan              Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                             Land Use      Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent      Inventoried
     Number       Acres Community Plan Area  Designation  Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)    Income-level
 27502600500000   2.67    North Sacramento      SCnt        C-2-LI     70-150           56.0         25%              37              Lower
 27502400970000   3.96    North Sacramento    UCntLow       C-2-LI     70-150           56.0         25%              55              Lower
 27502400960000   1.95    North Sacramento    UCntLow       C-2-LI     70-150           56.0         25%              27              Lower
 27701340040000   0.70    North Sacramento    UCorLow       C-2-TO     70-150           56.0         25%              10              Lower
 27701600730000   1.01      Arden Arcade      UCntHigh       C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              14              Lower
 27702610400000   2.93      Arden Arcade      UCntHigh       C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              41              Lower
 27400420430000   1.90     South Natomas       ECMR        C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              27              Lower
 00100310260000   0.85        Central City    UCntHigh     C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              12              Lower
 00102100470000   1.26        Central City    UCntHigh     C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              18              Lower
 00102100480000   0.51        Central City    UCntHigh     C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%               7              Lower
 00102100510000   1.83        Central City    UCntHigh     C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              26              Lower
 00100700090000   1.71        Central City    UCntLow      C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              24              Lower
 00100700240000   1.87        Central City    UCntLow      C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              26              Lower
 00300610100000   0.60        Central City    UCorLow      C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%               8              Lower
 00500100160000   0.53    East Sacramento       TCnt         C-2       70-150           56.0         25%               7              Lower
 00900120480000   0.80        Central City    UCntHigh       C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              11              Lower
 00900120580000   1.26        Central City    UCntHigh       C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              18              Lower
 00900120020000   2.24        Central City    UCntHigh       C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              31              Lower
 00900120030000   5.11        Central City    UCntHigh       C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              71              Lower
 00900120670000   1.38        Central City    UCntHigh       C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              19              Lower
 01002940300000   0.53         Land Park      UCorLow        C-2       70-150           56.0         25%               7              Lower
 01402220670000   1.11   Fruitridge/Broadway  UCorLow      C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              16              Lower
 01400850460000   0.97   Fruitridge/Broadway  UCorLow        C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              14              Lower
 01500100370000   4.32   Fruitridge/Broadway  UCntLow       C-2-TO     70-150           56.0         25%              60              Lower
 02301110310000   1.70   Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor       C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              24              Lower
 02301110300000   7.15   Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor       C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              100             Lower
 02202800290000   0.71   Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor       C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              10              Lower
    Page H C-4  |                                                                                                Adopted December 17, 2013
    HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                                                         H-C
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                    Inventoried Units
                                                                           Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                                  General Plan              Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                                  Land Use      Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent        Inventoried
     Number         Acres    Community Plan Area  Designation  Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)      Income-level
 02302520190000      1.00     Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              14                Lower
 02302520170000      1.07     Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              15                Lower
 04101120070000      1.06          South Area      UCntLow        C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              15                Lower
 04100860280000      0.86          South Area      UCntLow      C-2-TO      70-150           56.0         25%              12                Lower
 04100860290000      0.77          South Area      UCntLow        C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              11                Lower
 04100860310000      0.77          South Area      UCntLow      C-2-TO      70-150           56.0         25%              11                Lower
 04100860300000      0.68          South Area      UCntLow        C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              10                Lower
 03802730230000      1.23     Fruitridge/Broadway    SCnt         C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              17                Lower
 03700810020000      0.59     Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor       C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%               8                Lower
 04000210470000      2.36     Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor      C-2-R-SPD    70-150           56.0         25%              33                Lower
 03901710250000      0.50     Fruitridge/Broadway   SNHD       C-2-R-SPD    70-150           56.0         25%               7                Lower
 04000210030000      0.95     Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor         C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              13                Lower
 11801310290000      1.11          South Area        SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              16                Lower
 11801310600000      1.51          South Area        SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              21                Lower
 11801110620000      3.78          South Area        SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              53                Lower
 11801110630000      1.70          South Area        SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              24                Lower
 11801110650000      1.17          South Area        SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              16                Lower
 11801110640000      1.02          South Area        SCor        C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              14                Lower
 11801330040000      4.55          South Area        SCor         C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              64                Lower
 11801330090000      3.73          South Area        SCor         C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              52                Lower
 05000200150000      0.61          South Area        SCnt         C-2       70-150           56.0         25%               9                Lower
 05300210080000      0.71          South Area       SNLD          C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              10                Lower
 04900500090000      0.60          South Area        SCnt         C-2       70-150           56.0         25%               8                Lower
 04900210430000      1.21          South Area      UCntLow       C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              17                Lower
 04900210050000      4.65          South Area       TNHD          C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              65                Lower
 04903700060000      0.80          South Area      UCntLow        C-2       70-150           56.0         25%              11                Lower
 04903800200000      0.50          South Area      UCntLow        C-2       70-150           56.0         25%               7                Lower
    Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                       | Page H C-5
                                                                                                         Appendix C: LAND INVENTORY
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                Inventoried Units
                                                                       Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                             General Plan               Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                             Land Use        Zoning   Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent      Inventoried
     Number       Acres Community Plan Area  Designation   Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)    Income-level
 04902700060000   0.64        South Area       SNHD            C-2      70-150           56.0         25%               9              Lower
 02904700250000   2.54           Pocket         SCnt        C-2-EA-2    70-150           56.0         25%              36              Lower
 07903100020000   0.50    East Sacramento     UCntLow          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%               7              Lower
 07903100460000   1.02   Fruitridge/Broadway  UCntLow     C-2-SWR-PUD   70-150           56.0         25%              14              Lower
 07904200150000   0.94    East Sacramento     UCorLow        C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              13              Lower
 07904300170000   0.93   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       C-2-SWR-PUD   70-150           56.0         25%              13              Lower
 07901820110000   2.39    East Sacramento     UCorLow          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%              33              Lower
 07901820270000   0.63    East Sacramento     UCorLow          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%               9              Lower
 07801900490000   1.16    East Sacramento       SCor        C-2-SWR     70-150           56.0         25%              16              Lower
 11714600280000   2.58        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              36              Lower
 11714600080000   1.10        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              15              Lower
 11714600070000   1.22        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              17              Lower
 11714600090000   0.81        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              11              Lower
 11714600250000   1.01        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              14              Lower
 11714600220000   0.99        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              14              Lower
 11714600210000   0.58        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%               8              Lower
 11714600240000   0.92        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              13              Lower
 11714600230000   0.51        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%               7              Lower
 11714600180000   1.14        South Area        SCnt         C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              16              Lower
 04100750070000   0.51        South Area        SCor           C-2      70-150           56.0         25%               7              Lower
 04100750060000   1.49        South Area        SCor           C-2      70-150           56.0         25%              21              Lower
 27407100020000   3.75     South Natomas       ECMR          C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              53              Lower
 11702200190000   3.86        South Area        SCnt          C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              54              Lower
 11702200200000   0.59        South Area        SCnt          C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%               8              Lower
 11702200230000   1.11        South Area        SCnt          C-2-R     70-150           56.0         25%              16              Lower
 26503220160000   1.49    North Sacramento    UCorLow          C-2      70-150           56.0         25%              21              Lower
 22517800120000   1.12     North Natomas       SNHD          C-2-PUD    70-150           56.0         25%              16              Lower
    Page H C-6  |                                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
    HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                                                          H-C
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                     Inventoried Units
                                                                            Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                                  General Plan               Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                                  Land Use       Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent        Inventoried
     Number         Acres    Community Plan Area  Designation   Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)      Income-level
 22500300570000     14.46       North Natomas      UCntLow       C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              202               Lower
 22517800100000      9.06       North Natomas        TCnt        C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              127               Lower
 11714600350000      0.90          South Area        SCnt        C-2-PUD     70-150           56.0         25%              13                Lower
 02203100040000      0.99     Fruitridge/Broadway    SCor        C-2-SPD     70-150           56.0         25%              14                Lower
 11702200400000      0.71          South Area        SCnt         C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              10                Lower
 11702200390000      1.02          South Area       SNHD          C-2-R      70-150           56.0         25%              14                Lower
                                                                                No
 00601350300000      1.21          Central City      CBD           C-3      Maximum          192.3         25%              58                Lower
                                                                                No
 00601340390000      0.66          Central City      PRK         C-3-SPD    Maximum          192.3         25%              32                Lower
                                                                                No
 00600870540000      0.53          Central City      CBD         C-3-SPD    Maximum          192.3         25%              25                Lower
 25000100490000      6.07       South Natomas       ECLR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              44                Lower
 25000100460000     10.94       South Natomas       ECLR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              79                Lower
 27403201020000      4.33       South Natomas        SCnt        OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              31                Lower
 27701530160000      5.77        Arden Arcade       ECMR            OB          36            28.8         25%              42                Lower
 27403200640000      0.92       South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%               7                Lower
 27403200630000      1.44       South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              10                Lower
 27403200600000      0.57       South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%               4                Lower
 27403200590000      2.19       South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              16                Lower
 27403200620000      9.21       South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              66                Lower
 27404100250000      5.42       South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              39                Lower
 27404100260000      5.53       South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%              40                Lower
 29503700140000      0.74        Arden Arcade       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%               5                Lower
 00101810150000      0.56          Central City    UCntLow       OB-SPD         36            28.8         25%               4                Lower
 00102100460000      1.57          Central City    UCntHigh      OB-SPD         36            28.8         25%              11                Lower
 04900310020000      0.53          South Area       ECMR            OB          36            28.8         25%               4                Lower
 03100530170000      0.78             Pocket        ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8         25%               6                Lower
 03100540210000      1.36             Pocket        ECMR       OB-EA-3-PUD      36            28.8         25%              10                Lower
    Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                        | Page H C-7
                                                                                                         Appendix C: LAND INVENTORY
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                Inventoried Units
                                                                       Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                             General Plan               Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                             Land Use       Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent      Inventoried
     Number       Acres Community Plan Area  Designation   Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)    Income-level
 07902910080000   1.40   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR         OB-SWR         36            28.8          25%             10              Lower
 07902910090000   0.82   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR         OB-SWR         36            28.8          25%              6              Lower
 07904300150000   2.03   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             15              Lower
 07904300130000   11.38  Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             82              Lower
 07904300140000   2.81   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             20              Lower
 07904300190000   5.07   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             37              Lower
 07904300180000   10.90  Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             78              Lower
 07904300210000   3.81   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             27              Lower
 07904300200000   3.48   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             25              Lower
 07904300160000   3.26   Fruitridge/Broadway   ECMR       OB-SWR-PUD       36            28.8          25%             23              Lower
 11702020410000   3.13        South Area       ECLR            OB          36            28.8          25%             23              Lower
 11701840100000   3.99        South Area        SCnt           OB          36            28.8          25%             29              Lower
 11701840170000   4.22        South Area        SCnt           OB          36            28.8          25%             30              Lower
 11701810440000   3.65        South Area        SCnt        OB-PUD         36            28.8          25%             26              Lower
 11701830040000   0.87        South Area        SCnt        OB-PUD         36            28.8          25%              6              Lower
 11701810400000   1.08        South Area       ECMR        OB-R-PUD        36            28.8          25%              8              Lower
 11701810450000   2.29        South Area        SCnt       OB-R-PUD        36            28.8          25%             16              Lower
 11702110240000   3.99        South Area        SCnt        OB-PUD         36            28.8          25%             29              Lower
 27406300110000   0.97     South Natomas       ECMR         OB-PUD         36            28.8          25%              7              Lower
 22600610200000   7.23    North Sacramento     SNHD         R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             173             Lower
 25001910380000   0.99    North Sacramento     SNHD          R-3-R         30            24.0         100%             24              Lower
 25003410100000   0.78    North Sacramento     SNHD           R-3          30            24.0         100%             19              Lower
 25003310190000   1.99    North Sacramento     SNHD           R-3          30            24.0         100%             48              Lower
 25101810170000   0.83    North Sacramento      SCor          R-3          30            24.0         100%             20              Lower
 25101810200000   0.63    North Sacramento      SCor          R-3          30            24.0         100%             15              Lower
 26503830140000   0.96    North Sacramento     TNMD           R-3          30            24.0         100%             23              Lower
 20104400780000   5.04     North Natomas       SNHD         R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             121             Lower
    Page H C-8  |                                                                                                 Adopted December 17, 2013
    HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                                                         H-C
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                    Inventoried Units
                                                                           Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                                  General Plan              Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                                  Land Use      Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent        Inventoried
     Number         Acres    Community Plan Area  Designation  Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)      Income-level
 20104400770000      4.62       North Natomas       SNHD        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             111               Lower
 22501400350000     15.85       North Natomas       SNHD        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             380               Lower
 22525000140000      6.85       North Natomas       SNHD        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             164               Lower
 22523500030000      6.09       North Natomas       SNHD        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             146               Lower
 22517300020000      3.50       North Natomas        PUB        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             84                Lower
 27402320130000      0.61       South Natomas       SNHD         R-3-R         30            24.0         100%             15                Lower
 27402320140000      0.61       South Natomas       SNHD         R-3-R         30            24.0         100%             15                Lower
 27402450010000      0.61       South Natomas       SNHD         R-3-R         30            24.0         100%             15                Lower
 01103500430000      0.96     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNHD          R-3          30            24.0         100%             23                Lower
 01103600400000      1.14     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNHD          R-3          30            24.0         100%             27                Lower
 01103500440000      0.93     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNHD          R-3          30            24.0         100%             22                Lower
 01400310100000      1.29     Fruitridge/Broadway  UCorLow        R-3          30            24.0         100%             31                Lower
 01103600390000      0.64     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNHD          R-3          30            24.0         100%             15                Lower
 03600840200000      0.51          South Area       TNHD        R-3-EA-1       30            24.0         100%             12                Lower
 03800910050000      2.82     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNHD         R-3-R         30            24.0         100%             68                Lower
 11802900060000      3.75          South Area       SNHD        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             90                Lower
 11714600170000      0.52          South Area       SNHD        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             12                Lower
 20112600090000      1.41       North Natomas       SNHD        R-3-PUD        30            24.0         100%             34                Lower
 00102100240000      0.71          Central City    UCntLow     R-3A-SPD        36            28.8         100%             20                Lower
 00101600500000      3.97          Central City     ECLR       R-3A-SPD        36            28.8         100%             114               Lower
 20103001530000      4.83       North Natomas       SNHD        R-4-PUD       110            88.0         100%             425               Lower
 22523200020000      7.06       North Natomas       SNHD        R-4-PUD       110            88.0         100%             622               Lower
 22523200010000      6.96       North Natomas       SNHD        R-4-PUD       110            88.0         100%             613               Lower
 22523200030000      7.23       North Natomas       SNHD        R-4-PUD       110            88.0         100%             636               Lower
 00100620060000      0.74          Central City    UCntHigh     R-5-SPD       175           140.0         100%             103               Lower
 23801600160000      4.35      North Sacramento      TCnt      RMX-SPD         60            48.0         100%             209               Lower
 23801400120000      0.53      North Sacramento      TCnt      RMX-SPD         60            48.0         100%             25                Lower
    Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                       | Page H C-9
                                                                                                         Appendix C: LAND INVENTORY
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                Inventoried Units
                                                                       Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                              General Plan              Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                              Land Use      Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent      Inventoried
     Number         Acres Community Plan Area Designation  Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)    Income-level
 23801400080000     0.87   North Sacramento      TCnt      RMX-SPD         60            48.0         100%             42              Lower
 25102700040000     0.80   North Sacramento      SCor         RMX          60            48.0         100%             38              Lower
 26202110310000     0.61    South Natomas        SCor      RMX-SPD         60            48.0         100%             29              Lower
 26200630080000     0.61    South Natomas        SCor      RMX-SPD         60            48.0         100%             29              Lower
 26200300140000     1.86    South Natomas        SCor      RMX-SPD         60            48.0         100%             89              Lower
 26503730280000     0.68   North Sacramento    UCntLow        RMX          60            48.0         100%             33              Lower
 27700730090000     1.54   North Sacramento     UNLD          RMX          60            48.0         100%             74              Lower
 27701430080000     0.59   North Sacramento    UCorLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             28              Lower
 00100630020000     0.51       Central City    UCntHigh    RMX-SPD         60            48.0         100%             25              Lower
 01500100330000     0.97   East Sacramento     UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             46              Lower
 04100850030000     0.71       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             34              Lower
 04100850040000     0.73       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             35              Lower
 04100830020000     0.73       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             35              Lower
 04100830010000     0.73       South Area      UCntLow        RMX          60            48.0         100%             35              Lower
 04100830030000     0.74       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             35              Lower
 04100830040000     0.74       South Area      UCntLow        RMX          60            48.0         100%             35              Lower
 04905700040000     1.61       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             77              Lower
 04905700030000     1.95       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             94              Lower
 04905700050000     0.84       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             40              Lower
 04905700010000     2.54       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             122             Lower
 04905700060000     2.78       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             133             Lower
 04905700020000     1.58       South Area      UCntLow      RMX-TO         60            48.0         100%             76              Lower
 26503840110000     0.55   North Sacramento     TNMD           RO          36            28.8         100%             16              Lower
 01402230040000     1.23  Fruitridge/Broadway  UCorLow      RO-SPD         36            28.8         100%             35              Lower
 22601020010000     1.42   North Sacramento      SCnt        C-1-R         30            24.0          25%              9              Lower
 22602400260000     0.81   North Sacramento      SCnt        C-1-R         30            24.0          25%              5              Lower
 25002000500000     1.23   North Sacramento      TCnt       C-1-SPD        30            24.0          25%              7              Lower
    Page H C-10   |                                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013
    HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                                                           H-C
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                     Inventoried Units
                                                                            Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                                  General Plan               Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                                  Land Use       Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent         Inventoried
     Number         Acres    Community Plan Area  Designation   Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)       Income-level
 25002000490000      1.34      North Sacramento      TCnt        C-1-SPD        30            24.0          25%              8                 Lower
 20105400290000      3.45       North Natomas        SCnt        C-1-PUD        30            24.0          25%             21                 Lower
 22512500480000      0.71       North Natomas        SCnt        C-1-PUD        30            24.0          25%              4                 Lower
 29500200070000      3.41        Arden Arcade       ECMR        C-1-R-PUD       30            24.0          25%             20                 Lower
 00101030030000      0.57          Central City    UCntLow       C-1-SPD        30            24.0          25%              3                 Lower
 00101030060000      0.58          Central City    UCntLow       C-1-SPD        30            24.0          25%              4                 Lower
 02502310180000      0.57          South Area        SCor       C-1-R-EA-4      30            24.0          25%              3                 Lower
 11802900040000      0.85          South Area        SCor        C-1-PUD        30            24.0          25%              5                 Lower
 11802900030000      0.95          South Area        SCor        C-1-PUD        30            24.0          25%              6                 Lower
 11802900010000      0.91          South Area        SCor        C-1-PUD        30            24.0          25%              5                 Lower
 11709200560000      3.51          South Area       SNLD          C-1-R         30            24.0          25%             21                 Lower
 11702020290000      4.55          South Area        SCnt         C-1-R         30            24.0          25%             27                 Lower
 22521701650000      2.52       North Natomas       SNMD         C-1-PUD        30            24.0          25%             15                 Lower
 26602820070000      1.16        Arden Arcade       SNMD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%             16               Moderate
 26602510380000      0.52        Arden Arcade       SNMD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%              7               Moderate
 26602030300000      0.74        Arden Arcade        SCor          R-2A         17            13.6         100%             10               Moderate
 23703800510000      4.17      North Sacramento     SNMD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%             57               Moderate
 25101910240000      0.74      North Sacramento     SNMD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%             10               Moderate
 25101310160000      0.55      North Sacramento     TNMD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%              7               Moderate
 25101310170000      1.53      North Sacramento     TNMD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%             21               Moderate
 26300100270000      4.46      North Sacramento     TNMD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%             61               Moderate
 22501400400000      3.58       North Natomas       SNHD        R-2A-PUD        17            13.6         100%             49               Moderate
 04000320180000      2.39     Fruitridge/Broadway   SNMD          R-2A-R        17            13.6         100%             33               Moderate
 02900210160000      1.97             Pocket        SNHD           R-2A         17            13.6         100%             27               Moderate
 07802020060000     42.52     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNMD        R-2A-SWR        17            13.6         100%             578              Moderate
 07802020140000      0.67     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNMD       R-2A-R-SWR       17            13.6         100%              9               Moderate
 11701400390000      3.15          South Area       SNMD          R-2A-R        17            13.6         100%             43               Moderate
    Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                        | Page H C-11
                                                                                                         Appendix C: LAND INVENTORY
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                Inventoried Units
                                                                       Maximum     Expected Density                 (based on
                                              General Plan              Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                              Land Use      Zoning    Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent      Inventoried
     Number         Acres Community Plan Area Designation  Designation  Density    otherwise noted) Residential    residential)    Income-level
 05202900130000     0.59      South Area         SCor         R-2A         17            13.6         100%              8            Moderate
 23700400010000     3.13   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             53            Moderate
 25001300170000     1.54   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             26            Moderate
 25001300160000     1.34   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             22            Moderate
 25001300210000     0.58   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             10            Moderate
 25001910180000     0.61   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             10            Moderate
 25001300230000     0.93   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             16            Moderate
 25001300220000     1.34   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             23            Moderate
 25202820100000     0.52   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%              9            Moderate
 25203400180000     0.89   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             15            Moderate
 26301720080000     0.70   North Sacramento     TNMD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             12            Moderate
 26500110020000     0.72   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             12            Moderate
 26501610030000     1.00   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             17            Moderate
 26500120030000     0.90   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             15            Moderate
 26501610070000     0.90   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             15            Moderate
 26501610080000     1.24   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             21            Moderate
 26500720240000     0.77   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             13            Moderate
 26501110010000     0.78   North Sacramento     SNHD          R-2B         21            16.8         100%             13            Moderate
 26500710010000     0.88   North Sacramento     SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             15            Moderate
 26503710040000     0.76   North Sacramento     TNMD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             13            Moderate
 22502300740000     1.17    South Natomas        PRK       R-2B-PUD        21            16.8         100%             20            Moderate
 22510100150000     1.40    South Natomas       ECMR       R-2B-PUD        21            16.8         100%             24            Moderate
 22510100230000     2.89    South Natomas       ECMR       R-2B-PUD        21            16.8         100%             49            Moderate
 22510100210000     1.72    South Natomas       ECMR       R-2B-PUD        21            16.8         100%             29            Moderate
 22500600780000     8.23    North Natomas       SNHD       R-2B-PUD        21            16.8         100%             138           Moderate
 22520900870000     1.14    North Natomas       SNHD       R-2B-PUD        21            16.8         100%             19            Moderate
 27402320120000     1.04    South Natomas       SNHD        R-2B-R         21            16.8         100%             17            Moderate
    Page H C-12   |                                                                                               Adopted December 17, 2013
     HOUSING ELEMENT: Land Inventory                                                                                                          H-C
Table H C-1 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                     Inventoried Units
                                                                             Maximum    Expected Density                 (based on
                                                   General Plan              Allowed      (80% of max                expected density
 Assessors Parcel                                   Land Use       Zoning   Residential  density unless   Percent       and percent         Inventoried
      Number         Acres    Community Plan Area  Designation  Designation   Density   otherwise noted) Residential    residential)       Income-level
 22500600750000      16.19       North Natomas       SNHD        R-2B-PUD       21            16.8         100%              272             Moderate
 03800910040000       1.51     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNMD         R-2B-R        21            16.8         100%               25             Moderate
 03800910020000       1.11     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNMD         R-2B-R        21            16.8         100%               19             Moderate
 04900101030000       5.67          South Area       SNMD           R-2B        21            16.8         100%               95             Moderate
 02900210510000       5.39             Pocket        SNHD         R-2B-R        21            16.8         100%               91             Moderate
 11702110270000       1.42          South Area       SNMD       R-2B-R-PUD      21            16.8         100%               24             Moderate
 11702110180000       1.52          South Area       SNMD       R-2B-R-PUD      21            16.8         100%               26             Moderate
 11701400010000       0.59          South Area       SNHD           R-2B        21            16.8         100%               10             Moderate
 11702020420000       5.93          South Area       SNHD         R-2B-R        21            16.8         100%              100             Moderate
 11709100410000       9.65          South Area       SNHD         R-2B-R        21            16.8         100%              162             Moderate
 11701820230000       4.97          South Area       SNHD       R-2B-R-PUD      21            16.8         100%               83             Moderate
 11701820220000       5.47          South Area       SNHD       R-2B-R-PUD      21            16.8         100%               92             Moderate
 11702110210000       1.53          South Area       SNMD       R-2B-R-PUD      21            16.8         100%               26             Moderate
 03801010140000       4.60     Fruitridge/Broadway   TNMD         R-2B-R        21            16.8         100%               77             Moderate
 26300100430000       0.60      North Sacramento      PRK           R-2B        21            16.8         100%               10             Moderate
 26300100420000       1.09      North Sacramento     SNHD           R-2B        21            16.8         100%               18             Moderate
  1,789 Separate                                                            1 unit per
      Parcels       582.23            Various        SNLD           R-1         lot           6.1          100%             3,528          Above Mod.
                                                     SNLD,
                                                     TNLD,
  1701 Separate                                      SNMD,                  1 unit per
      Parcels       533.41            Various        TNMD           R-1A        lot           9.4          100%             4,993          Above Mod.
    13 Separate                                                             2 units per
      Parcels         1.41          Central City     TNMD           R-1B        lot           7.9          100%               11           Above Mod.
       Total          685                                                                                                  21,216
   Total Lower-
      Income                                                                                                                9,995
 Total Moderate-
      Income                                                                                                                2,689
   Total Above
Moderate-Income                                                                                                             8,532
     Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                       | Page H C-13
                                       Appendix C: LAND INVENTORY
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H C-14    |                               Adopted December 17, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W ELKHORN BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  HERI TAGE PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BRIDGECROSS DR
                                                                                                                                                    þ
                                                                                                                                                    }
                                                                                                                                                    |
                                                                                                                                                    ·  99
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROOK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NATOMAS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAYB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CLUB CENTER DR
                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                        $
                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                          EC
                                                                                                                                                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                                           OM
                                                                                                                                                                                        N PARK DR
                                                                                                                                                                               RC
                                                                                                                                                                                  AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DRY CREEK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                EW                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BL ACK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N BEND DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RALEY BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O CK D
                                                                                                                                                                                             DEL PASO RD
                                                                                                                              NATOM AS CENTRAL DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MAIN AVE                                                                                                                MAIN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RIO LINDA BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GATEWAY PARK BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                    EL CENTRO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BELL AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WINTERS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                           ARENA BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N FRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80                                                                                                       NORTH AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NORWOOD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    DUC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BLVD                                    RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                           R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SE     ASTO RIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       KHO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VILL E                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SOUTH AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VI
                                                                                                                                                        EL CENTRO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LL                                               LV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MARY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FORD RD                                                                                                                                                           B
                                             "
                                             $
                                             #
                                             !   80                                                                                                                                                                                              R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NORTHGATE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SAN JUAN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OD                                                                                                                                                                                                 E BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ARCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZE
                                    "
                                    $
                                    #
                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                      VED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HOWE AVE
                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                            $
                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TRUXEL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                              80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VD
                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DR
                                                            / 50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Y OAKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ELEANOR AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                    ORCHARD LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GATEWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EVERGREEN ST
                                                      þ
                                                      }
                                                      |
                                                      ·
                                                      99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HARVARD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W EL CAMINO AVE                         EL CAMINO AVE
                                 "
                                 $
                                 #
                                 !  5
                                                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                           R                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VD
                                                                                                                                                                         VE                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BL
                                                                                                                                                             W
                                                                                                                                                                       RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O              ARDEN WAY                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ETHAN WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                         GARD                                                                                                                                                             ELP
                                                                                                                                                                                                              EN HW                                                                                                                                                     D                                                                           FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                                    HW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¯
                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                       DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LEISUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E   LN               TE R
                                                                                                                            GA
                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !5                               RICH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TRIB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U                            EXPOSITION BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VD                                                                                                                              VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
Vacant Land by Zoining
Residential Zones
     R-1 - Standard Single Family
                                                      R-2B - Multi-Family (21)
                                                      R-3 - Multi-Family (29)
                                                                                      RMX - Residential Mixed Use
                                                                                 Commercial and Office Zones
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Housing Element
     R-1A - Single Family Alternative                 R-3A - Multi-Family (36)        OB - Office Building
     R-1B - Single or Two Family
     R-2 - Two-Family
     R-2A - Multi-Family (up to 17 units/acre)
                                                      R-4 - Multi-Family (58)
                                                      R-5 - Multi-Family (174)
                                                      RO - Residential-Office
                                                                                      C-1 - Limited Commercial
                                                                                      C-2 - General Commercial
                                                                                      C-3 - Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                            Vacant Residential Land Inventory                                   1 of 3: Northern Section
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0                              0.5                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Date: July 2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ETHAN WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VD                                                                                                                                      AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BL                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FEE DR                                                    D       EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A   SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U      RE L                                                                                            WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                     $
                                                                                                                                                     #    5
                                                                                                                                                                                  RICH
                                                                                                                                                                                            A RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    S BL                                                                                                                                                                                     EXPOSITION BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                        VD                                                                                                                                                                                                VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ETHAN WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12         ST
                                                                                                                                             JIBBOOM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST             N 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                      12T
                                                                                                                                                                                                          H                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                             G                F ST
                                                                                                                                                                                          H S ST                       16T                   ES
                                                                                                                                                                                             T                             H                      T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST                                                                                                                                                         VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                                 7TH                                                                                                                                                                             ST                       AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                                                                          KS                  15T     I ST
                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H                                                                          29T                                 MCK                                                  WA                                        DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30T H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INLE                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                          9TH      8
                                                                                                                                                                               ST TH ST
                                                                                                                                             ST                                                                                                                                                                                               YB                                                                             SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                       L ST                                                                                                                                         LVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HS                                                                                 CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                           3RD                          10T                                                                                                                      T                                                                                 LOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                                                          5TH
                                                                                                                                                                                            NS
                                                                                                                                                                            HS                T                                                       KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T                                                                                                                                                    RL
                                                                                                                               T ST                           ST               T                                                       CAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       J ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HS                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ITO                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L AV                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                             FRO                                                                         PS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            T                                          E
                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST 39
                                                                                                                                                                                                        QS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                           T                                                                             A BL                                                                                                                                                                                                    ICAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GS                                                                                     RIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VD
                                                                                                                                                                                 T ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H        T                                                                                                                                                                                         T                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          21S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               57TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                                               BRO
                                                                                                                                   ADW X ST                                                                                   TS                                                   AL H                                                       39T                                51S
                                                                                                                                      AY    80                 -
                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                               )                                                                         ST                                             AMB                                                       H                                  TS
                                                                                                                                                                                               WS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 T                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24T                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HOWE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H                                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         39T                                                     56T                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H                                                       H      58T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          34TH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FO                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OCCID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      51ST S                                                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T ST                                                  LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S                                                                                               OM                                                                                                         A DR
                                         "
                                         $
                                         #
                                         !80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA RIVIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NTAL
                                                                                                                                                              LVD                                                     2ND                                                                                                                                                                                                                EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                               "
                               $
                               #
                               !   5
                                                                                                                                                    SID
                                                                                                                                                           EB
                                                                                                                                                                                  VAL L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV         COLLEGE TOWN DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                                       EJ          O WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  59TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRANKLIN BLVD
                                                                                                                                            RIV                                                        Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JU
                                                      (
                                                      /
                                                      50
                                                                                                                                               ER
                                                                                                                                                                        DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                65TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                     PARK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DR                  KIEFER BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MARTIN LUTHER KING JR BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        JAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KSO
                                                                                                                                                                    LAND
                                                 þ
                                                 }
                                                 |
                                                 ·
                                                 99                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                             "
                             $
                             #
                             ! 5                                                                                                                                                                                                    24TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12TH AVE
                                                                                                                                    SU
                                                                                                                                                                                            BLVD                      E RD
                                                                                                                                       T   TE                                                              T TE RVILL                                                                                                                                                                     14TH AVE
                                                                                                                                              R     VIL                                                 SU
                                                                                                                                                       LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BELVEDERE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                   RD                     PO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FLORIN PERKINS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                              T
                                                                                                                                                                                      FREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65TH STREET EXPY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            21ST AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POWER INN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            21ST AVE
                                                                                                             T WA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¯
                                                                                                                 Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     STO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          24TH ST                                                                                                                                              NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         26TH AVE
                                                                                                         KARB
                                                                                                                                                                                                   IRVIN WAY
                                                                                                              E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FRUITRIDGE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LVD
                                                                                                     SEAM
                                                                                                         A           S AVE                                                                                            FRUITRIDGE RD
Vacant Land by Zoining
Residential Zones                                 R-2B - Multi-Family (21)        RMX - Residential Mixed Use
                                                                             Commercial and Office Zones
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Housing Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Vacant Residential Land Inventory
     R-1 - Standard Single Family                 R-3 - Multi-Family (29)
     R-1A - Single Family Alternative             R-3A - Multi-Family (36)        OB - Office Building
     R-1B - Single or Two Family                  R-4 - Multi-Family (58)         C-1 - Limited Commercial
     R-2 - Two-Family                             R-5 - Multi-Family (174)        C-2 - General Commercial
     R-2A - Multi-Family (up to 17 units/acre)    RO - Residential-Office         C-3 - Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 of 3: Central Section
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0                     0.5                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Date: July 2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  21ST AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             21ST AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E   DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LIN BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IRVIN WAY              26TH AVE                                            E    NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BLVD                                                                                 WR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POWER INN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SEAM                                                                                            D                                                                                                                                                              FRUITRIDGE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      A   S AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FLORIN PERKINS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FRAN                                            STO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      35TH AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R           E          FREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KLIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             65TH STREET EXPY
                                                                                                                                                                                                           DP                                                                                                                                               KTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                             43RD AVE        AR                                                                                                                                                                                                    LEMON HILL AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AN                                                                                                                                                      LVD
                                                                                                                                                                            LVD
                                                                                                                                                        RS         IDE B                              SL               BLAIR AVE
                                                                                                                                                   RIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    47TH AVE                                                                                      ELDER CREEK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                47TH AVE
                                                                                                                      PA
                                                                                                                        RK                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                  RI A
                                                                                                                             RI
                                                                                                                                  VI                           GLO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 53RD AVE
                                                                                                                                     ER                                  R
                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                            W                         SIDE D
                                                                                                                                                                                  GREENHAVEN DR
                                                                                                                                             AY
                                                                                                                                  WAY                               HAVEN
                                                                                                                         RG   ATE                                                                                                                       FLORIN RD
                                                                                                                    RIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             29TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      21ST ST
                                                                                                                                       PO                                      RUSH RIVER DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                               $
                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                               !  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L D DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AMHERST ST
                                                                                                                                            C                                                                                                                                                                           IE                                    E
                                                                                                                                                KE                                                                                                              MEADOWVIEW RD                                    BRO OKF                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                   T                                                                                                                                                                                                  NE
                                                                                                                                                       R                                                                                                                                                                                            RI
                                         "
                                         $
                                         #
                                         !80
                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  JOHN STILL DR                                                 FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N   TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N   GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KLIN
                               "
                               $
                               #
                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MACK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VALLEY HI DR
                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BLV                                 NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D                               CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AM          DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ER                               WYNDH
                                                      (
                                                      /
                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PK
                                                 þ
                                                 }
                                                 |
                                                 ·
                                                 99
                             "
                             $
                             #
                             ! 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         H     A RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T AV                 COSUMNES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RIVE                               R BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      W STOCKTON BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CARLIN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BRUCEVILLE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            JA                                                                           JACINTO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¯
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   · 99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SHELDON RD
Vacant Land by Zoining
Residential Zones                                 R-2B - Multi-Family (21)        RMX - Residential Mixed Use
                                                                             Commercial and Office Zones
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Housing Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vacant Residential Land Inventory
     R-1 - Standard Single Family                 R-3 - Multi-Family (29)
     R-1A - Single Family Alternative             R-3A - Multi-Family (36)        OB - Office Building
     R-1B - Single or Two Family                  R-4 - Multi-Family (58)         C-1 - Limited Commercial
     R-2 - Two-Family                             R-5 - Multi-Family (174)        C-2 - General Commercial
     R-2A - Multi-Family (up to 17 units/acre)    RO - Residential-Office         C-3 - Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3 of 3: Southern Section
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0        0.5                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Date: July 2013

This page is intentionally left blank
                                                                                             BRIDGECROSS DR
                                            WAY
                                                                             DR
                                                                                                NATOMAS BLVD
                                                                        ROOK
                                            CE
                                                                   MAYB
                                       MM
                                          ER                             "
                                                                         $
                                                                         #
                                                                         !80
                                     E CO
                                                                                  N PARK DR
                                                               "
                                                               $
                                                               #
                                                               !5 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DRY CREEK RD
                                                                  A
                                                               MW
                                                 TU                                    DR
                                               OT                           ARKET             N BEND DR
                                                               NEW M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RALEY BLVD
NATOM AS CENTRAL DR
                                                                 DEL PASO RD
                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                      GATEWAY PARK BLVD
                                                                                        /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RIO LINDA BLVD
                                                                                         50                                                                                                                                                MAIN AVE
                      EL CENTRO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BELL AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WINTERS ST
                                             ARENA BLVD
                                                                                  þ
                                                                                  }
                                                                                  |
                                                                                  ·
                                                                                  99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80                                                                                                                NORTH AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NORWOOD AVE
                                                                   DUC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GRAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RD
                                                                          R
                                                                      KHO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SOUTH AVE                                           RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SE
                                                                           ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FORD RD                                                                                                            LL                          VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E                       BL
                                                                                            DO D
                                                                              R                                                 SAN JUAN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                   NORTHGATE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BLVD                                                                                UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA DE
                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AR                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                        AZEV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                               TRUXEL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BL                CO
                                                                                            E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VD                NI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N                              E
                                                  ORCHARD LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ELEANOR AVE                                                                               UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                            W EL CAMINO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EL CAMINO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VD
                                                                                                                                                                         GARDEN
                                                                                                                                                                                           HW Y                                                                     BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ETHAN WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ELP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D                                                                                           AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D      EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FEE DR                                                    WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EXP                                                                                 Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OSI
                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                    $
                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                    !    5                         RICH
                                                                                                                                                               A RD
                                                                                                                                                                      S BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ETHAN WAY
                                                                                                                                                                          VD
                                                                                                                           JIBBO OM ST
                                                                                                                                                                              NB
                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                             CS
                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                           HS GS
                                                                                                                                                             T   T                16T        ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                   T                                                                                            EL
                                                                                                                                           7TH                                        H                                                                                                           VA
                                                                                                                                               ST                                                                                                                       ST                           S          AV
                                                                                                                                                                              I ST                                                 ST                               C                                              E                                      DR
                                                                                                                                             9TH
                                                                                                                    3RD                                                                                                          29T
                                                                                                                                                 ST                      L ST         ST                                                                                                                                                     SO
                                                                                             T ST
                                                                                                                                                               NS                                                                    H                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VD
                                                                                                               5TH      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                    KS
                                                                                                                                                                 T                 19T     CAP                      T        J ST                      HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BL
                                                                                                                                               QS                                      H                                                                 T                                                                              RL
                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                           T                                       ITO                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                         FRO                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                             PS
                                                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                                                       L AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            E                                                                                                                                                              AK
                                                                                            N                                                  T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                                                      T                                    ST                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                 15T                                                                                                                                    T                                                       FA
                                                                                                                     WS                                              H            21S        ST                          30T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    51S                          56TH
                                                                                                                                                                                      TS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HOWE AVE
                                                                                                               BRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TS                            ST
                                                                                                                         T                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9TH
                                                                                                                   ADW
                                                                                                                       AY                                                                  24T
                                                                                                                                                                  XS
                                                                                                                                                                         T                     H                                   T
                           ¯
                                                                                                                                           LVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             34TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T ST                                                           FO                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                           2ND                                                                                  39T                                             T         LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OM                                          VA
                                                                                                                                          EB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S                 H                                                                                                 EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              51ST
                                                                                                                                                                 AVE                                                                                                                                                                  BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VD
                                                                                                                           SID                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            59TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AV
                                                                                                                  RIV                                VAL L                                                                                                                                                                            SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T       65TH ST
                                                                                                                     ER                                   EJ       O WA
                                                                                                                                                                       Y
                                       C-4 - Heavy Commercial                                                                                                                         Vacant Parcels
                                       M-1 - Light Industrial                                                                                                  For Temporary Residential Shelters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                    0.5                     1
                                       M-2 - Heavy Industrial                                                                                                                                      July 2013                                                                                                                                                                                  Miles

                 RIC
                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                            þ
                                                                                                                                            }
                                                                                                                                            ·        160                                   EXP
                                                                                                                                                                                                 O SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TI O
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALTA ARDEN EXPY
                            HA R
                                     DS
                                               BLV
                                                        D
                                                                                  ST
                                                                                       |
                                                                                       þ
                                                                                       }
                                                                                       ·  160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LVD                                                                                                                                                                   ARDEN WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ETHAN WAY                  BELL ST
                                                                             TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FULTON AVE
                                                                     12           ST
                                             NB                N
                                                       ST
                                                                              6T H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HOWE AVE
                                                                             N1
                                                                                          "
                                                                                          $
                                                                                          #
                                                                                          !
                                                                                          80
                             FS
                             HS
                                      T       HS
                                             12T
                                                 T      HS
                                                           T
                                                                                     ES
                                                                                          CS
                                                                                          T
                                                                                               T                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                 )80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WATT AVE
 KS                             T                                                                                                                                                                       EL
       T                                               14T                                                                                                                                                VA
                                                                   "
                                                                   $
                                                                   #
                                                                   !                                                                                               CS                                        S
                            10T                                                                                                                                          T                                         AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
           ST                                                            5                         HS                          HS                              MC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR
                                                                       19T                            T                           T                               KIN
       7T H                                             HS                                                                                                              L EY                                                                         N
                                                                           HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MUNROE ST
                                                                                               24T                         29T                                                   BLV                                                                SO
                 ST                                        T                  T                                                                                                        D                                                        RL
                                                       16T            TS                      KS                                                                                                                                               CA                                                  FAIR OAKS BLVD
            9T H            HS                                           T                         T                    J ST
                               T                                              21S      C AP
                       12T                                                                     I TO
      SS                                                 PS                                            L AV                                                                                                      F ST
             T
                   HS
                      T
                               HS
                             14T
                                  T
                                                               T                                                    E
                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                           /
                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                    47T
                                                                                                                                                                                                        HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                        B LV
                 12T
                                                                        T ST                                                     ST                                                              HS
                                                                                                                      RA                                                                            T
      EB                               WS
                                                                                                                               34T H
         LVD
                                                   T                                                                AM B                                                                     47T                                 HS                                                                                                 Y AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T                                                                           ERSIT
                                       BR O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UNIV
  SI D                                             AD W
                                                                                                 þ
                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                             A LH              T ST                                                                                       56T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¤
                                                                                                -·
                                                       AY                                                                                                                                                        FO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                           99                                                                                                         LS
 ER
RIV
                                                             2N D
                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                +
                                                                                                *
                                                                                                )   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA RIVIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA DR
                                                                        AVE
                                                                                               |
                                                                                               þ
                                                                                               }
                                                                                               ·99                                                                                                                                    SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            59TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST
           DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     65TH ST
      PARK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KIEFER BLVD
  LA N D                                                                     24T H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KS O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NR
                                                                               ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                  MARTIN LUTHER KING JR BLVD
                                                                                                   12TH AVE
                                                                         RD
                                                             ER   VILL E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14TH AVE
                                               S U TT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FLORIN PERKINS RD
                        T BL
                            VD
                      PO R                                                                                                                                                                                         21ST AVE
                   FR E E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRUITRIDGE RD
                                                                   24TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POWER INN RD                                                                                                  S WATT AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         65TH STREET EXPY                                                                   ELDER CREEK RD
                                                                                                                                                                  47TH AVE
                                                                                                                                                                 FR
                                                                                                                                                                  AN
                                                                                                                                                                   KL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       65TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                         BLV                                                                         S TO
                                    FLORIN RD                                                                                                                         IN                                                                                 CK
                                                                                                          29TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRENCH RD
                                   21ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NB
                                                                                                                                                                                             CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ·99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ELK GROVE FLORIN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PK
                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                                 ELD DR                                                                                                                                                                        GERBER RD
                                                               MEADOWVIEW RD                                                                                    BRO O KFI
      §
      ¦
      ¨    5       ¯                                                                                                                                                                         VA LLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MACK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                               HI DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VALLEY HI DR   WYN DH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A           M DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ELSIE AVE
                                   C-4 - Heavy Commercial                                                                                                                                                             Vacant Parcels
                                   M-1 - Light Industrial                                                                                                                                  For Temporary Residential Shelters
                                   M-2 - Heavy Industrial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0                    0.5                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               July 2013                                                                                                                                                                                               Miles

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NORWOOD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VD                                                       I SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BL                                                       ED VE
                                                                                                                                 NORTHGATE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AS
                                                     TRUXEL RD
     E
  AZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RIO                 LP
        VE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LINDA              DE                                         BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VD
           DO                                                                                                                                                                                                      ELEANOR AVE LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
              DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M                                                                    UR
                                                                                                                                                                                          O    OD                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV AS                                           AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E A                                              B
                                                                             W EL CAMINO                                                                                             O RW YP                                                              S
                                                                                                    AVE                                                                            N     B
                              S
                           MA                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EVERGREEN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EL CAMINO AVE
                        TO
                      NA K DR                                                                                                                                                               GR OV E
                       PAR                                                   GARDEN HWY                                                                                                                                                                  HA
                                                                                                                                                     ARDE
                                                                                                                                                           N                                 AVE                                                           RV
                                                                                                                                                           EN
                                                                                                                                                     GA R D OR                                                                                               AR
                                                                                                                                                          ECT                                                                                                   DS  AR
                                                                                                                                                   C ON N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ETHAN WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T   D   EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ROYAL                                             WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OA K S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                   Township 9                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FEE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LEISURE LN             TE R                                                        E                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AG
                   "
                   !
                   $
                   #5
                                                                 RICH
                                                                          ARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TRIB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U               EXPOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GE
                                                                                  S BL                                                                                                                                                                                       ION BLV                        AL
                                                                              T       VD                                                                                                                                                                                             D                         L
                                                                             HS                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CH
                                                                        N 7T                                      ST
                        JIBBOOM ST
                                                                                                             TH        ST
                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                    N             6TH
                                                                  T 7TH                             NB
                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                  N1
                                                                        ST
                                                                                         12T
                                                                                             H
                                                                                         ST
                   IS                                            DS
                     TR                                                                                      ST
                    BR EE
                      G T                                                             Downtown           16T
                                                 HS                                                          H
                         J
                          ST
                                                          T
                                                                                       Railyards
                                                                                        F ST
                                                                                       GS
                                                                                          T
         CAP                                                                                                                       ES
             IT                                                                                                                                    T
          MA L OL                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
              L                                                                                                                                                                                                     C                                                EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VD                            WAY               AV                          DR
                                                 ST                            L ST                                                                                29T                                                   L EY BL
                                                                                                                                                                       H                             MCKIN                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                  30T ST
                                                                                                                                                   I ST                                                                                                                                                    N
  T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C OL
                                               8TH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SO
                                                                          NS                                                                                         HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O MA
                                                                                  T                                                                                      T                                                                                                                    CA
FRO                                              ST                                                                                                 KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F
    N                                                                 P ST
                                                                                                                                                  CAP
                                                                                                                                                         T                                                                                                                                                                              O AI R
                                               9TH                                                                                                    I TO                                                                                                                                                                            BL AK
                                                                      QS                                                                                                                                                             H ST                                                                                               VD S
                                                                         T                                                                         AVE L
    3RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ITY AVE
        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     J ST
                                                                                                                                                                  LVD                                                                                     50TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            57TH ST
                                       10T                       T ST
                                           H                                                   19T
                                       ST                                                          H                                                              AB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UNIVERS
                                                                      15T                      ST
                                                                      ST
                                                                          H                                                                                  MB R
                      BRO                                        WS                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                      T                                                                                                                                                  FO
                                                                                                                                                          ALH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    51ST
                                     ADW                                                                                                                                                                                    L   SO
                                        AY                                                                                                                    A                                                                      MB
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST                                        LVD           S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T
  5TH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
      ST                                                                                                                                                                                     39T                                                                           56T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HS80
                                                                                                                                                                                                 H                                                                               58T
                                                                                                                        XS
                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                                                                  ST                  ST
                                                                                                                                                             34T
                                                                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                                                                            CK
                                                                                                                                                                                             TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !   5
                                                                                              ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UN STAT
                                                                                                                  2ND AVE                                                                        N
                   EB                                                                                                                                                                                  VD                                                        T ST                                                                 IVE E
                     LV                                                                   21ST                                                                                                       BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 59TH ST
                        D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SS                                        R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DR SITY
                                                                 VALL
                SID
                                                                      E      JO W
                                                                                 AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /50                           E
              ER
             RIV
                                                                                        D
                                                                                                   DONNER
                                                                                                                                                        The                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                      T BLV
                                                                                                                                                       Arbors
                                                                                                                                   FRANKLIN BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     65TH ST
                                                                                                    WAY
                                            DR
           Curtis Park Court           PAR
                                                                                  P OR
                                                                                                                                                                                MARTIN
                                                                                                                                                                                             Kelsey                                                   BROADWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ·     99
                                           K
             Apartments                                                        FREE                           24TH                                                                           Village
                                                                                                                                                                                LUTHER
                                     LAND                                                                         ST                                              AV 1
                                                                                                                                                   12TH AVE         EN 2 T
                                                                                                                                                                      UE H   KING JR BLVD
                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                              LE R
                                                                                                   E   RVIL                                                               BY                                                                                                               14TH AVE                    65TH
                                                                                              SUTT                                                                           P
                 ND
             S LA R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STREET
                 KD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EXPY
             PAR
    0
                                     ¯  0.5                                       1
                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                   Planned and Approved
                                                                                                                                       Projects North
                                                                                                                                                                             July 2013

                                                                                                 KL I N
                                                                                             FRAN D
                                                                                               BLV
              43                                                                                                                                                                                             LEMON HILL AVE
                 R   DA
                       VE BLAIR
                           AVE                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                            STO
                                                                                                                                                                                 KTO
                                                                                                                                                             47TH AVE                                       ELDER CREEK RD
                                                                   24TH ST
S                                                                                                                                                                                   NB                       65TH
                                                                                                                                                                                       LVD
    LA                                                                                                                                                                                                      STREET
         ND
              PA                                                                                                                                                                                             EXPY
                R                                                                                                                                                                                                     53RD
                    K
                        DR                                                                                                                                                                                             AVE   BRIGGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                    þ
                                                                                                                                    }
                                                                                                                                    |
                                                                                                                                    ·
                                                                                                                                    99
                                                                                        FLORIN RD
                                     T                                        29TH ST
                             AM HERS
                                            21ST ST
                                ST
                             FREEPOR
                                                                                                                            D   R
                                                                                                                  K   FIELD
                                         MEADOWVIEW RD                                                      BRO O                           EA
POCKET RD                                                                                                                                     VE
                                                                                                                                           RIN
                                T BLVD
                                                                                                                                      GE
                                                              DR                                                                    TA
                                                         LL
                                              N       STI                                                                              N
                                          JOH                                                                                                                                                         MACK RD          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ALT DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L EY
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BAMFORD
                                                                                                                                                                                      NT                        VAL
                                                                                                                               LE                                                                   DR
                                                                                                                           ADA
                                                                                                                        ARM AY                                                      CE
                                                                                                                           W                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                                           ER               WYNDHAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BRUC EVILLE
                                                                                                                                                                VAL                              PK
                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                  WY
                                                                                                                                                                        EY H
                                                                                                                                                                                I DR
                                                           Delta
                                                          Shores                                                                                             C OS
                                                                                                                                                                    U MN
                                                                                                                                                                           ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD
                                                                                                                                                                                RI V
                                                                                                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                                                                                     EHR                          BLV
                                                                                                                                                                           H AR                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                  DT
                                                                                                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                   FRANK
                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                        !  80
                                                                                                                                                      IN BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                                                                                $
                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                !5 INE R
                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                                                  LV
                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                    CARLIN AVE   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                 /
                                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                JACINTO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                þ
                                                                                                                                                                                }
                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                ·99
0
                             ¯
                             0.5         1
                                          Miles
                                                                             Planned and Approved
                                                                                 Projects South
                                                                                                      July 2013



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Final Draft – November 2008
DE LTA S HORE S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Introduction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Development Summary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4th S                                                                                                                         Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Land Use                                               Range
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Acres          Percent        Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        treet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Manorside Drive                                                                          Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lara                                             LDR     Low Density Residential                   4-7 DU/AC         136.89           17.50%          675
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MDR     Medium Density Residential (detached)    8-14 DU/AC          88.96           11.37%        1,246
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LDR                    LDR                                                                                                         Medium Density Residential (attached)   8-14 DU/AC           88.96           11.37%        1,246
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13.45                  4.97             MDR                                                                                HDR     High Density Residential                15-27 DU/AC          64.36            8.23%        1,738
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3.77                                                                                                                     Subtotal                     379.17           48.48%        4,904
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LDR                                                                       MDR                                       Commercial - Mixed Use
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8.29                                                                     14.50                                     C     Mixed Use Town Center                          23-29 DU/AC     19.93            2.55%          187
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HDR                                                                  C     Village/ Regional Center                                      121.70           15.56%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5.88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C     Corner Retail                                                   5.52            0.71%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Subtotal                  147.15           18.81%          187
                                                                                                                                                                   ld Way                                                                                                        LDR
                                                                                                                                                            Richfie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5.63                                                                                                        Public/Quasi-Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                       Drive                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CC
                                                                                                                            Cavalier                                                                                 5.3                                                                                                                                                                             Community Center                                              2.60            0.33%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LDR                                                                                MDR                      MDR                                    F       Fire Safety                                                   2.00            0.26%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6.32                                                                              8.77                     10.46                                 W       Utility - Water                                               1.65            0.21%
                                                                                                                                                                  MDR                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S       Sewer lift station                                            0.08
                                                                                                                                                                     9.71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS      Utility - Electrical Substation                               0.54            0.07%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LDR                                                                                                                                                   Subtotal                    6.87            0.87%
                                                                                                                          HDR                                                                                                                      LDR                           15.60
                                                                                                                                                             Park                                                                                  9.40
                                                                                                                           8.46                                                            MDR                                                                                                                                                                                               Schools
                                                                                                                                                              1.32          E               9.43                                                                                                                                                                                             ES      School 1                                                      9.98            1.28%
                                                                                                                                                                            0.54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ES      School 2                                                      9.92            1.27%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LDR                                                                    ES                                                       MDR                                                                         Subtotal                   19.90            2.54%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7.35                                                                  9.98                                                      11.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LDR                                                                                                                                      Parks and Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P       Parks                                                        58.12            7.43%
                                                       Park                             O.S                                                                      Commercial                                                                                                      Community                                                                                                   OS      Open Space                                                   24.45            3.13%
                                                       3.10                             7.78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MDR
                                                                                                                                                                   Retail                                                                                                         Center                                                                                                     OS-WL Wetland Restoration                                            22.94            2.93%
                                                                                                                                                                     24.73 ac.                                      HDR                                                                 2.60      Park                               7.53                                                    OS-D    Detention                                                    31.70            4.05%
                                                                                                                                                                  (250k - 315k SF)                                  5.95                                                                           8.6                                                            W                          Trails  Trails                                                        3.58            0.46%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Park                                                                                                                      1.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Subtotal                  140.79           17.54%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.76          F
                                                                             MDR                                                                                                                                                                   2.0
                                                                              5.74                                                                                                                        5k - 15k SF                                                                                                                                                                        Circulation
                                                        HDR                                                   e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Major Streets                                               88.25           11.28%
                                                        3.92                                         Avenu                                                                                                                          HDR
                                                                                             Crest                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Subtotal                   88.25           11.28%
                                                                                     Stone                                                                                                                                           4.06                         MDR                                                                MDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8.90              MDR                                              5.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Total                    782.13             100%        5,092
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                      5k - 15k SF                                                                                         MDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HDR                                                                                                     HDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.99                                                                                                   4.99
                                                                                                     MDR                                                  Commercial
                                                                                                      17.87                                                 Retail                              HDR                                                                                                                                                                            Cosumnes River Boulevard
                                                                                                                                                             29.24 ac.                             8.63                       Park
                                                                                                                                                          (255k - 320k SF)                                                    3.49
                                                                                         Pvt.
                                                                      vard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MDR
                                                              rt Boule
                                                                                         Park
                                        Sacram
                                                                                             0.54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9.66             MDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MDR                                              9.35
                                                        Freepo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MU-1                   MU-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.44 ac               14.49 ac                                    Community Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Commercial                                        26.56
                                                iver
                                         ento R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    90k - 161k SF)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    HDR
                                                                                                          LDR                                                                                         5.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Detention
                                                                                                          17.38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7.28
                                                                                                                     Detention                                                                               HDR                                                          ES            Park
                                                                                                                                                           Commercial                                                                                                    9.92           5.05
                                                                                                                       Basin                                                                                 5.85
                                                                                                                                                             Retail
                                                                                                                          2.57                                 37.16 ac.                                                                                                                           HDR
                                                                                                                                                            (250k - 300k SF)                                                      MDR                                                               6.83
                                                                             Park                                                                                                                                                 14.13
                                                                             6.02
                                                                                                                                                 tate 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8.65
                                                                                                                                           Inters
                                                                                                                  LDR
                                                                                                                  42.21
                                                                                                                                                                                   Commercial                                                Detention
                                                                                                                                                                                     Retail                                                    Basin                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                      30.76 ac.                                                    17.00
                                                                                                                                                                                   (275k - 335k SF)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pedestrian Bridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Public Facilities (E - Electrical,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LDR - Low Density Residential (4 - 7 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F - Firestation, W - Water Tank)
                                                                                                          Bartley Cavanaugh                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MDR - Medium Density Residential (8 - 14 du/ac)                                                                            Public Access Barrier (TBD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Wetland
                                                                                                            Golf Course                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Property Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HDR - High Density Residential (15 - 27 du/ac)                       Detention/Water Quality
                                                                                                                                                                                No Public Access Barrier (TBD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MU - Mixed Use (23 - 29 du/ac)                                       Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Commercial Retail                                                    ES - School Resevation Sites
Figure 1.7: Illustrative Concept Plan
City of Sacramento                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PUD Guidelines   1-21

This page is intentionally left blank
HOUSING ELEMENT: Glossary
                                                                                                        H-D
Appendix D: Glossary
Acre: a unit of land measure equal to 43,560 square feet. Net acreage refers to the portion of a site exclusive
of existing or planned public or private road rights-of-way.
Affordability Covenant: A property title agreement which places resale or rental restrictions on a housing
unit.
Affordable Housing: Under State and federal statutes, housing which costs no more than 30 percent of
gross household income. Housing costs include rent or mortgage payments, utilities, taxes, insurance,
homeowner association fees, and related costs.
Assisted Housing: Housing that has received subsidies (such as low interest loans, density bonuses, direct
financial assistance, etc.) by federal, state, or local housing programs in exchange for restrictions requiring a
certain number of housing units to be affordable to very low, low, and moderate income households.
At-Risk Housing: Assisted rental housing that is at risk of losing its status as housing affordable for
extremely low, very low, low, and moderate income residents due to the expiration of federal, state or local
agreements.
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD): The State Department
responsible for administering State-sponsored housing programs and for reviewing housing elements to
determine compliance with State housing law.
Census: The official United States decennial enumeration of the population conducted by the federal
government.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): A grant program administered by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) on a formula basis for entitlement communities and by the
State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for non-entitled jurisdictions. This
grant allots money to cities and counties for housing rehabilitation and community development, including
public facilities and economic development.
Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually, but the structure,
common areas and facilities are owned by all owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
Continuum of Care: A community plan to organize and deliver housing and services to meet the specific
needs of people who are homeless as they move to stable housing and maximum self-sufficiency. It includes
action steps to end homelessness and prevent a return to homelessness.
Density: The number of dwelling units per unit of land. Density usually is expressed “per acre,” (e.g., a
development with 100 units located on 20 acres has density of 5.0 units per acre).
Density Bonus: The allowance of additional residential units beyond the maximum for which the parcel is
otherwise permitted usually in exchange for the provision or preservation of affordable housing units at the
same site or at another location.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H D-1

                                                                                     Appendix D: GLOSSARY
Development Impact Fees: Fees required by City code, ordinance, resolution or other City law to be paid
as a condition of, or prerequisite to, issuance of a building permit for the development of residential uses, as
those fees may be amended from time to time.
Dwelling Unit: means one or more rooms that include permanent provision for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation that are occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons living as a single
housekeeping unit. (SCC 17.108)
Elderly Household: Elderly households are one- or two- member (family or nonfamily) households in
which the head or spouse is age 65 or older.
Emergency Shelter: An emergency shelter is a facility that provides shelter to homeless families and/or
homeless individuals on a limited short-term basis.
Fair Market Rent (FMR): Fair Market Rents (FMRs) are freely set rental rates defined by HUD as the
median gross rents charged for available standard units in a county or metropolitan area. Fair Market Rents
are used for the Section 8 Rental Program and other HUD programs.
First-Time Home Buyer: Defined by HUD as an individual or family who has not owned a home during
the three-year period preceding the HUD-assisted purchase of a home. Jurisdictions may adopt local
definitions for first-time home buyer programs which differ from non-federally funded programs.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The ratio of gross building area (GBA) of development divided by the total net
lot area (NLA). For example, a one-story building covering its entire lot would have a FAR of 1.0. A two-
story building covering half its lot would also have an FAR of 1.0. The formula for calculating FAR is
GBA/NLA = FAR.
General Plan: The General Plan is a legal document, adopted by the legislative body of a City or County,
setting forth policies regarding long-term development. California law requires the preparation of seven
elements or chapters in the General Plan: Land Use, Housing, Circulation, Conservation, Open Space,
Noise, and Safety. Additional elements are permitted to address local needs.
Group Quarters: A facility which houses groups of unrelated persons not living in households (U.S. Census
definition). Examples of group quarters include institutions, dormitories, shelters, military quarters, assisted
living facilities and other quarters, including single-room occupancy (SRO) housing, where 10 or more
unrelated individuals are housed.
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA): The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act requires larger lending
institutions making home mortgage loans to publicly disclose the location and disposition of home
purchase, refinance and improvement loans. Institutions subject to HMDA must also disclose the gender,
race, and income of loan applicants.
HOME Program: The HOME Investment Partnership Act, Title II of the National Affordable Housing
Act of 1990. HOME is a Federal program administered by HUD which provides formula grants to States
and localities to fund activities that build, buy, and/or rehabilitate affordable housing for rent or home
ownership or provide direct rental assistance to low-income people.
Homeless: Unsheltered homeless are families and individuals whose primary nighttime residence is a public
or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings
Page H D-2   |                                                                        Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: Glossary
                                                                                                       H-D
(e.g., the street, sidewalks, cars, vacant and abandoned buildings). Sheltered homeless are families and
persons whose primary nighttime residence is a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter (e.g.,
emergency, transitional, battered women, and homeless youth shelters; and commercial hotels or motels
used to house the homeless).
Household: The US Census Bureau defines a household as all persons living in a housing unit whether or
not they are related. A single person living in an apartment as well as a family living in a house is considered
a household. Household does not include individuals living in dormitories, prisons, convalescent homes, or
other group quarters.
Household Income: The total income of all the persons living in a household. Household income is
commonly grouped into income categories based upon household size, and income, relative to the regional
median family income. The following categories are used in the Housing Element:
         Extremely Low: Households earning less than 30 percent of County median family income;
         Very low: Households earning less than 50 percent of County median family income;
         Low: Households earning 51 percent to 80 percent of the County median family income;
         Moderate: Households earning 81 percent to 120 percent of County median family income; and
         Above Moderate: Households earning above 120 percent of County median family income.
Housing Choice Voucher Program (formerly Section 8 vouchers): A tenant-based rental assistance
program that subsidizes a family’s rent in a privately owned house or apartment. The program is
administered by local public housing authorities. Assistance payments are based on 30 percent of household
annual income. Households with incomes of 50 percent or below the area median income are eligible to
participate in the program.
Housing Problems: Defined by HUD as a household which: (1) occupies a unit with physical defects
(lacks complete kitchen or bathroom); (2) meets the definition of overcrowded; or (3) spends more than 30
percent of income on housing cost.
Housing Subsidy: Housing subsidies refer to government assistance aimed at reducing housing sales or
rent prices to more affordable levels. Two general types of housing subsidy exist. Where a housing subsidy
is linked to a particular house or apartment, housing subsidy is “project” or “unit” based. In Section 8 rental
assistance programs the subsidy is provided to the family (called “tenant-based”) who can then use the
assistance to find suitable housing in the housing unit of their choice.
Housing Unit: A room or group of rooms used by one or more individuals living separately from others in
the structure, with direct access to the outside or to a public hall and containing separate toilet and kitchen
facilities.
Large Household: A household with five or more members.
Manufactured Housing: Housing that is constructed of manufactured components, assembled partly at
the site rather than totally at the site. Also referred to as modular housing.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H D-3

                                                                                        Appendix D: GLOSSARY
Market-Rate Housing: Housing which is available on the open market without any subsidy. The price for
housing is determined by the market forces of supply and demand and varies by location.
Median Income: The annual income for each household size within a region which is defined annually by
HUD. Half of the households in the region have incomes above the median and half have incomes below
the median.
Mobile Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least 8 feet in width and 32
feet in length, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to
the required utilities, either with or without a permanent foundation.
Mortgage Revenue Bond (MRB): A state, county or city program providing financing for the
development of housing through the sale of tax-exempt bonds.
Overcrowding: As defined by the U.S. Census, a household with greater than 1.01 persons per room,
excluding bathrooms, kitchens, hallways, and porches. Severe overcrowding is defined as households with
greater than 1.51 persons per room.
Overpayment: The extent to which gross housing costs, including utility costs, exceed 30 percent of gross
household income, based on data published by the U.S. Census Bureau. Severe overpayment exists if gross
housing costs exceed 50 percent of gross income.
Parcel: The basic unit of land entitlement. A designated area of land established by plat, subdivision, or
otherwise legally defined and permitted to be used, or built upon.
Public Housing: A project-based low-rent housing program operated by independent local public housing
authorities. A low-income family applies to the local public housing authority in the area in which they want
to live.
Reasonable Accommodations: Amendments to a City’s standard procedures for processing permits or
application in order to enable people with disabilities to participate fully in the process.
Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP): A quantification by a Council of Government or by the State
Department of Housing and Community Development of existing and projected housing need, by
household income group, for all localities within a region.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA): Each city and county in the RHNP receives a Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) of a total number of housing units that it must plan through their
General Plan Housing Elements within a specified time period (January 1, 2013 to October 31, 2021 for this
Housing Element period). Allocations are also distributed within four economic income categories; these
four categories must add up to the total overall number a jurisdiction is allocated. The City’s total RHNA
from the 2013-2021 Housing Element is 24,101 housing units distributed in the following way: 4,944 should
be affordable to extremely low- and very low-income households, 3,467 to low-income households, 4,482 to
moderate-income households, and 11,208 to above moderate-income households.
Rehabilitation: The upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition for
human habitation or use.
Page H D-4  |                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: Glossary
                                                                                                       H-D
Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG): The regional government agency authorized by
the Federal and State Government to address regional transportation, housing, and other planning issues in
Sacramento, Placer, El Dorado, Sutter, Yolo, and Yuba Counties.
Second Dwelling Unit: A self-contained living unit, either attached to or detached from, and in addition
to, the primary residential unit on a single lot. Sometimes known as “granny flat” or “accessory unit.”
Senior: The Census Bureau defines a senior as a person who is 65 years or older, and this definition is used
in the Housing Element document unless otherwise noted. For persons of social security eligibility, a senior
is defined as a person age 62 and older. Other age limits may be used for eligibility for housing assistance or
retired communities.
Service Needs: The particular services required by special populations, typically including needs such as
transportation, personal care, housekeeping, counseling, meals, case management, personal emergency
response, and other services preventing premature institutionalization and assisting individuals to continue
living independently.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO): A SRO is a cluster of residential units of a smaller size than normally
found in multiple dwellings within a residential hotel, motel, or facility providing sleeping or living facilities
in which sanitary facilities may be provided within the unit and/or shared, and kitchen or cooking facilities
may be provided within the unit or shared within the housing project.
Special Needs Groups: Those segments of the population which have a more difficult time finding decent
affordable housing due to special circumstances. Under California Housing Element statutes, these special
needs groups include the elderly, people with disabilities, large families with five or more members, female-
headed households, farmworkers, extremely low income households, and the homeless. A jurisdiction may
also choose to consider additional special needs groups in the Housing Element, such as students, military
households, other groups present in their community.
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act
(California Government Code Section 66410 et seq.).
Substandard Housing: Housing which does not meet the minimum standards in the State Housing Code.
Jurisdictions may adopt more stringent local definitions of substandard housing. Substandard units which
are structurally sound and for which the cost of rehabilitation is economically warranted are considered
suitable for rehabilitation. Substandard units which are structurally unsound and for which the cost of
rehabilitation is considered infeasible are considered in need of replacement.
Supportive Housing: Housing with a supporting environment, such as group homes or Single Room
Occupancy (SRO) housing and other housing that includes a supportive service component such as those
defined below.
Supportive Services: Services provided to residents of supportive housing for the purpose of facilitating
the independence of residents. Some examples are case management, medical or psychological counseling
and supervision, child care, transportation, and job training.
Tenant-Based Rental Assistance: A form of rental assistance in which the assisted tenant may move from
a dwelling unit with a right to continued assistance. The assistance is provided for the tenant, not for the
project.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                           | Page H D-5

                                                                                 Appendix D: GLOSSARY
Transitional Housing: Transitional housing is temporary (often six months to two years) housing for a
homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing. Transitional housing often
includes a supportive services component (e.g., job skills training, rehabilitation counseling) to allow
individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD): The cabinet level department of the
federal government responsible for housing, housing assistance, and urban development at the national
level. Housing programs administered through HUD include Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG), HOME and Housing Choice Vouchers, among others.
Zoning: Local codes regulating the use and development of property. A zoning ordinance divides the city
or county into land use districts or “zones”, represented on zoning maps, and specifies the allowable uses
within each of those zones. It establishes development standards for each zone, such as minimum lot size,
maximum height of structures, building setbacks, and yard size.
Zoning Ordinance: Known as the “Planning and Development Code of the City of Sacramento” and its
purpose is to implement the City’s General Plan through the adoption and administration of zoning laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. (SCC 17.100.010)
Page H D-6  |                                                                      Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: References                                                                              H-E
Appendix E: References
Chapter 1, “Introduction”
City of Sacramento. 2030 General Plan. Adopted on March 3, 2009. Sacramento, CA. Available
        <http://www.sacgp.org/> Accessed June 2013.
Sandlund, Greg- pers comm, 2013. Associate Planner. City of Sacramento, Community Development
        Department, Sacramento, CA. July 2013
Sacramento Area Council of Governments. 2013. 2013-2021 Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) September
        2012. Available: <http://www.sacog.org/rhnp/rhna.cfm.> Accessed June 2013.
Chapter 2, “Evaluation of Past Performance”
Weichert, C. and G. Sandlund. Assistant Director and Associate Planner. Sacramento Housing and
        Redevelopment Agency, Sacramento, CA, and City of Sacramento, Community Development
        Department, Sacramento, CA. June, 13—e-mail to Chelsey Norton, Mintier Harnish containing
        HCD Annual Report and housing production data from 2008-2012.
Sacramento Area Council of Governments. 2013. 2013-21 Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) September
        2012. Available: <http://www.sacog.org/rhnp/rhna.cfm.> Accessed June 2013.
Chapter 3, “Community Profile”
Barnett, Leilani pers comm., 2012. Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency, Program Manager.
        2012.
Bloomberg, Michael. 2008. Housing New York City. Accessed April 2013.
Boone, Rolf. 2012. Thurston Apartment Vacancy Rates Up a Bit. The Olympian. Accessed April 2013.
Burton, Ben pers comm., 2012. Sacramento Steps Forward, Executive Director. 2012.
California Department of Finance. Demographic Research Unit. 2012a. Table E-2: City/County Population
        Estimates. Accessed January 2013.
———. 2012b. Table E-5: City/County Population and Housing Estimates. Accessed January 2013.
California Department of Housing and Community Development. 2013. Qualified Entities, Sacramento County.
        Available at: <http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/>. Accessed May 2013.
California Department of Mental Services. 2012. Alta California Regional Center Consumer Statistics. Accessed
        May 2013.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                            | Page H E-1

                                                                                        Appendix E: REFERENCES
California Employment Development Department. 2010a. 2008-2018 Industry Employment Projections
        Sacramento-Arden Arcade-Roseville Metropolitan Statistical Area (El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, and Yolo
        Counties). Available:
        <http://www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov/LMID/Projections_of_Employment_by_Industry_and_
        Occupation.html>. Accessed January 2013.
—2010b. 2008-2018 Occupations with the MostOpenings Sacramento-Arden Arcade-Roseville Metropolitan Statistical
        Area (El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, and Yolo Counties). Available:
        http://www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov/Content.asp?pageid=146. Accessed January 2013.
————. 2010c. 2008-2018 Fastest Growing Occupations Sacramento-Arden Arcade-Roseville Metropolitan Statistical
        Area (El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, and Yolo Counties), 2008-2018.
        http://www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov/Content.asp?pageid=146. Accessed January 2013.
California State University Sacramento. <http://www.csus.com>. 2012.
City of Sacramento. See Parrington, Desmond and Sandlund, GregCity of Sacramento. 211 Database.
City of Sacramento. Code Enforcement Division. 2013. Vacant Building Program Data. Accessed January
        2013.
City of Sacramento and Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency. Adopted August 10, 2004.
        Affordable Housing Preservation Ordinance. Sacramento, CA.
Community Services Planning Council. 2009. Mental Services.
Conerly, Bill. 2011. Housing Recovery Progressing Very Slowly. Businomics. Accessed April 2013.
———. 2012. REO or Short Sales from January-October 2012.
Dataquick News. 2012 (October 17). Notices of Default for the County. Available:
        <http://www.dqnews.com/Articles/2012/News/California/CA-Foreclosures/RRFor121017.aspx
        >. Accessed December 4, 2012.
EDD. 2010. See California Employment Development Department.
Fahrenthold, Joan C. 2012. America’s Sickest Housing Markets. Associated Press. Accessed April 2013.Fischer,
        Howard. 2011. Census Paints a Bleak Picture of Arizona Housing. Capitol Media Services. Accessed April
        2013.
Foreclosureradar.com. 2012. Foreclosures 2006-2012.
Glasser-Hedrick, Jeree pers comm., 2012. Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency, Program
        Manager. 2012.
Hoang-Burdette, Giang. 2012. Nobody’s Home: California Residential Vacancy Rates. Accessed April 2013.
Page H E-2  |                                                                                Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: References                                                                                H-E
National Association of Home Builders. 2013. Wells Fargo Housing Opportunity Index. Available:
        <http://www.nahb.org/reference_list.aspx?sectionID=135
        Accessed May 2013.
Parrington, Desmond pers comm., 2012-2013. City of Sacramento Planning Department, Infill Coordinator.
        2012-2013.
Pierce, Emett. 2008. Uptick in County Rental, Vacancy Rates, Tenants Together. San Diego Union Tribune.
        Accessed April 2013.
Podmolik, Mary Ellen. 2009. Chicago’s a Renter’s Market, but Vacancies, Delinquencies on Rise. Chicago Tribune
        News. Accessed April 2013.
Poe, William. 2012. Area Landlords High on Healthy Rental Market. Accessed April 2013.
Reid, Carolina and Elizabeth Laderman. 2009. The Untold Costs of Subprime Lending: Examining the Links among
        Higher‐Priced Lending, Foreclosures and Race in California. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
SACOG. See Sacramento Area Council of Governments.
Sacramento Area Council of Governments. 2012. Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) 2013-2021.
        Available: <http://www.sacog.org/rhnp/attachments/RHNP%20Allocations_2013-
        21_adopted.pdf>. Accessed November 2012.
———. 2012a. Housing Element Data Profiles. Accessed January 2013.
———. 2012b. SACOG Modeling Projections for 2008, 2020, and 2035. Accessed January 2013.
Sacramento County. 2011. 2011 Continuum of Care Application and Homeless Street Count and Survey. Department
        of Human Assistance. Sacramento, CA.
———. 2011. Mental Health Services.———. 2011. Ten Year Plan to End Homelessness.
———. 2012. 2013-17 Draft Consolidated Plan.
Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency. See Barnett, Leilani, Glasser-Hedrick, Jeree, and Weichert,
        Christine.Sacramento Steps Forward. See Burton, Ben and Watts, Michelle.
Sandlund, Greg pers comm., 2012-2013. City of Sacramento Planning Department, Associate Planner. 2012-
        2013.University of the Pacific. McGeorge School of Law. www.mcgeorge.edu
Sangree, Hudson. 2013. Effort to Aid Buyers Fizzles. Sacramento Bee. Accessed April 2013.
U.S. Census Bureau. 1990. 1990 US Census. Washington, D.C.
———. 2000. 2000 US Census. Washington, D.C.
———. 2006. 2006-2010 American Community Survey. Washington, D.C.
———. 2008. 2008-2010 American Community Survey. Washington, D.C.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                             | Page H E-3

                                                                               Appendix E: REFERENCES
———. 2010. 2010 US Census. Washington, D.C.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2007. 2007 Agricultural Survey.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2007. Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy Data
        (CHAS). Available: <http://socds.huduser.org/chas/index.html>. Accessed August 2007.
———. 2009. 2005-2009 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy Data (CHAS). Available:
        <http://socds.huduser.org/chas/index.html>. Accessed January 2013.
———. 2010. Neighborhood Stabilization Program Data. Accessed May 2013.
———. 2012. Fair Market Rents. Available at: <http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets>. Accessed May
        2013.
———. 2012b. Income Limits. Available at: <http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets>. Accessed May
        2013.
Watts, Michelle pers comm., 2012. Sacramento Steps Forward, Director of Programs. 2012.
Weichert, Christine pers comm., 2012. Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency, Assistant
        Director. 2012.
Zillow.com. 2012a. Home Sale Price Data January-December 2012. Accessed May 2013.
———. 2012b. Rental Rates. Accessed May 2013.
Chapter 5, “Land Inventory”
Halcon, Emily- pers comm. 2008. Management Analyst. Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency,
        Sacramento, CA. April 2008—e-mail to EDAW providing affordable housing projects developed in
        various zones.
Sacramento Area Council of Governments. 2013. 2013-21 Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) September
        2012. Available: <http://www.sacog.org/rhnp/rhna.cfm> Accessed June 2013.
Sandlund, Greg- pers comm, 2013. City of Sacramento Community Development Department, Associate
       Planner. Land Inventory and supporting information and data. 2008.
Weichert, Christine- pers comm. 2013. Assistant Director. Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment
        Agency, Sacramento, CA. June 2013—e-mails to Greg Sandlund providing affordable housing
        projects developed between 2006-2013.
Page H E-4 |                                                                      Adopted December 17, 2013

HOUSING ELEMENT: References                                                                          H-E
Chapter 6, “Housing Program Resources”
Riphagen, Joel- pers comm, 2013. Housing Finance Analyst. Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment
        Agency, Sacramento, CA. June 2013—e-mail to Greg Sandlund providing housing program
        resources.
Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency. 2013-2017 City of Sacramento Consolidated Plan. Approved
        January 8, 2013. Sacramento, CA.
Chapter 7, “Opportunities for Residential Energy
Conservation”
City of Sacramento. 2030 General Plan. Adopted on March 3, 2009. Sacramento, CA. Available
        <http://www.sacgp.org/> Accessed June 2013.
City of Sacramento. Climate Action Plan. Adopted on February 14, 2012. Available:
        <http://www.sacgp.org/cap.html> Accessed June 2013.
City of Sacramento jurisdictional Greenhouse Gas Inventory-2011, Prepared by Ascent Environmental,
        2013.
Growing Cooler: The Evidence on Urban Development and Climate Change. Reid Ewing et. al. 2008, The
        Urban Land Institute.
Meeting AB 32: Cost-Effective Green House Gas Reductions in the Residential Sector. A study prepared
        by ConSol for the California Home Builder’s Foundation, August, 2008.
SACOG. See Sacramento Area Council of Governments.
Sacramento Area Council of Governments. 2013. Metropolitan Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities
        Strategy for 2035. Available: <http://www.sacog.org/2035/>. Accessed June 2013.
Sacramento Municipal Utility District. Information about how residential customers can save energy.
        Available <https://www.smud.org/en/residential/save-energy/>. Accessed June 2013.
Chapter 8, “Constraints”
City of Sacramento. 2013. Planning and Development Code. Available:
        <http://www.sacgp.org/documents/PlanningandDevelopmentCode_001.pdf>Accessed on June
        2013
Economic & Planning Systems. 2007 (April). Sacramento Region Fee Comparisons. Prepared for the City of West
        Sacramento. Sacramento, CA.
EPS. See Economic & Planning Systems.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H E-5

                                                                                    Appendix E: REFERENCES
Kaiser Marston Associates. 2013 (February). Memo on Market Survey & Finance Feasibility: Mixed Income Housing
       Ordinance Update. Prepared for the City of Sacramento. Sacramento, CA. Available:
       <http://www.sacgp.org/documents/KMA_Market_Feasibility_Memo_2_08_13_FINAL.pdf>
Rent.com. <http://www.rent.com>. Accessed July 3, 2013.
Sams, Douglas. 2013. Construction financing may be easing. Atlanta Business Chronicle. March 29, 2013.
Sangree, Hudson. 2013. April home prices rise 23% in the region. Sacramento Bee. June 5, 2013.
Page H E-6 |                                                                             Adopted December 17, 2013
HOUSING ELEMENT: SACOG Data Approval Letter                                                        H-F
Appendix F: SACOG Data Approval
         Letter
The Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) developed regional data sets to support
jurisdictions’ work on housing element updates. The California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) reviewed the housing element data and approved its use in housing element updates
by jurisdictions in the SACOG region. The HCD approval meant that data drawn from these data sets
would not need to be reviewed again by HCD when the housing element is submitted.
 This Appendix contains the letter from HCD (dated January 30, 2013) stating HCD’s approval of the housing
element data.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                     | Page H B-1

                                       Appendix F: SACOG DATA APPROVAL LETTER
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H B-2    |                                             Adopted December 17, 2013


HOUSING ELEMENT: Regulated Affordable Housing Units Created or Preserved                             H-G
Appendix G: Regulated Affordable
        Housing Units Created or
        Preserved
This Appendix contains a table of newly constructed, rehabilitated or preserved housing units with regulatory
agreements from 2008-2012.
Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                       | Page H G-1
                         Appendix G: REGULATED AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS CREATED OR PRESERVED
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page H G-2    |                                                            Adopted December 17, 2013
    HOUSING ELEMENT: Regulated Affordable Housing Units Created or Preserved                                             H-G
Table H G-1 Regulated Affordable Housing Units Created or Preserved 2008-2012
                                   ELI                                                                                    Rehab
                                                  VLI     VLI Units     LI      LI Units                       Project
                                                                                                  Market               Qualification
      Project Name         Through     Through Restricted   with    Restricted    with   Moderate        TOTAL Type (N
                                                                                                   Rate                    Type
                           Funding    Vouchers   Units    Vouchers    Units    Vouchers                         or R)*
                                                                                                                       (SR, CV, PV)*
2008
Riverview Plaza               0           0      123          0         0          0        1       0     124     R          0
Rio Linda Manor               0                   13                   52                   0       0     65      R          0
Broadway Senior               0          48       20         10        79          38       1       0     100     R         PV
Casa de Angelo                0          40       20          8        79          32       1       0     100     R         PV
Copperstone Village           0                   37                   65                   1       0     103     N          0
YWCA                          31                   0                    1                   0       0     32      R          0
Subtotal                      31         88      213         18       276          70       4       0     524
2009
Southcrest                    0          12        6          2        24          10       0       0     30      R         PV
Taylor Terrace                0                   70                   65                  32       1     168     R          0
Subtotal                      0          12       76          2        89          10      32       1     198
2010
Forrest Palms                 0          16       14          6        26          10       0       0     40      R         PV
Budget Inn                    74                   0                    0                   1       0     75      R         SR
La Valentina                  24                  40                   16                   0       1     81      N          0
Maydestone                    0                    0                   16                   8       8     32      R         SR
Morrison Creek
Estates                       0                    5                    0                  17       0     22      R         CV
Hagginwood Manor              0                   16                    0                   1       0     17      R         CV
Subtotal                      98         16       75          6        58          10      27       9     267
2011
Palmer House                  16                   0                    0                   0       0     16      R          0
Norwood Avenue
Housing                       0                   20                    8                   0       0     28      R          0
Hotel Berry Acquisition       11          0       92                    0                   0       0     103     R         SR
7th and H                     75         14       75         14         0          0        0       0     150     N          0
Norwood Estates               0                    0                    0                   0       0      0      R          0
626 I Street                  82         20       26         20         0          0        0       0     108     R          0
23 Coral Gables               0                    4                    0                   0       0      4      R         CV
Subtotal                     184         34      217         34         8          0        0       0     409
2012
    Adopted December 17, 2013                                                                                                | Page H G-3
                          Appendix G: REGULATED AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS CREATED OR PRESERVED
Table H G-1 Regulated Affordable Housing Units Created or Preserved 2008-2012
                                      ELI                                                                                       Rehab
                                                     VLI     VLI Units     LI      LI Units                       Project
                                                                                                     Market                   Qualification
       Project Name          Through      Through Restricted   with    Restricted    with   Moderate        TOTAL Type (N
                                                                                                      Rate                       Type
                             Funding     Vouchers   Units    Vouchers    Units    Vouchers                         or R)*
                                                                                                                             (SR, CV, PV)*
Broadway/MLK                    6                    49                    0                   0       0     55      N              0
Township 9                      3                    33                  143                   0       1     180     N              0
Kelsey Village                  0            10       5          3        15          7        0       0     20      N              0
Subtotal                        9            10      87          3       158          7        0       1     255
TOTAL                          322          160     668         63       589          97      63       11   1,653
Notes:
N – New Construction
R – Rehabilitation
SR – Single Room Occupancy
CV – Conversion from Market Rate to Affordable
PV – Preservation
    Page H G-4     |                                                                                                   Adopted December 17, 2013

LAND USE AND
URBAN DESIGN
As a healthy, growing city, Sacramento’s focus
is on how to accommodate growth and change
while preserving and enhancing the qualities and
characteristics that make it such a desirable place
to live. The City recognizes that the quality of
life in Sacramento is dependent on both creating
and preserving attractive buildings, streets, and
public spaces that facilitate and enrich the life of
the community, and on creating a compatible and
complementary mix of residential, employment,
commercial, and service uses that can sustain a
vibrant economy, a healthy environment, and a vital
social life. In recognition of their interdependence,
policies addressing land use and urban design are
combined in this element to ensure that the physical
forms and patterns of future development advance
the City’s desire for a higher quality of life and a
more sustainable future.
                                                      Page 2-5

                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Photograph courtesy of Michael Zwahlen
 Page 2-6                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Growth and Change
                                                                                                              LU 1
Growth and Change
Policies in this section provide for strategic growth and change that
preserves existing viable neighborhoods and targets new development to
infill areas that are vacant or underutilized, as well as to “greenfield” areas.
Changes proposed to established areas focus on enhancing the quality of life
through improved connectivity with other parts of the city, greater access
to amenities, enhanced safety, and greater housing and employment choices.
GOAL LU 1.1
Growth and Change. Support sustainable growth and change through
orderly and well-planned development that provides for the needs of
existing and future residents and businesses, ensures the effective and
equitable provision of public services, and makes efficient use of land and
infrastructure.
Policies                                                                         Photograph courtesy of Sacramento Area
                                                                                 Council of Governments
LU 1.1.1	            Regional Leadership. The City shall be the regional
                     leader in sustainable development and encourage
                     compact, higher-density development that conserves
                     land resources, protects habitat, supports transit, reduces
                     vehicle trips, improves air quality, conserves energy and
                     water, and diversifies Sacramento’s housing stock. (RDR)
LU 1.1.2	            Building Intensity and Population Density. The
                     City shall regulate the levels of building intensity and
                     population density according to the standards and
                     land use designations set out in the General Plan and
                     the Sacramento City Code. Within these designations,
                     cumulative development shall not exceed 640,400 persons
                     and 390,100 employees by 2035. (RDR/PSR)
LU 1.1.3	            Growth and Change Evaluation. The City shall review
                     and adjust, as needed, the General Plan’s land use,
                     population, and employment capacities every five years,
                     subject to the evaluation of their impacts. (RDR)
                                                                                 The City will be a regional leader of
LU 1.1.4	            Leading Infill Growth . The City shall facilitate infill   sustainable, compact development.
                     development through active leadership and the strategic
                     provision of infrastructure and services and supporting
                     land uses. (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                          Page 2-7

                                                                           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                               LU 1.1.5	 Infill Development . The City shall promote
   See the Utilities Element for additional
   policies on the provision of infrastructure           and provide incentives (e.g., focused infill planning,
   facilities and services.                              zoning/rezoning, revised regulations, provision of
                                                         infrastructure) for infill development, reuse, and growth
                                                         in existing urbanized areas to enhance community
                                                         character, optimize City investments in infrastructure
                                                         and community facilities, support increased transit use,
                                                         promote pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly neighborhoods,
                                                         increase housing diversity, ensure integrity of historic
                                                         districts, and enhance retail viability. (RDR/MPSP)
       Vacant and underutilized properties
    within the existing urban area provide
        opportunities for new development.
                                               LU 1.1.6	 Infill Below Minimum Standards. The City shall allow
                                                         renovations and expansions of existing development that
                                                         fall below the allowed minimum density or floor area ratio
                                                         (FAR), provided that the density or FAR is not reduced,
                                                         and the proposed use does not compromise the long-
                                                         term vision of the General Plan. (RDR)
                                               LU 1.1.7	 Interim Zoning Consistency. In areas where zoning has
                                                         not been brought into conformity with the General Plan,
Infill development, redevelopment,                       the City shall allow property owners to develop consistent
reuse, and growth in existing                            with the existing zoning if only a ministerial permit is
urbanized areas enhances community                       required. For property owners requiring a discretionary
character, optimizes City investments
                                                         permit, the City shall allow property owners to either
in infrastructure and community
facilities, supports increased transit                   (1) develop consistent with the existing zoning, provided
use, promotes pedestrian- and bicycle-                   the City makes a finding that approval of the project
friendly neighborhoods, increases                        would not interfere with the long-term development of
housing diversity, ensures integrity of
historic districts, and enhances retail
                                                         the area consistent with the General Plan, or (2) develop
viability.                                               under the General Plan designation, in which case the
                                                         City will facilitate rezoning consistent with the General
                                                         Plan. (RDR)
     Page 2-8                                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Growth and Change
                                                                                                            LU 1
LU 1.1.8	            Annexation Prior to City Services. Prior to the provision
                     of City services to unincorporated areas, the City shall
                     require those unincorporated properties be annexed
                     into the City, or that a conditional service agreement be
                     executed agreeing to annex when deemed appropriate by
                     the City. (RDR)
LU 1.1.9	            New Growth. The City shall continue to plan for future
                                                                                See LU 10, Special Study Areas and
                     expansion and new growth in Special Study Areas to
                                                                                Planned Development, for additional
                     ensure that regional growth is adequately accommodated     policies on Special Study Areas.
                     and served by the City, particularly when it cannot be
                     absorbed in infill areas. (MPSP/RDR)
LU 1.1.10	           Exceeding Floor-Area-Ratio . The City may allow
                     new development to exceed the maximum allowed FAR
                     or density if it is determined that the project provides a
                     significant community benefit. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-9

                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
          LU 1.1.11	 Development Intensity at Less than the Minimum
                     Floor Area Ratio . The City shall permit development
                     at less than the required minimum FAR if only a
                     ministerial permit is required. Where a discretionary
                     permit is required, a development with a FAR at less than
                     the required minimum may be deemed consistent with the
                     General Plan if the City finds that (1) the use involves no
                     building or by its nature normally conducts a substantial
                     amount of its operations outdoors, or (2) the initial site
                     development is being phased and an overall development
                     plan demonstrates compliance with the FAR standard,
                     or (3) the use is temporary and would not interfere with
                     long-term development of the site consistent with the
                     FAR standard, or (4) the building size or lot coverage
                     is constrained beyond what is otherwise allowed by the
                     zoning designation of the site, due to the existence of an
                     overlay zone or because of environmental features, such
                     as wetlands (RDR)
          LU 1.1.12	 Expanded Industrial and Heavy Commercial. The
                     City may allow existing industrial and heavy commercial
                     uses in areas designated as Centers or Corridors to continue
                     and expand operations, provided that such uses operate
                     compatibly with existing and future new residential, and
                     commercial development in the area. (RDR)
Page 2-10                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Growth and Change
                                                                            LU 1
                                              The illustration to the left identifies
                                              the relative amount of change that is
                                              expected to occur through 2035 in
                                              different parts of the city as follows:
                                              ■■ Open Space. These areas are
                                                 expected to remain in open space
                                                 use such as agriculture, habitat
                                                 protection, or regional recreation
                                                 (e.g., Land Park and the American
                                                 River Parkway).
                                              ■■ Preserve and Enhance. These
                                                 areas are expected to retain their
                                                 current form and character, but will
                                                 experience some minor infill and
                                                 reuse consistent with their current
                                                 form and character (e.g., Pocket,
                                                 East Sacramento, and South
                                                 Natomas).
                                              ■■ Improve and Evolve. These areas are
                                                 expected to experience significant
                                                 change through infill, reuse, and
                                                 redevelopment (e.g., Lemon Hill, UC
                                                 Davis Medical Center, and Central
                                                 Business District).
                                              ■■ Transform-Urban. These existing
                                                 urban areas are expected to
                                                 experience dramatic change
                                                 through major development and
                                                 redevelopment projects (e.g., the
                                                 River District, UP Railyards, and I-5
                                                 Employment Centers).
                                              ■■ Transform-New Growth. These
                                                 existing open space areas are
                                                 expected to experience dramatic
                                                 change through major new
                                                 development projects (e.g.,
                                                 Greenbriar and Delta Shores).
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                        Page 2-11

                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
The illustration to the right identifies
subareas of the City that have been
identified for future infill, reuse, or rede-
velopment. These development oppor-
tunity areas contain vacant or underuti-
lized lands that provide opportunities for
future growth. Categories include:
■■ Neighborhoods. These areas are
   expected to contain a diversity
   of housing types, as well as
   complementary community
   supportive uses.
■■ Centers. These areas are expected
   to develop for commercial and
   employment uses (without housing)
   and/or mixed-use projects that
   integrate housing with retail, office,
   community facilities and other uses.
■■ Transit Centers. Similar to centers,
   with a focus on transit, these areas
   may include any combination of
   employment, services, retail and/or
   entertainment and housing centered
   on a transit station.
■■ Corridors. These areas will provide
   connections between centers,
   districts and neighborhoods and
   are expected to contain a mix of
   uses, including housing, retail and
   office development that support
   surrounding neighborhoods.
■■ New Growth Areas. These areas
   are generally vacant land located
   on the outer edges of the city and
   are expected to see greenfield
   development, requiring new
   infrastructure and services.
Opportunity areas are further identified
in Part 3, Community Plan Areas and
Special Study Areas.
   Page 2-12                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015

            LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Growth and Change
                                                                                          LU 1
                                                          The illustration to the left shows areas
                                                          included in the Sacramento Area
  reas                                                    Council of Governments (SACOG)
ouncil of                                                 2035 Metropolitan Transportation
politan                                                   Plan (MTP) (2007) that are within or
ommuni-                                                   adjacent to the City of Sacramento
 are within                                               and located within 0.5 mile of a
                                                          major transit stop or a high-quality
  to and
                                                          transit corridor. The MTP for the
ransit stop                                               Sacramento Region is the Regional
he                                                        Transportation Plan (RTP) for the six-
 n is the                                                 county Sacramento region, as defined
) for the                                                 by SACOG. Projects located within
  efined by                                               0.5 miles of a major transit stop or a
 miles of a                                               high-quality transit corridor identified
                                                          by a SACOG MTP could be eligible
   transit
                                                          for certain project review streamlining
  /SCS                                                    provisions under the California
 review                                                   Environmental Quality Act (CEQA),
California                                                provided that this and other criteria are
 provided                                                 met, per the provisions of Senate Bill
  per the                                                 375 (SB 375) of 2008.
5) of 2008.
            Areas within 1/2 mile
            of a Major Transit Stop
            Areas within 1/2 mile of a
            High Quality Transit Corridor
                  Existing LRT Station
                  Proposed LRT Station
                  Existing LRT Rail
                  Proposed LRT Rail
            Adopted March 3, 2015                                                          Page 2-13
                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
          Regional Sustainable
          Communities
          California Senate Bill 375 (Chapter 728 Statutes of 2008), known as the
          Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008, requires
          each metropolitan planning organization (MPO) to include a Sustainable
          Communities Strategy in its regional transportation plan (RTP) or to adopt
          an Alternative Planning Strategy, for the purpose of reducing greenhouse
          gas emissions, aligning planning for transportation and housing needs, and
          creating incentives for the implementation of the strategies, such as CEQA
          streamlining and transportation funding. Policies in this section provide for
          coordination with SACOG in preparing its MTP and for consistency with
          SACOG’s strategies in the City’s planning efforts to facilitate and streamline
          the development of residential mixed-use projects and “Transit Priority
          Projects.”
          GOAL LU 1.2
          Sustainable Sacramento Strategy . Support statewide and regional efforts
          to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, fund transportation improvements, and
          meet housing needs.
          Policies
          LU 1.2.1	          Regional Coordination . The City shall continue to
                             work with SACOG to develop and periodically update
                             the Sustainable Communities Strategy or an Alternative
                             Planning Strategy as part of the Regional Transportation
                             Planning process. (IGC)
          LU 1.2.2	          Sustainable Sacramento Strategy . The City shall
                             review SACOG’s Regional Transportation Plan, including
                             the Sustainable Communities Strategy or Alternative
                             Planning Strategy, each time it reviews and updates the
                             General Plan and any master plan, strategy, and zoning, to
                             ensure overall consistency among all of these plans and
                             strategies and allow for CEQA streamlining and eligibility
                             for State transportation funding. (MPSP)
          LU 1.2.3	          Project Streamlining for Sustainability . The City
                             shall review SACOG’s Metropolitan Transportation
                             Plan, including the Sustainable Communities Strategy
                             or Alternative Planning Strategy, for projects that may
                             benefit from CEQA streamlining (e.g., full exemption,
                             Sustainable Communities Environmental Assessment, or
                             traffic mitigation) as provided by State law. (RDR)
Page 2-14                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Growth and Change
                                                                               LU 1
LU 1.2.4	            CEQA Streamlining for Sustainability . The City
                     shall work with SACOG to ensure that cumulative
                     impacts for any Regional Transportation Plan are analyzed
                     pursuant to CEQA so that applicable projects may
                     benefit from CEQA streamlining (e.g., full exemption,
                     Sustainable Communities Environmental Assessment, or
                     traffic mitigation) as provided by State law. (IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                           Page 2-15

          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-16                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
                                                                                                               LU 2
Citywide Land Use and
Urban Design
Policies in this section articulate a vision for a sustainable city of livable
residential neighborhoods and distinctive and vibrant centers and corridors
that incorporate more compact mixed-use development, energy- and
resource-efficient buildings and landscapes, effective public transit, attractive
pedestrian-friendly streets, and a robust urban forest. The policies promote
development that utilizes the city’s natural and cultural assets as keys to
enhancing Sacramento’s position as an attractive place to live and work and
a unique destination to visit. Additionally, these policies promote uses that
equitably support the diverse needs of Sacramento’s residents including
opportunities for commerce, employment, recreation, education, culture,
entertainment, and civic engagement.
GOAL LU 2.1
                                                                                    See LU 4, Neighborhoods, for additional
City of Neighborhoods. Maintain a city of diverse, distinct, and well-
                                                                                    policies on residential development and
structured neighborhoods that meet the community’s needs for complete,
                                                                                    neighborhood design.
sustainable, and high-quality living environments, from the historic
downtown core to well-integrated new growth areas.
Policies
LU 2.1.1	            Neighborhoods as a Basic Unit. Recognizing that
                     Sacramento’s neighborhoods are the basic living
                     environments that make-up the city’s urban fabric, the
                     City shall strive through its planning and urban design to
                     preserve and enhance their distinctiveness, identity, and
                     livability from the downtown core to well integrated new
                     growth areas. (RDR/MPSP)
LU 2.1.2	            Protect Established Neighborhoods. The City shall
                     preserve, protect, and enhance established neighborhoods
                     by providing sensitive transitions between these
                     neighborhoods and adjoining areas, and by requiring
                     new development, both private and public, to respect
                     and respond to those existing physical characteristics
                     buildings, streetscapes, open spaces, and urban form that
                     contribute to the overall character and livability of the    Neighborhoods are the basic living
                     neighborhood. (RDR)                                          environments that make-up the city’s
                                                                                  urban fabric.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-17

                                                                                                   Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                    LU 2.1.3	                 Complete and Well-Structured Neighborhoods. The
                                                                              City shall promote the design of complete and well-
                                                                              structured neighborhoods whose physical layout and land
                                                                              use mix promote walking to services, biking, and transit
                                                                              use; foster community pride; enhance neighborhood
                                                                              identity; ensure public safety; are family-friendly and
                                                                              address the needs of all ages and abilities. (RDR)
                                                    LU 2.1.4	                 General Plan Density Regulations for Mixed-Density
                                                                              Development Projects. Where a developer proposes a
                                                                              multi-parcel development project with more than one
                                                                              residential density or FAR, the City shall, at the discretion
                                                                              of the Community Development Director, apply the
                                                                              applicable density or FAR range of the General Plan
                                                                              Land Use Designation to the net developable area of the
                                                                              entire project site rather than individual parcels within the
                                                                              site. Some parcels may be zoned for densities/intensities
                                                                              that exceed the maximum allowed density/intensity of
Mixed-use neighborhood centers                                                the project site’s Land Use Designation, provided that the
within walking distance of surrounding                                        net density of the project as a whole is within the allowed
neighborhoods provide local-serving                                           range. (RDR)
commercial, employment, and
entertainment uses; additional housing
and transit opportunities; and gathering            LU 2.1.5	                 General Plan Density Regulations for Historic
places for residents.                                                         Structure Conversions. Where a developer proposes to
                                                                              convert a non-residential historic structure/building to
                                                                              residential use, the City shall not require compliance with
                                                                              density regulations. (RDR)
  Complete Neighborhoods
  Complete neighborhoods promote livability and safety for residents of all ages, incomes, and cultural
  backgrounds. Characteristics of complete neighborhoods include the following:
  ■■ A mix of housing types and housing affordability
  ■■ One or more nodes or districts of vibrant commercial or civic activity that provide identity for the neighborhood (e.g., shopping district,
     collection of public buildings)
  ■■ Neighborhood services and facilities including schools, parks, retail (e.g., grocery store, drug store), restaurants and cafes, and community
     centers or other public meeting hall
  ■■ Employment opportunities accessible by transit
  ■■ Sustainable designs and green infrastructure that respond to climatic demands and conserves scarce resources
  ■■ Extensive tree canopy and attractive landscaping
  ■■ A sense of personal safety (e.g., low crime rate, short police and emergency response times)
  ■■ An interconnected street network with short blocks and few cul-de-sacs
  ■■ Convenient access to public transportation (e.g., light rail and bus)
  ■■ A complete network of pedestrian, bicycle, transit, and roadway facilities that are connected to adjacent neighborhoods, centers, corridors,
     and employment
  ■■ Well-maintained housing and public facilities
  Page 2-18                                                                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
                                                                                                              LU 2
LU 2.1.6	            Neighborhood Centers. The City shall promote the
                     development of strategically located (e.g., accessible to
                     surrounding neighborhoods) mixed-use neighborhood
                     centers that accommodate local-serving commercial,
                     employment, and entertainment uses; provide diverse
                     housing opportunities; are within walking distance of
                     surrounding residents; and are efficiently served by
                     transit. (RDR)
LU 2.1.7	            Good Neighbors. The City shall encourage businesses
                     located within and adjacent to residential developments to
                     conduct their business in a courteous manner by limiting
                     disturbances and nuisances from operations and patrons,
                     and to act as members of the community by making
                     themselves available to respond to complaints and by
                     participating in neighborhood/community meetings.
LU 2.1.8	            Neighborhood Enhancement. The City shall promote
                     infill development, reuse, rehabilitation, and reuse efforts
                     that contribute positively (e.g., architectural design) to
                     existing neighborhoods and surrounding areas. (RDR)
GOAL LU 2.2
                                                                                  See the Environmental Resources and
City of Rivers. Preserve and enhance Sacramento’s riverfronts as signature        the Education, Recreation, and Culture
features and destinations within the city and maximize riverfront access          elements for additional policies on rivers,
from adjoining neighborhoods to facilitate public enjoyment of this unique        waterways, and riparian habitat.
open space resource.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-19

                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                           Policies
                                           LU 2.2.1	          World-Class Rivers. The City shall encourage
                                                              development throughout the city to feature (e.g., access,
                                                              building orientation, design) the Sacramento and
                                                              American Rivers and shall develop a world-class system
                                                              of riverfront parks and open spaces that provide a
                                                              destination for visitors and respite from the urban setting
                                                              for residents. (MPSP)
                                           LU 2.2.2	          Waterway Conservation . The City shall encourage
                                                              the conservation and restoration of rivers and creeks
                                                              within the urbanized area as multi-functional open space
                                                              corridors that complement adjoining development and
                                                              connect the city’s parks and recreation system to the
                                                              Sacramento and American rivers. (RDR/MPSP)
                                           LU 2.2.3	          Improving River Development and Access. The City
                                                              shall require new development along the Sacramento and
                                                              American rivers to use the natural river environment as
                                                              a key feature to guide the scale, design, and intensity of
                                                              development, and to maximize visual and physical access
                                                              to the rivers, subject to the public safety requirements of
                                                              the Local Maintaining Agencies (LMA) and the Central
                                                              Valley Flood Protection Board (CVFPB). (RDR/MPSP)
See the Education, Recreation, and         GOAL LU 2.3
Culture and Environmental Resources
elements for additional policies on parks, City of Trees and Open Spaces . Maintain multi-functional “green
open space, and urban forest.              infrastructure” consisting of natural areas, open space, urban forest,
                                           and parkland, which serves as a defining physical feature of Sacramento,
                                           provides visitors and residents with access to open space and recreation, and
                                           is designed for environmental sustainability.
                                           Policies
                                           LU 2.3.1	          Open Space System . The City shall strive to create
                                                              a comprehensive and integrated system of parks, open
                                                              space, and urban forests that frames and complements
                                                              the city’s urbanized areas. (MPSP)
                                           LU 2.3.2	          Adjacent Development. The City shall require
                                                              that development adjacent to parks and open spaces
                                                              complements and benefits from this proximity by:
                                                                  	Preserving physical and visual access
                                                                  	Requiring development to front, rather than back,
                                                                       onto these areas
Page 2-20                                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
                                                                                                            LU 2
                         	Using single-loaded streets along the edge to
                             define and accommodate public access
                         	Providing pedestrian and multi-use trails
                         	Augmenting nonaccessible habitat areas with
                             adjoining functional parkland
                         	Extending streets perpendicular to parks and
                             open space and not closing off visual and/or
                             physical access with development
                         	Addressing the operations, maintenance, and
                             public safety needs of the Local Maintaining
                             Agencies (LMA). (RDR)
GOAL LU 2.4
                                                                                See ER     7, Aesthetic Resources, for
City of Distinctive and Memorable Places. Promote community design
                                                                                additional policies on maintenance and
that produces a distinctive, high-quality built environment whose forms         protection of significant visual and
and character reflect Sacramento’s unique historic, environmental, and          aesthetic resources that contribute to the
architectural context, and create memorable places that enrich community        identity and character of Sacramento.
life.
Policies
LU 2.4.1	            Unique Sense of Place . The City shall promote
                     quality site, architectural and landscape design that
                     incorporates those qualities and characteristics that make
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-21

                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                             Sacramento desirable and memorable including: walkable
                                                             blocks, distinctive parks and open spaces, tree-lined
                                                             streets, and varied architectural styles. (RDR)
                                          LU 2.4.2	          Responsiveness to Context. The City shall require
                                                             building design that respects and responds to the local
                                                             context, including use of local materials where feasible,
                                                             responsiveness to Sacramento’s climate, and consideration
                                                             of cultural and historic context of Sacramento’s
                                                             neighborhoods and centers. (RDR)
                                          LU 2.4.3	          Enhanced City Gateways. The City shall ensure that
                                                             public improvements and private development work
                                                             together to enhance the sense of entry at key gateways to
                                                             the city. (JP)
                                          LU 2.4.4	          Iconic Buildings. The City shall encourage the
                                                             development of iconic public and private buildings in
                                                             key locations to create new landmarks and focal features
                                                             that contribute to the city’s structure and identity. (RDR/
                                                             MPSP)
Photograph courtesy of Michael Zwahlen
                                          LU 2.4.5	          Distinctive Urban Skyline. The City shall encourage the
                                                             development of a distinctive urban skyline that reflects
                                                             the vision of Sacramento with a prominent central core
                                                             that contains the city’s tallest buildings, complemented by
                                                             smaller urban centers with lower-scale mid- and high-rise
                                                             development. (RDR/MPSP)
                                          GOAL LU 2.5
  See the Mobility Element for additional
  policies on pedestrianways, bikeways,   City Connected and Accessible . Promote the development of an
  transit, roadways, and other modes of   urban pattern of well-connected, integrated, and accessible neighborhoods
  transportation that connect the city.   corridors, and centers.
                                          Policies
                                          LU 2.5.1	          Connected Neighborhoods, Corridors, and Centers
                                                             . The City shall require that new development,
                                                             both infill and greenfield, maximizes connections and
                                                             minimizes barriers between neighborhoods corridors,
                                                             and centers within the city. (RDR)
                                          LU 2.5.2	          Overcoming Barriers to Accessibility . The City
                                                             shall strive to remove and minimize the effect of natural
                                                             and manmade barriers to accessibility between and within
                                                             existing neighborhoods corridors, and centers. (MPSP/
                                                             RDR)
  Page 2-22                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
                                                                                                                LU 2
GOAL LU 2.6
City Sustained and Renewed . Promote sustainable development and                      Sustainability policies are threaded
                                                                                       throughout the 2035 General Plan in all
land use practices in both new development, reuse, and reinvestment that
                                                                                       elements.
provide for the transformation of Sacramento into a sustainable urban city
while preserving choices (e.g., where to live, work, and recreate) for future
generations.
Policies
LU 2.6.1	            Sustainable Development Patterns . The City shall
                     promote compact development patterns, mixed use, and
                     higher-development intensities that use land efficiently;
                     reduce pollution and automobile dependence and the
                     expenditure of energy and other resources; and facilitate
                     walking, bicycling, and transit use. (RDR)
LU 2.6.2	            Transit-Oriented Development. The City shall actively
                     support and facilitate mixed-use retail, employment, and
                     residential development around existing and future transit
                     stations (RDR)
LU 2.6.3	            Revitalization Strategies . The City shall employ a
                     range of strategies to promote revitalization of distressed,
                     under-utilized, and/or transitioning areas, including:
                      	Targeted public investments.
                      	Development incentives.
                      	Public-private partnerships.
                      	Revised development regulations and entitlement
                          procedures.
                      	Implementation of City-sponsored studies and
                          master plans. (MPSP/RDR/FB/JP)                             The CalPERS office building incorporates
                                                                                     sustainable building practices.
LU 2.6.4	            Sustainable Building Practices . The City shall
                     promote and, where appropriate, require sustainable
                     building practices that incorporate a “whole system”
                     approach to designing and constructing buildings that
                     consume less energy, water and other resources, facilitate
                     natural ventilation, use daylight effectively, and are healthy,
                     safe, comfortable, and durable. (RDR/IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-23

                                                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                           LU 2.6.5	  Existing Structure Reuse . The City shall encourage
                                                      the retention of existing structures and promote their
                                                      adaptive reuse and renovation with green building
                                                      technologies to retain the structures’ embodied energy,
                                                      increase energy efficiency, make it more energy efficient,
                                                      and limit the generation of waste. (RDR)
                                           LU 2.6.6	  Efficiency Through Density . The City shall
                                                      support an overall increase in average residential densities
                                                      throughout the city consistent with the adopted General
                                                      Plan Land Use & Urban Form Diagram, as new housing
Retention and renovation of existing                  types shift from lower-density, large lot developments to
buildings retains the structures’                     higher-density, small lot and multifamily developments as
embodied energy and limits the
                                                      a means to increase energy efficiency, conserve water, and
generation of waste.
                                                      reduce waste. (RDR)
 See ER 3, Urban Forest, for additional
 policies on the urban heat island effect. LU 2.6.7	  Green Building Retrofit . The City shall promote
                                                      the retrofitting of existing structures with green building
                                                      technologies/practices and encourage structures being
                                                      renovated to be built to a higher green building standard
                                                      such as CalGreen Tier 1 or Tier 2 or Leadership in Energy
                                                      and Environmental Design (LEED). (RDR)
                                           LU 2.6.8	  Heat Island Effect . The City shall reduce the
                                                      “heat island effect” by promoting and requiring, where
                                                      appropriate, such features as reflective roofing, green
                                                      roofs, light-colored pavement, and urban shade trees and
                                                      by reducing the unshaded extent of parking lots. (RDR)
                                           LU 2.6.9	  Sustainability Leader . The City shall expand existing
                                                      partnerships with educational institutions, neighborhood
                                                      groups, businesses, and community organizations to
                                                      continue efforts to maintain the City’s status as an
                                                      environmental “green” leader. (PI/IGC/JP)
                                           LU 2.6.10	 Promote Resiliency . The City shall continue to
                                                      collaborate with nonprofit organizations, neighborhoods
                                                      groups, and other community organizations to promote
                                                      the issues of air quality, food availability, renewable
                                                      energy systems, sustainable land use and the reduction of
                                                      GHGs. (PI/IGC)
                                           LU 2.6.11	 Promote Green Building . The City shall work with
                                                      local groups and organizations to develop programs
                                                      (e.g., home tours) to celebrate and raise awareness about
                                                      innovative green building projects in both new and
                                                      existing buildings. (PI/IGC)
  Page 2-24                                                                                   Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
                                                                                                                     LU 2
GOAL LU 2.7
City Form and Structure. Require excellence in the design of the city’s form
and structure through development standards and clear design direction.
Policies
LU 2.7.1	              Development Regulations. The City shall promote
                       design excellence by ensuring City development
                       regulations clearly express intended rather than prohibited
                       outcomes and reinforce rather than inhibit quality design.
                       (RDR)
LU 2.7.2	              Design Review. The City shall require design review
                       that focuses on achieving appropriate form and function
                       for new and reuse and reinvestment projects to promote
                       creativity, innovation, and design quality. (RDR/IGC)
LU 2.7.3	              Transitions in Scale. The City shall require that the
                       scale and massing of new development in higher-density
                       centers and corridors provide appropriate transitions in
                       building height and bulk that are sensitive to the physical
                                                                                   Neighborhood corridor/main street
                                                                                   Existing development of varying heights
                                                                                   New development transitions in scale from
                                                                                   higher massing along corridor street to lower,
                                                                                   more articulated massing towards adjoining
                                                                                   neighborhood
                                                                                   Townhouse character of new development
                                                                                   transitions to less dense character of
                                                                                   adjoining neighborhood
                                                                                   Existing adjoining residential neighborhood of
                                                                                   duplexes and large single family houses
                                                                                   Neighborhood streets, primarily residential
The illustration above shows how the scale and massing of new development will
transition in building height and bulk.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                 Page 2-25

                                                                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                                     and visual character of adjoining neighborhoods that
                                                                     have lower development intensities and building heights.
                                                                     (RDR)
                                                LU 2.7.4	            Public Safety and Community Design. The City shall
                                                                     promote design of neighborhoods, centers, streets, and
                                                                     public spaces that enhances public safety and discourages
                                                                     crime by providing street-fronting uses (“eyes on the
                                                                     street”), adequate lighting and sight lines, and features
                                                                     that cultivate a sense of community ownership. (RDR)
                                                LU 2.7.5	            Development along Freeways. The City shall promote
See ER 6, Air Quality, for a policy that
                                                                     high-quality development character of buildings along
protects air quality for “sensitive uses.”
                                                                     freeway corridors and protect the public from the adverse
                                                                     effects of vehicle-generated air emissions, noise, and
                                                                     vibration, using such techniques as:
                                                                     ■■  Requiring extensive landscaping and trees along the
                                                                         freeway fronting elevation
        Articulated and modulated building
           elevations and heights to create
                                visual interest
    Extensive landscaping and trees along
                            freeway frontage
                            Appropriate uses
     (employment buildings, parking, etc.)
      Buildings with mediating mechanical
                     and acoustical systems
   (where open windows are not required)
                                                The illustration above shows how development along freeways can be designed
                                                with high-quality character.
Page 2-26                                                                                                   Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
                                                                                                                 LU 2
                     ■■  Establish a consistent building line, articulating and
                         modulating building elevations and heights to create
                         visual interest
                     ■■  Include design elements that reduce noise and provide
                         for proper filtering, ventilation, and exhaust of vehicle
                         air emissions (RDR/MPSP)
LU 2.7.6	            Walkable Blocks . The City shall require new
                     development and reuse and reinvestment projects               See M 2, Walkable Communities, for
                                                                                   additional policies on pedestrian facilities.
                     to create walkable, pedestrian-scaled blocks, publicly
                     accessible mid-block and alley pedestrian routes where
                     appropriate, and sidewalks appropriately scaled for the
                     anticipated pedestrian use. (RDR)
                                                                                   Existing neighborhood without walkable,
                                                                                   pedestrian-scaled blocks, mid-block
                                                                                   pedestrian routes, or alleys
                                                                                   Extent of development area
                                                                                   New streets divide the project into
                                                                                   walkable, pedestrian-scaled blocks
                                                                                   and connect to the network of existing
                                                                                   streets
                                                                                   Alley and mid-block pedestrian routes
                                                                                   create more walkable communities
The illustration above shows how new development can create walkable,
pedestrian-scaled blocks, and publicly accessible mid-block pedestrian routes.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                              Page 2-27

                                                                                 Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                             LU 2.7.7	           Buildings that Engage the Street. The City shall
                                                                 require buildings to be oriented to and actively engage
                                                                 and complete the public realm through such features as
                                                                 building orientation, build-to and setback lines, façade
                                                                 articulation, ground-floor transparency, and location of
                                                                 parking. (RDR)
                                             LU 2.7.8	           Screening of Off-street Parking. The City shall reduce
                                                                 the visual prominence of parking within the public realm
See LU     8, Public/Quasi-Public and                            by requiring most off-street parking to be located behind
Special Uses, for additional policies on the                     or within structures or otherwise fully or partially screened
equitable distribution of public facilities.
                                                                 from public view. (RDR/MSPS)
                                             GOAL LU 2.8
                                             City Fair and Equitable. Ensure fair and equitable access for all citizens
                                             to employment, housing, education, recreation, transportation, retail, and
                                             public services, including participation in public planning for the future.
                                             Policies
                                             LU 2.8.1	           Equitable Distribution of Uses and Amenities.
                                                                 The City shall strive to ensure that desirable uses and
                                                                 neighborhood amenities are distributed equitably
                                                                 throughout the city. (RDR/MSPS)
See the Housing Element, located in a        LU 2.8.2	           Public Facilities and Services. The City shall strive
separately bound document, for additional                        to equitably distribute public facilities, improvements,
policies on the equitable distribution of                        and services throughout the city, with priority given to
house types.                                                     remedying existing deficiencies in blighted or under-
                                                                 served neighborhoods. (MPSP)
                                             LU 2.8.3	           High-Impact Uses. The City shall avoid the
                                                                 concentration of high-impact uses and facilities in a
                                                                 manner that disproportionately affects a particular
                                                                 neighborhood, center, or corridor to ensure that such
                                                                 uses do not result in an inequitable environmental burden
                                                                 being placed on low-income or minority neighborhoods.
                                                                 (RDR)
                                             LU 2.8.4	           Sustainability For All . The City shall identify and
                                                                 work with existing groups, such as schools, neighborhood
                                                                 associations, and non profits, to identify issues and
                                                                 opportunities for engaging them in sustainability efforts,
                                                                 and ensure that all possible segments of the community
                                                                 are included in the City’s sustainability efforts and
                                                                 outreach. (PI/IGC)
 Page 2-28                                                                                                Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
                                                                                  LU 2
LU 2.8.5	            Safety and Hazardous Materials. The City shall
                     discourage establishment or expansion of potentially
                     hazardous uses that have the potential to disproportionately
                     impact minority or low-income populations. (RDR/
                     MPSP)
LU 2.8.6	            Jobs Housing Balance . The City shall encourage a
                     balance between job type, the workforce, and housing
                     development to reduce the negative impacts of
                     long commutes and provide a range of employment
                     opportunities for all city residents. (RDR/MPSP)
LU 2.8.7	           Community Outreach. The City shall strive to engage
                    all segments of the community in planning decisions,
                    including non-English-language speakers, the elderly,
                    youth, working parents, low-income residents, and other
                    similar special needs groups. (PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                              Page 2-29

          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-30                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Land Use and Urban Form Diagram: Overview
                                                                                                         LU 3
Land Use and Urban
Form Diagram: Overview
This section presents the Land Use and Urban Form Diagram as well as an
overview of urban form guidelines, standards of population density and
building intensity, and allowed uses for the various land use and urban form
designations in the plan.
                                                                             The concept diagram to the left is a
                                                                             simplified representation of the Land
                                                                             Use & Urban Form Diagram. This
                                                                             illustration provides an overall idea of
                                                                             how the city will look in 2035 including
                                                                             where major centers and corridors will
                                                                             develop.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                     Page 2-31
                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                        The 2035 General Plan includes a diagram (Figure LU 1) and set of
                                        designations that give direction for both land use and urban form. The
                                        system includes components for allowed uses, population density, building
                                        intensity, and urban form criteria for the different neighborhoods, centers,
                                        and corridors throughout the city. These components work together
                                        to define the overall role of each area of the city, whether it’s for living
                                        (neighborhoods), gathering and employment (centers), travel and commerce
                                        (corridors), preservation (open space), or a unique role (other district) such
                                        as a college.
                                        Land Use & Urban Form Designations
                                        and Development Standards
                                        State planning law requires general plans to establish “standards of population
                                        density and building intensity” as well as allowed uses for the various land
                                        use designations in the plan (Government Code Section 65302(a)). Each
                                        land use and urban form designation in this section specifies (1) urban
                                        form guidelines, (2) allowed uses, and (3) development standards. These are
                                        described below and summarized in Table LU-1.
                                        Urban Form Guidelines
                                        Urban form describes key physical form characteristics envisioned for
Unlike the allowed uses and development each designation. Urban form guidelines are intended to inform future
standards described below, the urban    development by ensuring that all parties (i.e., developers, the City, and the
form guidelines are recommendations not public) share a common understanding of the characteristics that contribute
required standards.                     to good design and consider the implications of individual project design on
                                        the form and character of the community as a whole.
                                        These qualities include characteristics such as the height and bulk of buildings,
                                        the location of buildings on their lots, the relationship of buildings to streets,
                                        the height of buildings relative to adjacent neighborhoods, and the location
                                        and character of parking and pedestrian facilities. Unlike the allowed uses
                                        and development standards described below, the urban form guidelines are
                                        recommendations not required standards.
                                        Allowed Uses
                                        These descriptions outline the range of uses that are allowed within each
                                        designation.
 Page 2-32                                                                                           Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Land Use and Urban Form Diagram: Overview
                                                                                                               LU 3
Development Standards
These are legal standards of density for residential uses and standards of
building intensity for nonresidential and mixed use. The following explains
how these standards operate.
Standards of building density for residential uses are stated as the allowable
range (i.e., minimum and maximum) of dwelling units per net acre. Standards
of population density for residential uses can be derived by multiplying the
maximum number of dwelling units per net acre by the average number of
persons per dwelling unit assumed for the applicable residential designation
(e.g., two persons per dwelling unit).
                                                                                 The illustration to the left shows
                                                                                 different densities for residential
                                                                                 development on a similarly sized lot.
Standards of building intensity for nonresidential uses such as mixed-use,
commercial, and industrial development are stated as a range (i.e., minimum
and maximum) of floor-area ratios (FARs). In the case of mixed-use
developments that include residential uses, the FAR includes residential
building square footage, and the density range is not applicable.
An FAR is the gross building area on a site, excluding structured parking,
to the net developable area of the site. The net developable area is the total
area of a site excluding portions that cannot be developed (e.g., right-of-
way, public parks, etc.). A site includes all contiguous parcels that will share
parking or access. For example, on a lot with 25,000 square feet of land area,
a FAR of 0.50 will allow 12,500 square feet of useable building floor area
to be built, regardless of the number of stories in the building (e.g., 6,250
square feet per floor on two floors or 12,500 square feet on one floor). On the
same 25,000-square-foot lot, a FAR of 1.00 would allow 25,000 square feet
of useable floor area, and a FAR of 2.00 would allow 50,000 square feet of
useable floor area. The diagram above shows various building configurations
representing FARs of 0.50, 1.00, and 2.00.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-33
                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
     The illustration to the right shows
   how various building configurations
  represent different FARs of 0.5, 1.0,
                                 and 2.0.
                                          While FAR provides for the overall development size and intensity, it does
                                          not specify the form or character of the building. Different interpretations
                                          of the same FAR can result in buildings of very different character. The
                                          urban form guidelines for each designation describe key physical form
                                          characteristics envisioned for the designation. In addition, other City
                                          regulations (e.g., zoning or design guidelines height limits, building setbacks,
                                          and open space requirements) guide the form of buildings within a given
                                          FAR range.
Page 2-34                                                                                             Adopted March 3, 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure LU1
            Sacramento
        International Airport                                                   §
                                                                                ¦
                                                                                ¨
                                                                                SR-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Land Use & Urban Form Diagram
                                    Metro
                                    Airpark
                                                       Natomas Joint Vision Study Area
                                                                                |
                                                                                þ
                                                                                }
                                                                                ·99
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NATOMAS BL                                                                                            le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pa
            §
            ¦
            ¨
            I-5   EL CENTRO RD
                                                       $
                                                       "
                                                       !
                                                       #5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CLUB CENTER DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DRY CREEK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SO RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      McClellan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Air Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RALEY BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DEL PASO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAIN AV                                                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAIN AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BL
                                                                                                                 Natomas
                                                                                                                 Crossing                   COM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BELL AV
                                                                                                                                                  M                                             BL
                                                                                                                                                      ER
                                                                                                                                                           C                               EN A                                                               NORTH MARKET BL
                                                                                                                                                           E                          AR
                                                                                                                                                               PK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RD                                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NG W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LE                                                                                                                                                 WINDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NORWOOD AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GRAND AV                                                                                                                                         $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #    80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WATT AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RIO LINDA BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B   UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FULTON AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SILVER EAGLE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FORD RD
                                                                                                                                           SAN JUAN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                     DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR CA DE               BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                DO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                            AZ EVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VI                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HOWE AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             YS
                                                                                  EL CENTRO RD
                                                                                                 Camino
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NORTHGATE BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AR                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TRUXEL RD
                                                                                                                                                  $
                                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AV
                                                                                                  Norte                                               G A EW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UR
                                                                                                                                                                       OA K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                    AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                       SD
                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
LAND USE &                                                                                                                                                                                                             ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T E L C A MINO AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GROVE AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EL CAMINO AV
                                                                                                                       DR                                                                                              NATO
                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                        M
URBAN FORM LEGEND                                                                                    E   ST
                                                                                                            RI
                                                                                                                 VE                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       K DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST
                                                                                                 W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PA                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S PAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ARD EN WY                                           L                                                                                       AR
Neighborhoods                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Arden Arcade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ETHAN WY                                                                       Study Area
Rural                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR
                                                                     §
                                                                     ¦
                                                                     ¨   I-80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               STATE ROUTE 160                                                                                              D       EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Y
     Rural Residential                                                                                                                                                                                                      $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXPOSITION
      Density: 0.25 - 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BANN O                                  D    SB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N ST                                                           TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
Suburban                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JIBBO OM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NO R       NO                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T     HB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST                 TH
         Suburban Neighborhood Low                                                                                                                                                              IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                  T RE                                                                          7TH
         Density: 3 - 8                                                                                                                                                                                           ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
         Suburban Neighborhood Medium                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H                     F ST
         Density: 7 - 17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IT                 OL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DR
         Suburban Neighborhood High                                                                                                                                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M        L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST                                                                                                                                                               YB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L                                                                                  ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M C K IN LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3R D                                                    10T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TY AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CA
         Density: 15 - 30 / FAR: 0.35 - 1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         H                       16T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H                                           KS              J ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FAIR OAKS BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST                                  T                 BU S                                                                 HS                                                                                                                                                                          SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              INE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RS                                                                                                        ST                                                                                                                   T                                                                                                                                                                  ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T                ST                                                     19T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         21S
Traditional                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I   V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9TH                                              PS                                                     OL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T                            AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T                                                                                                                             NR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              56T
         Traditional Neighborhood Low                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                29T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H    RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HOWE AV
          Density: 3 - 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BR O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ADW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ca p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ita l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C ity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AY                                                                                                                                A
         Traditional Neighborhood Medium                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F                               ree w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a    y                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             34T H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IE RA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RIV
          Density: 8 - 36                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S                                    T ST                                                                                      FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BL                                    S                                                                                                                                                                                AV
         Traditional Neighborhood High                                                                                                                                                                                                   RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ID E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2N D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WN DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RIV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AV                    CO L LEG
          Density: 18 - 36 / FAR: 0.50 - 1.5                                                                                                                                                                                        E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rosemont
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   59TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T
Urban                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    24TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LAN D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAR K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RT B
         Urban Neighborhood Low                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BROADWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DR                       FREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          65TH ST
          Density: 12 - 36 / FAR: 0.50 - 1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PO
         Urban Neighborhood Medium                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ERVI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LLE           RD             12TH AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SU TT                                                                                                                                 14TH AV
          Density: 33 - 110 / FAR: 1.5 - 4.0                                                                                                                                                                                                      SU TT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ·16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MARTIN LUTHER KING BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ERV
         Urban Neighborhood High                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ILLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TT AV
          Density: 61 - 250 / FAR: 2.0 - 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SOU TH WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21ST AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 East Study
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FLORIN PERKINS RD
Centers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POWER INN RD
         Suburban Center                                                                                                                                           SEAM
                                                                                                                                                                              AS AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FRUITRIDGE RD
          Density: 15 - 36 / FAR: 0.15 - 2.0                                                                                                                         35T H
                                                                                                                                                                           AV
         Traditional Center
          Density: 15 - 36 / FAR: 0.3 - 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65TH EX
                                                                                                                                                                          4 3R
                                                                                                                                                                                     D AV
         Regional Commercial                                                                                                                                                                                                    BLAIR AV
          Density: 32 - 80 / FAR: 0.15 - 3.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    47TH AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ELDER CREEK RD
         Urban Center Low
                                                                                                                           HAV
                                                                                                                               EN
                                                                                                                                                                                      SO
                                                                                                                                                                                        UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fruitridge Florin
          Density: 20 - 150 / FAR: 0.4 - 4.0                                                                                       SID
                                                                                                                  D            R                                                                     ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Study Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SOUTH WATT AV
                                                                                                              RIA                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                          GLO                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               24TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RK
                                                                         BL                                                         ED                                                                                      D
         Urban Center High                                           E
                                                                   SID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                              ER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65TH ST
          Density: 24 - 250 / FAR: 0.5 - 8.0                RI
                                                               V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FR
         Central Business District                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FLORIN RD                                                                                                                                                                KL                                                                                                                      STO                                                                                                                                                                          FLORIN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IN
          Density: 61 - 450 / FAR: 3.0 - 15.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BL                                                                                                                    CK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NB
                                                                                                                                                               G                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                                                                   R EE
Corridors                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                            VEN DR
                                                                                                                                                                          HA                                                FREEPO RT
                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                 ED
                                                                                                                               DG
                                                                                                                          RI
         Suburban Corridor                                                                                       W IN
                                                                                                                     DBRU S
                                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                        #   5
                                                                                                                                   H RI                                                                                             BL
          Density: 15 - 36 / FAR: 0.15 - 2.0                                                                                            V ER DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KFIELD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GERBER RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MEADOWVIEW RD                                                                               BR OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                POCKET RD
         Urban Corridor Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ELK GROVE FLORIN RD
          Density: 20 - 110 / FAR: 0.3- 3.0
         Urban Corridor High                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MACK RD                                                                                                                  ELSIE AV
          Density: 33 - 150 / FAR: 0.3 - 6.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MF O R D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BA         DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N                                   WYN DHA M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CE
Districts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VA LL                                        TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EY H                                    K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I DR
         Employment Center Low Rise                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             COSUMNES RIVER BL
          FAR: 0.15 - 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UM N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E                     SR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IVE
         Employment Center Mid Rise                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L
          Density: 18 - 60 / FAR: 0.25 - 2.0                                                                     Town of Freeport
         Industrial                                                                                                 Study Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CALVINE RD
          FAR: N/A - 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CALVINE RD
         Public/Quasi-Public                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sacramento Regional                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JACINTO AV                              ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Wastewater Treatment Plant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BRUCEVILLE RD
         Open Space                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TO C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              99      NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L
         Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SHELDON RD
         Special Study Areas
         Planned Development                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Special Study
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ·  99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #   5          þ )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                · -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )   80
Additional Map Features                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /     50
                                               Major Road                                            Existing LRT Stations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ·   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¹
          Policy Area                          Expressway                                            Proposed LRT Stations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0                                      0.5                                   1                                                                                    2
          City Limits
          Waterways
                                               Major Rail
                                               Existing LRT Line
                                               Proposed LRT Line
                                                                                2
                                                                                I                        Intermodal Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ·  99
    ó
    ô
    õ     Proposed Parks/Parkways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ·99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Map Revised: June 26, 2014


LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Land Use and Urban Form Diagram: Overview
                                                                                                                                                            LU 3
 Table LU 1	      Land Use & Urban Form Designations
                                                                             Guidelines                                            Standards
                                                                                                        Minimum           Maximum            Minimum           Maximum
                                                                            Building Height              Density            Density
         Land Use and Urban Form Designation                                                   (1)                                           Floor Area        Floor Area
                                                                           (Number of Stories)         (dwelling units   (dwelling units
                                                                                                          per acre)         per acre)       Ratio (FAR) (2)    Ratio (FAR)
  Neighborhoods
                     Rural Residential (4)
                                                                                    1-3                      0.25               3.0                N/A               1.50
                     (See Page 2-40)
                     Suburban Neighborhood
                     Low Density (4)                                                1-3                       3.0               8.0                N/A               1.50
                     (See Page 2-44)
                     Suburban Neighborhood
                     Medium Density (4)                                             1-3                       7.0              17.0                N/A               1.50
                     (See Page 2-44)
                     Suburban Neighborhood
                     High Density (3) (4)                                           1-3                      15.0              30.0               0.35               1.50
                     (See Page 2-44)
                     Traditional Neighborhood
                     Low Density (4)                                                1-3                       3.0               8.0                N/A               1.50
                     (See Page 2-48)
                     Traditional Neighborhood
                     Medium Density (4)                                             1-3                       8.0              36.0                N/A               1.50
                     (See Page 2-48)
                     Traditional Neighborhood
                     High Density (3) (4)                                           1-3                      18.0              36.0               0.50               1.50
                     (See Page 2-48)
                     Urban Neighborhood
                     Low Density (3) (4)                                            2-4                      12.0              36.0               0.50               1.50
                     (See Page 2-52)
                     Urban Neighborhood
                     Medium Density (3) (4)                                         3-8                      33.0             110.0               1.50               4.00
                     (See Page 2-52)
                  (1) Height guidelines are urban form guidelines, not land use standards.
                  (2) Small commercial (less than 1 acre), where permitted by the land use designation, shall be exempt from the minimum FAR requirement.
                  (3) Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the
                     allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with the allowed density range.
                  (4) Neighborhood support uses (schools, parks, libraries, community centers, and childcare/elderly care facilities) are also allowed.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                                                        Page 2-37

                                                                                                           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Table LU 1	    Land Use & Urban Form Designations
                                                                          Guidelines                                            Standards
                                                                                                     Minimum           Maximum            Minimum           Maximum
                                                                         Building Height              Density            Density
        Land Use and Urban Form Designation                                                 (1)                                           Floor Area        Floor Area
                                                                        (Number of Stories)         (dwelling units   (dwelling units
                                                                                                       per acre)         per acre)       Ratio (FAR) (2)    Ratio (FAR)
                  Urban Neighborhood
                  High Density (3) (4)                                           4-24                     61.0             250.0               2.00               8.00
                  (See Page 2-52)
 Centers
                  Suburban Center (3)
                                                                                  1-4                     15.0              36.0               0.15               2.00
                  (See Page 2-66)
                  Traditional Center (3)
                                                                                  1-4                     15.0              36.0               0.30               2.00
                  (See Page 2-68)
                  Regional Commercial Center (3)
                                                                                  1-6                     32.0              80.0               0.15               3.00
                  (See Page 2-70)
                  Urban Center Low (3)
                                                                                  2-7                     20.0             150.0               0.40               4.00
                  (See Page 2-72)
                  Urban Center High (3)
                                                                                 2-24                     24.0             250.0               0.50               8.00
                  (See Page 2-74)
                  Central Business District (3)
                                                                                  4+                      61.0             450.0               3.00              15.00
                  (See Page 2-76)
 Corridors
                  Suburban Corridors (3)
                                                                                  1-4                     15.0              36.0               0.15               2.00
                  (See Page 2-86)
                  Urban Corridor Low (3)
                                                                                  2-6                     20.0             110.0               0.30               3.00
                  (See Page 2-88)
               (1) Height guidelines are urban form guidelines, not land use standards.
               (2) Small commercial (less than 1 acre), where permitted by the land use designation, shall be exempt from the minimum FAR requirement.
               (3) Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the
                  allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with the allowed density range.
               (4) Neighborhood support uses (schools, parks, libraries, community centers, and childcare/elderly care facilities) are also allowed.
 Page 2-38                                                                                                                                     Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Land Use and Urban Form Diagram: Overview
                                                                                                                                                            LU 3
 Table LU 1	      Land Use & Urban Form Designations
                                                                             Guidelines                                            Standards
                                                                                                        Minimum           Maximum            Minimum           Maximum
                                                                            Building Height              Density            Density
         Land Use and Urban Form Designation                                                   (1)                                           Floor Area        Floor Area
                                                                           (Number of Stories)         (dwelling units   (dwelling units
                                                                                                          per acre)         per acre)       Ratio (FAR) (2)    Ratio (FAR)
                     Urban Corridor High (3)
                                                                                     3-8                     33.0             150.0               0.30               6.00
                     (See Page 2-90)
  Other Designations
                     Employment Center Low Rise
                                                                                    1-3                      N/A                N/A               0.15               1.00
                     (See Page 2-100)
                     Employment Center Mid Rise (3)
                                                                                    3-12                     18.0              60.0               0.25               2.00
                     (See Page 2-102)
                     Industrial
                                                                                    N/A                      N/A                N/A                N/A               1.00
                     (See Page 2-104)
                     Public/Quasi-Public
                                                                                    N/A                      N/A                N/A                N/A               N/A
                     (See Page 2-112)
                     Open Space
                                                                                    N/A                      N/A                N/A                N/A               N/A
                     (See Page 2-120)
                     Parks and Recreation
                                                                                    N/A                      N/A                N/A                N/A               N/A
                     (See Page 2-121)
                     Special Study Area
                                                                                    N/A                      N/A                N/A                N/A               N/A
                     (See Page 2-126)
                     Planned Development
                                                                                    N/A                      N/A                N/A                N/A               N/A
                     (See Page 2-126)
                  (1) Height guidelines are urban form guidelines, not land use standards.
                  (2) Small commercial (less than 1 acre), where permitted by the land use designation, shall be exempt from the minimum FAR requirement.
                  (3) Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the
                     allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with the allowed density range.
                  (4) Neighborhood support uses (schools, parks, libraries, community centers, and childcare/elderly care facilities) are also allowed.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                                                        Page 2-39

          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-40                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                            LU 4
Neighborhoods
Policies in this section provide for the protection, maintenance, and
enhancement of Sacramento’s residential neighborhoods, assuring that
new development complements and reinforces their unique characteristics
through sensitive infill and transitions in scale from adjacent centers and
corridors. They provide for residential neighborhoods that contain a
diversity of housing types and support the development of more complete
residential neighborhoods and complementary community-supportive uses
such as neighborhood-serving commercial and appropriately scaled public
and quasi-public uses, such as schools parks, and libraries; fire and police
facilities; community centers, private social halls, religious institutions and
other places of assembly; cultural facilities; hospitals; and transportation-
related and utility facilities. Table LU-2 (Page 2-54) provides a quick
comparison of urban form guidelines for the different neighborhood types.
                                                                                The diagram to the left illustrates the
                                                                                location of Sacramento’s existing and
                                                                                planned neighborhoods.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-41

                                                                                Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Rural
  Residential
Rural Residential has a limited role in Sacramento’s future. Rural Residential areas contribute to variety and choice in
housing and lifestyle. However, given the inefficient use of land and infrastructure, this development pattern will be
limited to a few areas of the city. Rural Residential areas are the preferred residential designation to provide “buffers”
and serve as a physical transition between Suburban Neighborhoods and the city’s outer edges that abut open space.
Urban Form Guidelines                           ■■ Paved and/or compact                                    Accessory second
                                                   aggregate pedestrian/multi-                             units
Key urban form characteristics of                  use trails separated from and
Rural Residential areas that should                aligned along one side of the
be preserved, enhanced, and/or                     public roadway (rather than
introduced include the following:                  sidewalks on both sides of
1.	 Large parcels relating to the size             roadway)
    and shape of older agricultural             ■■ Large street trees scaled to
    landholdings                                   the open character of the
2.	 Large residential lots with low                rural landscape and set back
    building coverage (e.g., less than             from the roadway
    10 percent)
3.	 Building heights generally             Allowed Uses
    ranging from one to three
                                           This designation provides for the                     Single family detached
    stories                                                                                      residential uses
                                           following uses:
4.	 Buildings sited centrally within
    the parcel with deep front, side,      ■■  Single-family detached residential
    and rear setbacks                          uses normally associated with
                                               urban/rural interface areas
5.	 Generally straight, narrow
    streets designed to                    ■■  Accessory second units
    accommodate lower traffic              ■■  Limited neighborhood-serving
    volumes generated by low-                  commercial uses
    density development (i.e., not
    designed to urban standards)           ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
6.	 Rural street improvement                   and special uses
    standards including the
    following:                             Development Standards
    ■■ Compacted shoulders and
                                           ■■  Minimum Density:	 0.25 Units/
        open drainage swales with              Net Acre
        limited curb and gutter            ■■  Maximum Density:	 3.0 Units/
        improvements                           Net Acre
    ■■  Minimal or no street lights        ■■  Maximum FAR:	         1.50 FAR
    ■■  No on-street parking lanes
  Page 2-42                                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                    LU 4
                                                                                                                        Rural
                                                                                                                  Residential
                                                                      Village green owned
                              1/3 acre lots around open space         either publicly or in
                                                                      common
                                                                                                   1   Large parcels
                                                                            Lots with less
                            Special use public building at
                                             village green
                                                                       than 10% building     2
                                                                                coverage
                                                                 3   Building heights from 1 to 3 stories
                                                       4   Buildings sited centrally within parcel
                                                 5   Straight, narrow streets
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                Page 2-43
                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Suburban
  Residential
The suburban neighborhood designations (low, medium, and high) will continue to be the predominant residential
development pattern in existing neighborhoods. As a result, the magnitude of change anticipated for these areas
is substantially less than what is anticipated for the commercial corridors and centers that serve them. Changes
proposed in areas identified as suburban neighborhoods are more subtle, focusing on how to enhance the quality of
such areas by improving characteristics such as connectivity, pedestrian safety, neighborhood character, and housing
choice.
Urban Form Guidelines                    6.	 Neighborhood parks within
                                             walking distance of local                     Townhouses
Key urban form characteristics               residents                                                          Semi-
envisioned for the suburban
                                         7.	 A range of housing types and                                       detached
neighborhood designations include                                                                               Single Family
                                             designs consistent with existing
the following:                                                                                                  Homes
                                             forms and patterns
1.	 Predominantly single-family          8.	 Street design balancing
    residential scale                        pedestrian and bicycle use                                        Apartments
2.	 Higher-density uses near centers         with vehicular circulation by
    or major transit routes                  incorporating traffic-calming
3.	 Lot coverage generally not               measures and more attractive             7
                                                                                          Range of housing types
    exceeding 60 percent                     and functional pedestrian/                   consistent with existing context
4.	 Building heights generally               bicycle facilities
    ranging from one to three            9.	 Consistent patterns of street
    stories                                  trees providing shade and                   4
                                                                                             Building heights
                                                                                             from 1 to 3 stories
5.	 A street system providing                enhancing character and identity
                                                                                             Consistent pattern
    distribution of traffic and route                                                             of street trees  9
    flexibility
  Page 2-44                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

 LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                                     LU 4
                                                                                                                                     Suburban
                                                                                                                               Neighborhood
Typical existing suburban street
     pattern of curvilinear roads
  and cul-de-sacs, with minimal       School
   connectivity & route flexibility                         Streets system provides traffic
                                                        5   distribution and route flexibility
                                                                                                           Parks within walking distance
                                                                                                      6    of residents
                              Parks within walking distance
                         6    of residents
                                                                                                            7    See opposite
                                                                                     2   Higher-density near centers or transit
                                                                           9    Consistent patterns of street trees
                                       Single-family residential scale  1
 Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                                Page 2-45
                                                                                   Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Suburban                                   Suburban                                      Suburban
  Low Density                                Medium Density                                High Density
Suburban Neighborhood Low Density           Suburban Neighborhood Medium Density         Suburban Neighborhood High Density
Allowed Uses                                Allowed Uses                                 Allowed Uses
This designation provides for low-          This designation provides for                This designation provides for
intensity housing and neighborhood-         medium-density          housing       and    single-use multifamily housing and
support uses including the following:       neighborhood-support                 uses    predominantly residential mixed-
                                            including the following:                     use development in areas served
■■  Single-family detached dwellings
                                                                                         by major transportation routes and
                                            ■■  Small-lot single-family detached
■■  Single-family attached dwellings                                                     facilities, and near major shopping
                                                dwellings
    (e.g., duplexes, triplexes,                                                          areas, including the following:
    townhomes)                              ■■  Small-lot single-family attached
                                                                                         ■■  Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,
    Accessory second units                      dwellings (e.g., duplexes,
■■
                                                triplexes, townhomes)                        apartments and condominiums)
■■  Limited neighborhood-serving                                                         ■■  Mixed-use neighborhood-serving
    commercial on lots three acres          ■■  Accessory second units
                                                                                             commercial
    or less                                 ■■  Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,
                                                                                         ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
                                                apartments and condominiums)
■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,                                                         and special uses
    and special uses                        ■■  Limited neighborhood-serving
                                                commercial on lots three acres           Suburban Neighborhood High Density
Suburban Neighborhood Low Density               or less                                  Development Standards
Development Standards                       ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,         ■■  Minimum Density:	 15.0 Units/
■■  Minimum Density:	 3.0 Units/                and special uses                             Net Acre
    Net Acre
                                                                                         ■■  Maximum Density:	 30.0 Units/
                                            Suburban Neighborhood Medium Density
■■  Maximum Density:	 8.0 Units/                                                             Net Acre
                                            Development Standards
    Net Acre
                                                                                         ■■  Minimum FAR:	           0.35 FAR
                                            ■■  Minimum Density:	 7.0 Units/
■■  Maximum FAR:	          1.50 FAR
                                                Net Acre                                 ■■  Maximum FAR:	           1.50 FAR
                                            ■■  Maximum Density:	 17.0 Units/
                                                Net Acre
                                            ■■  Maximum FAR:	          1.50 FAR
  Development Standards Note: Residential        development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed floor
  area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with the
  allowed density range.
   Page 2-46                                                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                             LU 4
                              Suburban                             Suburban                                  Suburban
                         Low Density                      Medium Density                                 High Density
 Single family detached units          Duplexes                                   Stacked apartments
                                                                                  with podium parking
 Detached garages/                     Single family detached units
 accessory second units                                                           Attached townhouses
                                       Accessory/garage units                     with parking court
                                                                                                      Mixed-use
                                                          Small lot single                            neighborhood serving
                                                          family attached units                       commercial
                                                          (duplexes)
                                                                                                      Parking court
                                                          Small lot single family
                                                          detached units
                            3-8 DU/Ac                           7-17 DU/Ac                                15-30 DU/Ac
                    (5 DU/Ac shown)                     (11 DU/Ac shown)                         (22.5 DU/Ac shown)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-47
                                                                                Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Traditional
  Neighborhood
Traditional neighborhoods and the characteristics associated with them are highly desirable and expected to be
highly sought after in the future. Many existing traditional neighborhoods are well-established and generally well-
preserved; thus, changes to these areas will be relatively modest. Conversely some traditional neighborhoods, such as
Oak Park, have many of the key formal characteristics of a traditional neighborhood, but have declined over time.
These neighborhoods will experience more substantial change related to rehabilitation of units, infill development,
and streetscape improvements. Changes proposed in these traditional neighborhoods will focus on preserving and
restoring the quality of such areas by protecting and enhancing features such as scale and quality of housing,
neighborhood character, and housing choice. It should be noted that Traditional Neighborhoods contain a wide
diversity of development and thus some houses and buildings fall outside the allowed development standards. The
City expects to retain this diversity. It is also anticipated that future new development areas will be planned with
attributes that emulate the traditional neighborhood form and character and include adequate neighborhood-serving
uses.
Urban Form Guidelines                     7.	 Neighborhood services, transit,
                                                                                                   Building heights
                                               parks and schools within                       3
Key urban form characteristics                 walking distance of local
                                                                                                   from 1 to 3 stories
of low-, medium-, and high-                    residents                                                  Dense tree
density residential development in                                                                            canopy    12
                                          8.	 Limited garages and curb cuts
traditional neighborhoods include
                                               along the street frontage with
the following:
                                               rear, alley, and side garage access
1.	 Predominantly single-family           9.	 Diverse architectural
     residential scale and including           designs consistent with the
     a mix of single-family units,             neighborhoods forms and
     second units, duplexes, tri-              patterns
     plexes, four-plexes, and
                                          10.	Street design balancing
     apartments
                                               pedestrian and bicycle uses and                                      Semi-
2.	 Lot coverage generally not                 safety with vehicular circulation
                                                                                                                    detached
     exceeding 70 percent                                                                                           Single Family
                                          11.	Traffic-calming measures,                                             Homes
3.	 Building heights generally                 sidewalks with parkways (e.g.,                                        Townhouses
     ranging from one to three                 planting strips), and more
     stories for all traditional               attractive and functional                                             Apartments
     neighborhood designations                 pedestrian/bicycle facilities
4.	 A highly interconnected street        12.	Dense street tree canopy
     system facilitating flow of               providing shade and enhanced             1   Range of residential house types
     traffic, connectivity, and route          neighborhood character and
     flexibility                               identity
5.	 Pedestrian-scale blocks that are
     easy to navigate
6.	 A comprehensive, integrated,
     and interconnected pedestrian/
     bicycle system
                                                                                            Traffic-calming measures &
                                                                                       11   sidewalks with parkways (e.g.,
                                                                                            planting strips)
   Page 2-48                                                                                                Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                             LU 4
                                                                                                                            Traditional
                                                                                                                      Neighborhood
                            Limited garages and curb-cuts along street frontage with
                                          rear, alley and side garage access common
                                                                                        8
                                                                                                      Parks within walking distance
                                                Dense street tree canopy   12                     7   of residents
            Highly interconnected street system      4
                                                                               Neighborhood services and schools
                                                                               within walking distance of residents   7
                                                       Predominantly single-family
                                                   1   residential scale
                                            Parks within walking
                                      7     distance of residents
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                         Page 2-49
                                                                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Traditional                                   Traditional                                      Traditional
  Low Density                                   Medium Density                                   High Density
Traditional Neighborhood Low Density          Traditional Neighborhood Medium Density          Traditional Neighborhood High Density
Allowed Uses                                  Allowed Uses                                     Allowed Uses
This designation provides for                 This designation provides for                    This designation provides for
moderate-intensity housing and                higher-intensity          medium-density         single-use multifamily housing and
neighborhood-support                  uses    housing and neighborhood-support                 predominantly residential mixed-
including the following:                      uses including the following:                    use development in areas served
                                                                                               by major transportation routes and
■■   Single-family detached dwellings         ■■   Small-lot single-family dwellings
                                                                                               facilities, and near shopping areas,
■■   Single-family attached dwellings         ■■   Small-lot single-family attached            including the following:
     (e.g., duplexes, triplexes,                   dwellings (e.g., duplexes,
     townhomes)                                    triplexes, townhomes)                       ■■  Small-lot single-family dwellings
                                                                                               ■■  Small-lot single-family attached
■■   Accessory second units                   ■■   Accessory second units
                                                                                                   dwellings (e.g., duplexes,
■■   Limited neighborhood-serving             ■■   Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,                    triplexes, townhomes)
     commercial on lots two acres or               apartments and condominiums)
                                                                                               ■■  Accessory second units
     less                                     ■■   Limited neighborhood-serving
                                                                                               ■■  Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,
■■   Compatible public, quasi-public,              commercial on lots two acres or
                                                                                                   apartments and condominiums)
     and special uses                              less
                                                                                               ■■  Mixed-use neighborhood-
                                              ■■   Compatible public, quasi-public,
Traditional Neighborhood Low Density                                                               serving commercial uses
                                                   and special uses
Development Standards                                                                          ■■  Compatible public, quasi-
■■   Minimum Density:	 3.0 Units/             Traditional Neighborhood Medium Density              public, and special uses
     Net Acre                                 Development Standards
                                                                                               Traditional Neighborhood High Density
■■   Maximum Density:	 8.0 Units/             ■■   Minimum Density:	 8.0 Units/
                                                                                               Development Standards
     Net Acre                                      Net Acre
                                                                                               ■■  Minimum Density:	 18.0 Units/
■■   Maximum FAR:	          1.50 FAR          ■■   Maximum Density:	 36.0 Units/
                                                                                                   Net Acre
                                                   Net Acre
                                                                                               ■■  Maximum Density:	 36.0 Units/
                                              ■■   Maximum FAR:	            1.50 FAR
                                                                                                   Net Acre
                                                                                               ■■  Minimum FAR:	           0.50 FAR
                                                                                               ■■  Maximum FAR:	           1.50 FAR
   Development Standards Note:          Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
   floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
   the allowed density range.
   Page 2-50                                                                                                       Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                             LU 4
                            Traditional                           Traditional                               Traditional
                         Low Density                     Medium Density                                  High Density
 Single family detached units           Stacked apartments                         Stacked apartments
 Detached garages/                                                                 Attached townhouses
 accessory second units                 Attached townhouses
                                                                   Duplexes
                                                                 Accessory/
                                                                 garage units
                                                           Alley access and
                                                           parking court                              Alley access to
                                                                                                      private garages
                                                           Small lot single family
                                                           attached units                             Pedestrian pathways
                                                                                                      through block
                                                           Small lot single family
                                                           detached units
                            3-8 DU/Ac                            8-36 DU/Ac                              18-36 DU/Ac
                    (7 DU/Ac shown)                    (17 DU/Ac shown)                            (26 DU/Ac shown)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-51
                                                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Urban
  Neighborhood
While the area proposed for Urban Neighborhoods is relatively small compared to the other neighborhood form
categories, Urban Neighborhoods will play a significant role in Sacramento’s future. The city’s continued growth as
a regional center for business, culture and entertainment increases the demand for and interest in urban residential
living. Urban Neighborhoods are highly active areas where people live, work and recreate seven days a week and
around the clock. As the city continues to grow, new Urban Neighborhoods will be developed in urban centers
outside the Central City.
Urban Form Guidelines                    7.	 Off-street parking integrated
                                             into the buildings or placed in                                      Office
Key urban form characteristics               separate parking structures
of low, medium, and high-density
                                         8.	 Minimal or no curb cuts along                                        Parking
residential development and support
                                             street fronts and façades                                            Retail
uses in urban neighborhoods include
the following:                           9.	 Side or rear access to parking
                                             and service functions                   6   Vertical & horizontal integration of
1.	 Buildings establishing a                                                             uses
                                         10.	Broad sidewalks appointed
     consistent setback from street
                                             with appropriate pedestrian
     that produces a pleasing
                                             amenities/facilities                                                 Parking with
     definition to the public right-                                                                              alley access
     of-way (e.g., sidewalk, parkway     11.	Street design that integrates
     strip, and street)                      pedestrian, bicycle, and
                                                                                                                  Active uses
                                             vehicular use and incorporates
2.	 Building façades and entrances                                                                                wrapping
                                             traffic-calming features and on-                                     parking
     that directly addressing the
                                             street parking
     street and have a high degree                                                   7   Building-integrated (podium)
     of transparency (i.e., numerous     12.	Consistent planting of street               parking
     windows) on street-fronting             trees providing shade and               8   No curb cuts along primary
     façades                                 enhance a character and identity            street fronts
3.	 Building heights generally           13.	Public parks and open space                 Rear access to parking and
                                             areas within walking distance of        9
     ranging from:                                                                       services
                                             local residents
     ■■ Two to four stories for Low
         Density
     ■■  Three to eight stories for
         Medium Density
     ■■  Four to twenty-four stories
         for High Density
4.	 Lot coverage generally not
     exceeding 80 percent                                                                Building façades and entrances that
                                                                                     2   directly address the street and have
5.	 An interconnected street system                                                      a high degree of transparency
     providing for traffic and route
     flexibility
6.	 Vertical and horizontal
     integration of complementary
     nonresidential uses
   Page 2-52                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                        LU 4
                                                                                                                            Urban
                                                                                                                    Neighborhood
                                                                            Interconnected street system    5
           Parks and open space within
           walking distance of residents
                                              Buildings defining the public right-of-way   1
                                         13
                                                              Light rail
                                                              station
                                                                          7    Building-integrated (podium) parking
                                     9   Rear access to parking and services
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                    Page 2-53
                                                                                    Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Urban                                       Urban                                         Urban
  Low Density                                 Medium Density                                High Density
Urban Neighborhood Low Density               Urban Neighborhood Medium Density             Urban Neighborhood High Density
Allowed Uses                                 Allowed Uses                                  Allowed Uses
This designation provides for                This designation provides for                 This designation provides for single-
moderate-intensity urban housing             moderate-to higher-intensity urban            use urban multifamily housing and
and neighborhood-support uses                housing and neighborhood-support              predominantly residential urban
including the following:                     uses including the following:                 mixed-use development in areas
                                                                                           served by major transportation
■■  Small-lot single-family dwellings        ■■  Small-lot single-family dwellings
                                                                                           routes and facilities, and near
■■  Small-lot single-family attached         ■■  Small-lot single-family attached          major shopping areas, including the
    dwellings (e.g., duplexes,                   dwellings (e.g., duplexes,                following:
    triplexes, townhomes)                        triplexes, townhomes)
                                                                                           ■■  Small-lot single-family attached
■■  Accessory second units                   ■■  Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,                  dwellings (e.g., duplexes,
                                                 apartments and condominiums)                  triplexes, townhomes)
■■  Mixed-use neighborhood-serving
    commercial                               ■■  Mixed-use neighborhood-serving            ■■  Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,
                                                 commercial                                    apartments and condominiums)
■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
    and special uses                         ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,          ■■  Mixed-use neighborhood-serving
                                                 and special uses                              commercial
Urban Neighborhood Low Density                                                             ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
Development Standards                        Urban Neighborhood Medium Density                 and special uses
                                             Development Standards
■■  Minimum Density:	 12.0 Units/
    Net Acre                                 ■■  Minimum Density:	 33.0 Units/             Urban Neighborhood High Density
                                                 Net Acre                                  Development Standards
■■  Maximum Density:	 36.0 Units/
    Net Acre                                 ■■  Maximum Density:	 110.0 Units/            ■■  Minimum Density:	 61.0 Units/
                                                 Net Acre                                      Net Acre
■■  Minimum FAR:	         0.50 FAR
                                             ■■  Minimum FAR:	          1.50 FAR           ■■  Maximum Density:	 250.0 Units/
■■  Maximum FAR:	         1.50 FAR
                                             ■■  Maximum FAR:	          4.00 FAR               Net Acre
                                                                                           ■■  Minimum FAR:	           2.0 FAR
                                                                                           ■■  Maximum FAR:	           8.0 FAR
  Development Standards Note: Residential development that is part of        a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed floor
  area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with the
  allowed density range.
   Page 2-54                                                                                                   Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                               LU 4
                                 Urban                                       Urban                                   Urban
                         Low Density                           Medium Density                               High Density
Attached townhouses                         Mid-rise stacked apartments               High-rise stacked apartments
                                            Low-rise stacked                          Low-rise stacked
Stacked apartments                          apartments                                apartments
                                            Courtyard over                            Courtyard over
                                            parking podium                            parking podium
                    Alley access to private
                                                             Mid-block pedestrian
                    garages                                                                          Mid-block pedestrian
                                                             pathway
                                                                                                     pathway
                    Pedestrian pathway
                                                             Structured parking
                    through block                                                                    Structured parking
                                                             wrapped with apartments
                                                                                                     wrapped with apartments
                                                             Mixed-use neighborhood
                                                                                                     Mixed-use neighborhood
                                                             serving commercial along
                                                                                                     serving commercial along
                                                             major street
                                                                                                     major street
                        12-36 DU/Ac                               33-110 DU/Ac                             61-250 DU/Ac
                 (28 DU/Ac shown)                           (75 DU/Ac shown)                        (125 DU/Ac shown)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-55
                                                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Table LU 2	           Comparison of Neighborhood Type Urban Form Guidelines
                    Predominant                                     Setbacks/                                Street      Primary    On-
 Neighborhood                                         Building                                                                                 Pedestrian
                       Building         Lot Size                     Building         Block Pattern          Width/    Vehicular   Street
     Types                                           Coverage                                                                                     Realm
                        Types                                       Placement                              Orientation  Loading   Parking
                                                                                                                                            Minimal Public
                                      Very                         Large Front,                                                             Improvements
                   Single-Family                                                    Interconnected        Narrow /
Rural Residential                     Large–         Low: <10%     Side and                                            Front     No         with Private
                   Dwellings                                                        Large Blocks          Vehicular
                                      Large                        Rear Yards                                                               Landscape
                                                                                                                                            Amenities
                                                                   Large Front
                                                                                    Interconnected
                                                                   and Rear                               Wide–                             Medium-Width
Suburban           Single-Family      Large–         Medium:                        Medium to                          Front or
                                                                   Yards with                             Moderate /             Optional   Zone with Street
Neighborhood       Dwellings          Medium         <60%                           Pedestrian-Scaled                  Alley
                                                                   Medium Side                            Balanced                          Trees
                                                                                    Blocks
                                                                   Yards
                                                                   Medium to
                                                                   Small Front      Highly
                                                                                                                                            Medium-Width
                   Small-lot                         Medium–       Yards with       Interconnected                     Alley
Traditional                           Medium–                                                             Narrow /                          Zone with
                   Single-Family                     High:         Small Side       Pedestrian-Scaled                  / Side    Yes
Neighborhood                          Small                                                               Balanced                          Densely Placed
                   Dwellings                         <70%          Yards with       Blocks in Grid                     Street
                                                                                                                                            Street Trees
                                                                   Consistent       Pattern
                                                                   Setbacks
                                                                   Minimal or
                                                                                    Highly
                   Townhouses                                      No Front
                                                                                    Interconnected        Moderate–    Alley                Wide Zone with
Urban              and                               High:         and Side
                                      Small                                         Pedestrian-Scaled     Narrow/      / Side    Yes        Densely Placed
Neighborhood       Multifamily                       <80%          Yards with
                                                                                    Blocks in Grid        Balanced     Street               Street Trees
                   Dwellings                                       Consistent
                                                                                    Pattern
                                                                   Setbacks
SOURCE: WRT | Solomon E.T.C. 2009
This matrix compares the urban form of the four neighborhood types as established by the respective guidelines.
                                                         GOAL LU 4.1
                                                         Neighborhoods. Promote the development and preservation of
                                                         neighborhoods that provide a variety of housing types, densities, and designs
                                                         and a mix of uses and services that address the diverse needs of Sacramento
                                                         residents of all ages, socio-economic groups, and abilities.
                                                         Policies
                                                         LU 4.1.1	                  Mixed-Use Neighborhoods . The City shall require
 See the Housing Element, located in a                                              neighborhood design that incorporates a compatible and
 separately bound document, for additional                                          complementary mix of residential and nonresidential
 policies related to residential development                                        (e.g., retail, parks, schools) uses that address the basic
 and housing.
                                                                                    daily needs of residents and employees. (RDR)
                                                         LU 4.1.2	                  Neighborhood Amenities . The City shall encourage
                                                                                    appropriately scaled community-supportive facilities
                                                                                    and services within all neighborhoods to enhance
                                                                                    neighborhood identity and provide convenient access
                                                                                    within walking and biking distance of city residents.
                                                                                    (RDR/MPSP)
  Page 2-56                                                                                                                           Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                 LU 4
                                                                                       Tree canopy
                                                                                       Housing oriented to street
                                                                                       Parkway
                                                                                       Walkable sidewalk
                                                                                       Minimal curb cuts
LU 4.1.3	            Walkable Neighborhoods . The City shall require
                     the design and development of neighborhoods that are          See M 2, Walkable Communities, for
                                                                                   additional policies on pedestrian facilities.
                     pedestrian friendly and include features such as short
                     blocks, broad and well-appointed sidewalks (e.g., lighting,
                     landscaping, adequate width), tree-shaded streets,
                     buildings that define and are oriented to adjacent streets
                     and public spaces, limited driveway curb cuts, paseos
                     and pedestrian lanes, alleys, traffic-calming features,
                     convenient pedestrian street crossings, and access to
                     transit. (RDR/MPSP)
LU 4.1.4	            Traditional Grid . The City shall require all new
                     neighborhoods to be designed with traditional grid block
                     sizes. (RDR)
LU 4.1.5	            Alley Access. The City shall encourage the use of well-
                     designed and safe alleys to access individual parcels in
                     neighborhoods in order to reduce the number of curb
                     cuts, driveways, garage doors, and associated pedestrian/
                     automobile conflicts along street frontages. (RDR)          Well-designed alleys provide alternative
                                                                                 access to homes and reduce the
LU 4.1.6	            Connecting Key Destinations . The City shall               number of curb cuts, driveways, garage
                                                                                 doors, and associated pedestrian/
                     promote better connections by all travel modes              automobile conflicts along street
                     between residential neighborhoods and key commercial,       frontages.
                     cultural, recreational, and other community-supportive
                     destinations for all travel modes. (RDR/MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-57

                                                                         Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
         Small lot single-family detached
 housing around a neighborhood park.
                                              LU 4.1.7	  Neighborhood Transitions. The City shall provide for
                                                         appropriate transitions between different land use and
                                                         urban form designations along the alignment of alleys
                                                         or rear lot lines and along street centerlines, in order to
                                                         maintain consistent scale, form, and character on both
                                                         sides of public streetscapes. (RDR)
                                              LU 4.1.8	  Connections to Open Space . The City shall ensure
See ER 3, Urban Forest, for additional
                                                         that new and existing neighborhoods contain a diverse
policies on the city’s trees and urban forest
management.                                              mix of parks and open spaces that are connected by trails,
                                                         bikeways, and other open space networks and are within
                                                         easy walking distance of residents. (RDR/MPSP)
                                              LU 4.1.9	  Neighborhood Street Trees . The City shall encourage
See the Housing Element, located in a
separately bound document, for additional
                                                         the strategic selection of street tree species to enhance
policies related to residential development              neighborhood character and identity and preserve the
and housing.                                             health and diversity of the urban forest. (RDR/MPSP)
                                              LU 4.1.10	 Family-Friendly Neighborhoods . The City
                                                         shall promote the development of family-friendly
                                                         neighborhoods throughout the city that provide housing
                                                         that accommodates families of all sizes and provides safe
                                                         and convenient access to schools, parks, and other family-
                                                         oriented amenities and services. (RDR/MPSP)
                                              LU 4.1.11	 Gated Communities. The City shall discourage creation
                                                         of gated communities in an effort to promote social
                                                         cohesiveness and maintain street network efficiency,
                                                         adequate emergency response times, and convenient
                                                         travel routes for all street users. (RDR)
 Page 2-58                                                                                       Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                    LU 4
GOAL LU 4.2
Suburban Neighborhoods. Encourage the creation of more complete and
well-designed suburban neighborhoods that provide a variety of housing
choices and mix of uses that encourage walking and biking.
Policies
LU 4.2.1	            Enhanced Walking and Biking . The City shall
                                                                                     See M 2, Walkable Communities, M 3,
                     pursue opportunities to promote walking and biking in
                                                                                     Public Transit, and M 5, Bikeways, for
                     existing suburban neighborhoods through improvements            additional policies on pedestrian, transit,
                     such as:                                                        and bicycle facilities and services.
                     ■■ Introducing new pedestrian and bicycle connections
                     ■■ Adding bike lanes and designating and signing bike
                        routes
                     ■■ Narrowing streets where they are overly wide
                     ■■ Introducing planting strips and street trees between
                        the curb and sidewalk
                     ■■ Introducing traffic circles, speed humps, traffic tables,
                        and other appropriate traffic-calming improvements
                        (RDR/MPSP)
                                                                                  Promote walking and bicycling by
                                                                                  providing well-designed trails and
                                                                                  facilities.
                                                                                  Illustration courtesy of Urban Advantage
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                 Page 2-59

                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                  LU 4.2.2	 Enhanced Urban Forest . The City shall pursue
    See ER 3, Urban Forest, for additional
    policies on the city’s trees and urban forest           opportunities to enhance the urban forest in existing
    management.                                             suburban neighborhoods by undertaking neighborhood
                                                            street tree planting programs that introduce more trees
                                                            into the public right-of-way, rather than depending on
                                                            trees in private yards. Potential strategies include the
                                                            following:
                                                            ■■  Introducing new planting strips and street trees
                                                                between the curb and sidewalk
                                                            ■■  Creating tree wells in existing sidewalks
                                                            ■■  Adding trees to public parks and greenways (MPSP/
Illustrates how existing neighborhoods
can incorporate trees and other                                 SO)
greenery to enhance neighborhood
character and livability.
Photograph courtesy of Urban Advantage
Illustration courtesy of Urban Advantage
    Page 2-60                                                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                            LU 4
GOAL LU 4.3
Traditional Neighborhoods. Retain the pedestrian-scale, pre-automobile            See the Historic and Cultural Resources
                                                                                  Element for additional policies related
form, and lush urban forest that typifies traditional neighborhoods and
                                                                                  to preservation of structures and
contributes to their special sense of place.                                      neighborhoods.
Policies
LU 4.3.1	            Traditional Neighborhood Protection . The City
                     shall protect the pattern and character of Sacramento’s
                     unique traditional neighborhoods, including the street-
                     grid pattern, architectural styles, tree canopy, and access
                     to public transit, neighborhood services and amenities.
                     (RDR)
LU 4.3.2	            Corner Duplexes and Halfplexes in Traditional
                     Neighborhood Medium Density . Within the
                     Traditional Neighborhood Medium Density designation,
                     the City shall grant an exception to the maximum density
                     standard for the construction of duplexes and halfplexes
                     on corner parcels of a traditionally scaled block. (RDR)
LU 4.3.3	            Density Regulations for Mixed-Density Development
                     Projects. Where a developer proposes a multi-parcel
                     development project with more than one residential
                     density or FAR, the applicable density or FAR range of
                     the General Plan Land Use Designation shall be applied
                     to the net developable area of the entire project site
                     rather than individual parcels within the site. Some parcels
                     may be zoned for densities/intensities that exceed the
                     maximum allowed density/intensity of the project site’s
                     Land Use Designation, provided that the net density of
                     the project as a whole is within the allowed range. (RDR)
LU 4.3.4	            Single-Family         Housing           in       Traditional
                     Neighborhoods. The City shall encourage the retention
                     of existing single-family dwellings in Traditional
                     Neighborhoods and discourage rezoning of single-family
                     districts to multifamily districts. (RDR)
LU 4.3.5	            Small-lot Single Family Development. Within areas
                     designated Traditional Neighborhood, the City shall allow
                     single family homes on existing parcels of 6,400 square
                     feet or less.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-61

                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
          GOAL LU 4.4
          Urban Neighborhoods. Promote vibrant, high-density, mixed-use
          urban neighborhoods with convenient access to employment, shopping,
          entertainment, transit, civic uses (e.g., school, park, place of assembly, library,
          or community center), and community-supportive facilities and services.
          Policies
          LU 4.4.1	          Well-Defined Street Fronts. The City shall require
                             that new buildings in urban neighborhoods maintain a
                             consistent setback from the public right-of-way in order
                             to create a well-defined public sidewalk and street. (RDR)
          LU 4.4.2	          Building Orientation. In buildings with nonresidential
                             uses at street level, the City shall require that building
                             facades and entrances directly face the adjoining street
                             frontage and include a high proportion of transparent
                             windows facing the street. (RDR)
          LU 4.4.3	          Building Design. The City shall encourage sensitive
                             design and site planning in urban neighborhoods that
                             mitigates the scale of larger buildings through careful
                             use of building massing, setbacks, facade articulation,
                             fenestration, varied parapets and roof planes, and
                             pedestrian-scaled architectural details. (RDR)
          LU 4.4.4	          Ample Public Realm. The City shall require that
                             higher-density urban neighborhoods include small public
                             spaces and have broad tree-lined sidewalks furnished
                             with appropriate pedestrian amenities that provide
                             comfortable and attractive settings to accommodate high
                             levels of pedestrian activity. (RDR)
          LU 4.4.5	          Parking and Service Access and Design. The City
                             shall require that, to the degree feasible, parking and
                             service areas in urban neighborhoods be accessed from
                             alleys or side streets to minimize their visibility from
                             streets and public spaces. Curb cuts for driveways should
                             not be allowed along the primary street frontage. (RDR)
Page 2-62                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                      LU 4
                                                                                    Careful use of building massing,
                                                                                    setbacks, roof planes, and pedestrian-
                                                                                    scaled architectural details provide for
                                                                                    sensitive transitions.
LU 4.4.6	            Mix of Uses . The City shall encourage the vertical
                     and horizontal integration of a complementary mix of
                     commercial, service and other nonresidential uses that
                     address the needs of families and other household types
                     living in urban neighborhoods. Such uses may include
                     daycare and school facilities, retail and services, and parks,
                     plazas, and open spaces. (RDR)
GOAL LU 4.5
New Neighborhoods . Ensure that complete new neighborhoods
embody the city’s principles of Smart Growth and Sustainability.
Policies
LU 4.5.1	            New Growth Neighborhoods. The City shall ensure
                     that new residential growth areas include neighborhoods
                     that maintain a mix of residential types and densities,          See LU 1, Growth and Change, for
                     and that the residential mix will provide appropriate            additional policies related to city expansion,
                     transitional features that integrate the area with adjacent      new growth, and development.
                     existing neighborhoods and development. (RDR)
LU 4.5.2	            Compact Neighborhoods . The City shall require
                     developers to create new residential neighborhoods
                     that are pedestrian and bicycle friendly, are accessible by
                     transit, and make efficient use of land and infrastructure
                     by being compact with higher average densities. (RDR)
                                                                                    Compact pedestrian- and
                                                                                    bicycle-friendly neighborhood.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                   Page 2-63

                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                           LU 4.5.3	          Green Neighborhoods . The City shall encourage
                                                              new development to build to a green neighborhood
                                                              rating standard and apply for certification in a green
                                                              neighborhood system such as LEED-ND (Leadership
                                                              in Energy and Environmental Design-Neighborhood
                                                              Development). (RDR)
                                           LU 4.5.4	          New Neighborhood Core . The City shall encourage
                                                              all parts of new neighborhoods to be within ½-mile of
                                                              a central gathering place that is located on a collector or
                                                              minor arterial and that includes public space, shopping
                                                              areas, access to transit, and community-supportive
                                                              facilities and services. (RDR)
                                           LU 4.5.5	          Connections to Transit . The City shall encourage
See M 3, Public Transit, for additional
                                                              new neighborhoods to include transit stops that can be
policies related to transit facilities and
service.
                                                              connected to and support a citywide transit system and
                                                              are within a ½-mile walking distance of all dwellings.
                                                              (RDR/MPSP)
                                           Del Paso Nuevo is a redeveloped master planned community, located in North
                                           Sacramento, which converted a distressed area into a new neighborhood.
Page 2-64                                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Neighborhoods
                                                                  LU 4
                                    page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                              Page 2-65
          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-66                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                              LU 5
Centers
Policies in this section provide for the intensification, reuse and reinvestment,
and revitalization of Sacramento’s uniquely identifiable centers that are defined
by their common functional role, mix of uses, density/intensity, physical
form and character, and/or environmental setting as places for commerce,
employment, entertainment, culture, and living. Pedestrian-oriented
activities are encouraged with plazas, cafes, bookstores, and restaurants that
draw a variety of people and offer a welcome setting. Policies accommodate
development of property exclusively for commercial and employment uses
(without housing) and/or mixed-use projects that integrate housing with
retail, office, community facilities, and other uses within the same structure
or on the same site. These areas also integrate community-serving uses,
such as public meeting rooms and daycare facilities in key activity areas.
Center policies ensure that their development is consistent with adjacent
neighborhoods through the siting of buildings, transitions in scale, and land
use mix.
                                                                                  The diagram to the left illustrates the
                                                                                  general location of Sacramento’s
                                                                                  centers.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-67

                                                                           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Suburban
  Center
Sacramento has numerous automobile-oriented suburban centers that represent a significant opportunity for
transformation and enhancement. Because of the large amount of land dedicated to parking, new infill development
can be added to surface parking areas and along adjoining public corridors to create more compact and consistent
development. Parking can be relocated behind buildings and out of public view, while residential and office uses can
be integrated into the suburban centers. Broad sidewalks with street trees and pedestrian zone amenities as well as
public gathering places can be created to promote walking and social interaction.
Urban Form Guidelines                   9.	 Convenient and attractive                         Buildings sited adjacent to
                                            pedestrian connections from                   1   streets
Key urban form characteristics              adjoining neighborhoods and
envisioned for suburban centers             transit
include the following:
                                        10.	Streets designed to integrate and
1.	 Compact development pattern             balance safe pedestrian, bicycle,
    with buildings sited adjacent           and transit use with efficient
    to streets to add character and         vehicular traffic flow
    spatial definition to the public    11.	Attractive landscaping of public
                                                                                  Proper                  Siting not in
    realm                                   right-of-way with street trees
                                                                                  Siting                  accordance with
                                                                                                          Guidelines
2.	 Centrally-located gathering             and other plantings to enhance
    places (e.g. a small park or            center character and identity
    greenspace, outdoor restaurant/                                                      Building heights
                                                                                    4
    café seating, or other publicly     Allowed Uses                                     from 1 to 4 stories
    accessible area) supporting                                                                     Vertically integrated
                                        This designation provides for                               development (residential
    surrounding uses                                                                             6 over retail/office uses)
                                        predominantly nonresidential, lower-
3.	 Building façades and entrances      intensity single-use commercial
    with a high degree of               development or horizontal and
    transparency and on-street and      vertical mixed-use development that
    internal street fronting façades    includes the following:
4.	 Building heights generally
                                        ■■ Retail, service, office, and/or
    ranging from one to four
                                           residential uses
    stories (taller heights acceptable
    if supported by context and         ■■ Central public gathering places
    market)                             ■■ Compatible public, quasi-public,
5.	 Lot coverage generally not             and special uses
    exceeding 60 percent                                                                   3
                                                                                               Building façades to be
                                                                                               street-fronting and highly
6.	 Integrated residential and office   Development Standards                                  transparent
    uses                                ■■ Minimum Density:	 15.0 Units/
7.	 Separated parking between              Net Acre
    buildings, pedestrian paths, and    ■■ Maximum Density:	 36.0 Units/
    landscaping                            Net Acre
8.	 Attractive pedestrian
    streetscapes with broad             ■■ Minimum FAR:	          0.15 FAR
    sidewalks appointed with            ■■ Maximum FAR:	          2.00 FAR
    appropriate landscaping,
    lighting, and pedestrian
    amenities/facilities
  Page 2-68                                                                                             Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                          LU 5
                                                                                                                          Suburban
                                                                                                                             Center
                                                                          1    Buildings sited adjacent to streets
                                                               Centrally-located gathering
                                                           2   places/parks
                                                7    Parking between or behind buildings
                                        11    Attractive landscaping of
                                              public right-of-way
  Development Standards Note:          Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                      Page 2-69
                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Traditional
  Center
Sacramento’s traditional centers are a critical element of sustainable, walkable traditional neighborhoods that provide
essential daily services within walking distance of surrounding residents. Infill development in areas designated
as Traditional Center can create additional character and spatial definition. Residential and office uses can also
be integrated into traditional centers to create a more balanced mix of uses and additional job opportunities
for surrounding residents. Sidewalks integrated with pedestrian amenities can also provide an active pedestrian
component and physical connections to adjoining neighborhoods.
Urban Form Guidelines                     9.	 Transparent building frontages
                                              with pedestrian-scaled                        3
                                                                                                 Building heights
Key urban form characteristics                articulation and detailing
                                                                                                 from 1 to 4 stories
envisioned for traditional centers
                                          10.	Moderately wide sidewalks (e.g.,
include the following:
                                              6 to 10 feet) furnished with
1.	 Small, rectangular blocks,                street trees, outdoor seating
    allowing for convenient                   areas, and other amenities that
    pedestrian access from adjacent           create inviting streetscapes
    areas                                 11.	Public streetscapes serving as
2.	 Relatively small and narrow               the center’s primary open space,
    lots, providing a fine-grained            complemented by outdoor
    development pattern                       seating, plazas, courtyards, and                     Building frontages that are
3.	 Building heights generally                sidewalk dining areas                           9    transparent with pedestrian-
    ranging from one to four                                                                       scaled articulation and
                                                                                                   detailing
    stories (taller heights acceptable    Allowed Uses
    if supported by context and           This designation provides for
    market)                               residential     and     nonresidential,
4.	 Lot coverage generally not            moderate       intensity,    single-use
    exceeding 80 percent                  development, or horizontal and
5.	 Buildings sited at or near the        vertical mixed-use development that
    sidewalk and typically abut one       includes the following:
    another with limited side yard        ■■ Residential uses
    setbacks
                                          ■■ Retail, service, office uses
6.	 Building entrances set at the                                                          Sidewalks designed to create
    sidewalk with preference for          ■■ Central public gathering places          10   inviting streetscapes
    corner entrances when buildings       ■■ Compatible public, quasi-public,
    are located on a corner lot              and special uses
7.	 Rear alleys and secondary
    streets providing vehicular and       Development Standards
    service access to reduce the          ■■ Minimum Density:	 15.0 Units/
    need for driveways and curb              Net Acre
    cuts on the primary street
8.	 Parking provided on-street            ■■ Maximum Density:	 36.0 Units/
    as well as in individual or              Net Acre
    shared lots at the side or rear       ■■ Minimum FAR:	          0.30 FAR
    of structures, or in screened
                                          ■■ Maximum FAR:	          2.00 FAR
    parking structures
   Page 2-70                                                                                                 Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                          LU 5
                                                                                                                         Traditional
                                                                                                                             Center
                                             Small & rectangular blocks, allowing convenient pedestrian access
                                                                                              from adjacent areas
                                                                                                                    1
                                                              2                        Building heights from 1
                         Fine-grained development pattern                         3    to 4 stories
                                                                               Rear alleys that provide vehicular and
                          Light rail                                       7   service access
                          station
                                              8    Shared parking lots behind structures
                                         5   Plaza open space, complemented by outdoor seating
                                             and sidewalk dining areas.
  Development Standards Note:          Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                      Page 2-71
                                                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Regional
  Commercial Center
Sacramento has numerous regional commercial centers along major corridors and major freeway interchanges.
These centers represent a significant opportunity for transformation and enhancement (i.e., increased residential
and employment uses). New infill development can be added to surface parking areas and along adjoining corridors
to create a more compact development pattern that creates a regional destination for living, working, and shopping.
Parking can be relocated to structures and behind building, while residential and office uses can be integrated
into the regional commercial centers to create a more balanced mix of uses. Broad sidewalks with street trees and
pedestrian amenities within the centers can create an active pedestrian component that promotes walking.
Urban Form Guidelines                   9.	 Convenient and attractive
                                             pedestrian connections from
Key characteristics envisioned for           adjacent transit facilities
regional commercial centers include
                                        10.	Internal streets designed to
the following:
                                             integrate and balance safe
1.	 A development pattern with               pedestrian, bicycle, and transit
    buildings sited at or near the           use with efficient vehicular
    front lot line on internal streets       traffic flow
    and plazas that add character       11.	Attractive landscaping of public
    and spatial definition to the            and internal right-of-ways with         3
                                                                                         Building façades to be street-
                                                                                         fronting and highly transparent at
    center                                   street trees and other plantings            ground floor
2.	 Centrally located gathering              to enhance center character and
    places/plazas connected by               identity
    pedestrian paths
3.	 Building façades and entrances      Allowed Uses
    with a high degree of               This designation provides for
    transparency                        predominantly nonresidential, large-
4.	 Building heights that generally     scale, regional shopping centers
    range from one to six stories       with a mix of uses including the
    (taller heights are acceptable      following:
    if supported by context and
                                        ■■  Major retail stores, home
    market)
                                            improvement stores, offices,                  Parking that is located behind
5.	 Lot coverage generally not              restaurants, and services                7    buildings or accommodated in
    exceeding 60 percent                                                                  parking structures
                                        ■■  Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,
6.	 Integrated (vertical and
                                            apartments and condominiums)
    horizontal) of residential and
    office uses into the centers        ■■  Central public gathering places
7.	 Parking located behind              ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
    buildings or accommodated in            and special uses
    parking structures
8.	 Internal pedestrian streetscapes    Development Standards
    with broad sidewalks,               ■■  Minimum Density:	 32.0 Units/
    appropriate landscaping,                Net Acre
    lighting, and pedestrian
    amenities/facilities                ■■  Maximum Density:	 80.0 Units/
                                            Net Acre
                                        ■■  Minimum FAR:	         0.15 FAR
                                        ■■  Maximum FAR:	         3.00 FAR
  Page 2-72                                                                                             Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                                LU 5
                                                                                                                                 Regional
                                                                                                                     Commercial Center
                                                                                 Vertical and horizontal integrations of uses 6
                                 Integrated streets that balance pedestrian, bicycle,
                                                           transit and vehicular traffic
                                                                                         10
                                                                                         Centrally-located gathering
                                                                                     2   places/plazas
                                                                         8  Internal pedestrian ways with broad sidewalks
                                           Development pattern with buildings sited up to
                                      1    internal streets and plazas
                    7   Parking located behind buildings or in parking structures
  Development Standards Note:             Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                            Page 2-73
                                                                                    Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Urban
  Center Low
Sacramento’s Urban Center Low provides for smaller urban areas throughout the city. Each center includes
employment-intensive uses, a mix of housing, and a wide variety of retail uses. Urban Center Low is located around
light rail stations, along local arterials, and in other key areas of the city. Building heights for Urban Center Low tend
toward low- and mid-rise structures. Other characteristics will take into account adjacent neighborhoods, such as
stepping down building heights from mid-rise structures to adjacent lower density neighborhoods.
Urban Form Guidelines                         9.	 Parking provided on-street as                  Building heights from
                                                                                                                              Alley
                                                   well as in individual or shared          3    2 to 7 stories
                                                                                                                              access
Key urban form characteristics                     lots at the rear of structures, or                                    Parking
envisioned for Urban Center Low                    in screened parking structures
include the following:
                                              10.	Transparent building frontages
1.	 Blocks are small and                           with pedestrian-scaled
    rectangular, allowing for                      articulation and detailing
    convenient pedestrian access              11.	Moderately wide sidewalks (e.g.,
    from adjacent areas                            6 to 10 feet), furnished with
2.	 Relatively small and narrow                    street trees, public seating areas,             Rear alleys for vehicular and
    lots, providing a fine-grained                                                             8
                                                   and other amenities that create                 service access
    development pattern                            inviting streetscapes
3.	 Building heights generally                12.	Public streetscapes serving as
    ranging from two to seven                      the area’s primary open space,
    stories (taller heights are                    complemented by plazas,                                               Active uses
    acceptable if supported by                     courtyards, and sidewalk dining                                       wrapping
    context and market)                            areas                                                                 parking
4.	 Building heights stepping down                                                             7   Building entrances set at the
    to not more than one story                Allowed Uses                                         sidewalk along the primary street
                                                                                                   frontage
    higher at the property line               This designation provides for a
    than permitted in the adjacent            balanced mix of high-density/                    9
                                                                                                   Shared parking in lots or structures
    neighborhood unless separated             intensity single-use commercial
                                                                                                   at the rear of buildings
    by a roadway, rail corridor, or           or residential development or
    other setback or buffer                   horizontal and vertical mixed-use
5.	 Lot coverage generally not                development that includes the
    exceeding 80 percent                      following:
6.	 Buildings sited at or near the            ■■  Retail, service, office, and/or
    sidewalk along the primary                    residential uses
    street frontage and typically
    abut one another with limited             ■■  Gathering places such as plazas,                Inviting streetscapes created by
    side yard setbacks                            courtyards, or parks                      11    wide sidewalks and pedestrian
                                                                                                  amenities.
7.	 Building entrances set at the             ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
    sidewalk along the primary                    and special uses
    street frontage                           Development Standards
8.	 Rear alleys and secondary                 ■■  Minimum Density:	 20.0 Units/
    streets providing vehicular and               Net Acre
    service access, with limited
    driveways and curb cuts on                ■■  Maximum Density:	 150.0 Units/
    primary streets                               Net Acre
                                              ■■  Minimum FAR:	          0.40 FAR
   Page 2-74                                  ■■  Maximum FAR:	          4.00 FAR                                Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                         LU 5
                                                                                                                              Urban
                                                                                                                      Center Low
                                                    Buildings sited near sidewalk          Building entrances
                                                  with minimal sideyard setbacks     6     set at the sidewalk
                                                                                            along the primary    7
                         Small rectangular blocks    1                                         street frontage
   Light rail
     station
                                                                                   Rear alleys and secondary        School
                                                                                   streets that provide vehicular
                                                                               8   and service access
                                                              2    Fine grain development pattern
        Semi-public plazas and courtyards   12         9   Shared parking behind buildings
  Development Standards Note:           Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                      Page 2-75
                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Urban
  Center High
Sacramento’s Urban Center High provides thriving areas with concentrations of uses similar to downtown. Each
center includes employment-intensive uses, high-density housing, and a wide variety of retail uses including large-
format retail, local shops, restaurants, and services. These areas include major transportation hubs accessible by
public transit, major highways and local arterials, and pedestrian travel. Building heights vary from low to high rise
(e.g., two to twenty-four stories). Other characteristics, such as building orientation, frontage-type, access, parking,
streetscape, and open space, are similar to those in the Central Business District.
Urban Form Guidelines                    10.	Minimal or no curb cuts along
                                              primary street façades, with side
Key urban form characteristics                or rear access to parking and
envisioned for Urban Center High              service functions
include the following:
                                         11.	Broad sidewalks appointed
1.	 A mix of low- and mid-rise                with appropriate pedestrian
     buildings (two to twenty-four            amenities/facilities                         Building entrances that directly
                                                                                      5
     stories) creating a varied and      12.	Street design integrating safe
                                                                                           address the street and have a high
                                                                                           degree of transparency
     defined skyline                          pedestrian, bicycle, transit and
2.	 Lot coverage generally does not           vehicular use and incorporates        New development transitions in scale from
     exceeding 90 percent                     traffic-calming features and on-      8-story building to 4-story (one level higher
3.	 Building heights stepping down            street parking                        than permitted adjacent)
     to not more than one story          13.	Consistent planting of street
     higher at the property line              trees providing shade and
     than permitted in the adjacent           enhance character and identity
     neighborhood unless separated
     by a roadway, rail corridor, or     Allowed Uses
     other setback or buffer
                                         This designation provides for a
4.	 Buildings sited to positively        balanced mix of high-density/
     define the public streetscape       intensity single-use commercial
     and public spaces                   or residential development or
5.	 Building façades and entrances       horizontal and vertical mixed-use
     directly addressing the street      development that includes the
     and having a high degree of         following:                                  Existing adjoining residential parcels with
     transparency                                                                    permitted 3 story development
                                         ■■  Retail, service, office, and
6.	 An interconnected street system          residential uses                              Building heights that step down to
     providing greater distribution                                                   3    not more than one story higher than
     of traffic and route flexibility    ■■  Gathering places such as plazas,              permitted on adjacent parcels
                                             courtyards, or parks
7.	 Vertical and horizontal
     integration of residential uses     ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
8.	 Public parks and open space              and special uses
     areas within walking distance of
     local residents                     Development Standards
9.	 Parking integrated into              ■■  Minimum Density:	 24.0 Units/
     buildings or placed in separate         Net Acre
     structures                          ■■  Maximum Density:	 250.0 Units/
                                             Net Acre
                                         ■■  Minimum FAR:	          0.50 FAR
  Page 2-76                              ■■  Maximum FAR:	          8.00 FAR                              Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                               LU 5
                                                                                                                                    Urban
                                                                                                                             Center High
                    Buildings that are sited to positively define
                    the public streetscape and public spaces                  Consistent planting of street trees
                4                                                        13
                                                                                       A mix of low- and mid-rise buildings that
                       8    Public parks and open space areas                      1   creates a varied and defined skyline
                            within walking distance of local residents
                                                                                             Industrial uses
                                                                                   Building heights that step down to not more than one
               Light rail stop         6
                                            An interconnected                  3   story higher than permitted on adjacent parcels
                                            street system
                                                                          9    Parking integrated into buildings
           8   Public parks and open space areas                       Parking in separate structures, integrated into
               within walking distance of local residents            9 block planning & layout
  Development Standards Note:              Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                            Page 2-77
                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Central Business
 District
The Central Business District (CBD) is Sacramento’s most intensely developed area. The CBD includes a mixture of
retail, office, governmental, entertainment and visitor-serving uses built on a formal framework of streets and park
spaces laid out for the original Sutter Land Grant in the 1840s. The vision for the CBD is a vibrant downtown core
that will continue to serve as the business, governmental, retail, and entertainment center for the city and the region.
A significant element in the future CBD includes new residential uses. Increasing the residential population will add
vitality to the CBD by extending the hours of activity and the built-in market for retail, services, and entertainment.
Urban Form Guidelines                    12.	Street design integrating
                                              pedestrian, bicycle, transit and            Mid- and high-rise buildings that
Key urban form characteristics                vehicular use and incorporates          1
                                                                                          create a varied and dramatic skyline
envisioned for the Central Business           traffic-calming features and on-
District include the following:               street parking
1.	 A mixture of mid- and high-rise      13.	Consistent planting of street
    buildings creating a varied and           trees providing shade and
    dramatic skyline with unlimited           enhance character and identity
                                                                                                                      Parking
    heights                                                                          Residential
2.	 Lot coverage generally not           Allowed Uses                                Retail
    exceeding 90 percent                 This designation provides for
3.	 Buildings are sited to positively    mixed-use high-rise development
    define the public streetscape        and single-use or mixed-use
    and public spaces                    development within easy access to
4.	 Building façades and entrances       transit (i.e., ground floor office/
    directly addressing the street       retail beneath residential apartments
                                                                                      6   Integrated residential uses
    and have a high degree of            and condominiums) that includes
    transparency                         the following:
5.	 An interconnected street system      ■■  Office, retail, and service uses                                     Rear alley
    providing for traffic and route                                                                               access to
                                         ■■  Multifamily dwellings (e.g.,
    flexibility                                                                                                   parking
                                             apartments and condominiums)                                         Active uses
6.	 Vertical and horizontal                                                                                       wrapping
    integration of residential uses      ■■  Gathering places such as plazas,                                     parking
                                             courtyards, or parks
7.	 Public parks and open space
    areas within walking distance of     ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,             8   Building-integrated parking
    local residents                          and special uses                                 Minimal or no curb cuts along
                                                                                          9
8.	 Parking is integrated into                                                                primary streets
    buildings or placed in separate      Development Standards
                                                                                              Side or rear access to parking
    structures                           ■■  Minimum Density:	 61.0 Units/               10   and service functions
9.	 Minimal or no curb cuts along            Net Acre
    primary streets                      ■■  Maximum Density:	 450.0 Units/
10.	Side or rear access to parking           Net Acre
    and service functions                ■■  Minimum FAR:	         3.00 FAR
11.	Broad sidewalks appointed
    with appropriate pedestrian          ■■  Maximum FAR:	         15.00 FAR
    amenities, including sidewalk
    restaurant/café seating
  Page 2-78                                                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                          LU 5
                                                                                                                Central Business
                                                                                                                              District
                                                                     Buildings that define the public
           Interconnected                                                   streetscape and spaces    3
             street system 5
                                             Parks and open space within walking
                                         7   distance of residents
                                               1    Mixture of mid- and high-rise buildings
                                             Parking integrated into buildings or in
                                          8  separate structures                                      10 Side or rear access to parking
                                                                                                         and service functions
                                                  Broad sidewalks with pedestrian amenities    11
  Development Standards Note:          Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                       Page 2-79
                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                           GOAL LU 5.1
                                           Centers. Promote the development throughout the city of distinct, well-
                                           designed mixed-use centers that are efficiently served by transit, provide
                                           higher-density, urban housing opportunities and serve as centers of civic,
                                           cultural, and economic life for Sacramento’s neighborhoods and the region.
                                           Policies
                                           LU 5.1.1	          Diverse Centers. The City shall encourage development
                                                              of local, citywide, and regional mixed-use centers that
                                                              address different community needs and market sectors,
                                                              and complement and are well integrated with the
                                                              surrounding neighborhoods. (RDR)
                                           LU 5.1.2	          Centers Served by Transit . The City shall promote
See M 3, Public Transit, for additional
                                                              the development of commercial mixed-use centers that
policies related to transit facilities and
                                                              are located on existing or planned transit stops in order
service.
                                                              to facilitate and take advantage of transit service, reduce
                                                              vehicle trips, and enhance community access. (RDR)
                                           LU 5.1.3	          Cultural and Entertainment Centers. The City shall
                                                              actively support the development of cultural, education,
                                                              and entertainment facilities and events in the city’s centers
                                                              to attract visitors and establish a unique identity for
                                                              Sacramento. (MPSP/IGC/JP)
                                           LU 5.1.4	          Vertical and Horizontal Mixed-Use . The City shall
                                                              encourage and, where feasible, require the vertical and
                                                              horizontal integration of uses within commercial centers
     Sacramento Memorial Auditorium,
               opened in February 1927.                       and mixed-use centers, particularly residential and office
                                                              uses over ground floor retail. (RDR)
See ERC 4, Arts       and Culture, and
ERC 5, Museums,        Zoos, and Other     LU 5.1.5	          Vertical and Horizontal Mixed-Use . The City shall
Major Destination       Attractions, for                      discourage low-intensity and auto-oriented uses around
additional policies   on cultural and                         transit stations. (RDR)
entertainment uses.
Page 2-80                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                LU 5
GOAL LU 5.2
Suburban Centers . Promote more attractive, pedestrian-friendly
suburban centers that serve surrounding neighborhoods and businesses at
local gathering places where people shop and socialize.
Policies
LU 5.2.1	            Suburban Centers and Destinations. The City shall
                     provide incentives (e.g., rezoning, density bonuses, or
                                                                                    Vertical and horizontal integration of
                     housing by right) to transform existing auto-dominated         uses within centers promotes ground
                     suburban centers into neighborhood destinations by             floor uses that engage the public and
                     integrating residential, office, service, and community-       contribute to a more active and vibrant
                                                                                    public realm.
                     supportive facilities and services with retail uses and by
                     adding public plazas and pedestrian amenities that will
                     create people-oriented centers for living, working, and
                     gathering. (RDR)
LU 5.2.2	            Enhanced Design Character . The City shall
                     encourage renovation, infill, and reuse of existing
                     suburban centers to utilize unused space in parking lots,
                     make the centers more pedestrian friendly, reduce visual
                     clutter associated with signage, and enhance the definition
                     and character of the street frontage and associated
                     streetscape. (RDR/JP)
LU 5.2.3	            Public Space. The City shall work with suburban centers
                     to integrate pedestrian amenities, traffic-calming features,
                     plazas and public areas, attractive streetscapes, shade trees,
                     lighting, and open spaces within the existing center to
                     create destinations for area residents to shop and gather.
                     (RDR/JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-81

                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Transforming existing auto-dominated suburban centers into neighborhood destinations creates pedestrian-oriented centers for
living, working, and gathering.
Photograph and Illustrations courtesy of Urban Advantage
   Page 2-82                                                                                          Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                    LU 5
GOAL LU 5.3
Traditional Centers . Promote traditional centers where people can
shop and socialize within walking distance of surrounding neighborhoods.
Policy
LU 5.3.1	            Development Standards. The City shall continue
                     to support development and operation of centers in
                     traditional neighborhoods by providing flexibility in
                     development standards, consistent with public health and
                     safety, in response to constraints inherent in retrofitting
                     older structures and in creating infill development in
                     established neighborhoods. (RDR)
GOAL LU 5.4
Regional Commercial Centers. Establish major mixed-use activity centers
through development and reinvestment in existing regional commercial
centers that are vibrant, regionally-accessible destinations where people live,
work, shop, and congregate in a mix of retail, employment, entertainment,
and residential uses.
Policies
LU 5.4.1	            Incorporating Housing and Employment Uses .
                     The City shall promote the introduction of housing and
                     employment uses in the city’s existing regional commercial
                     centers as a means of enhancing retail viability, establishing
                     pedestrian-oriented shopping districts, creating more
                     attractive buildings and public spaces, supporting transit
                     viability, and reducing vehicle trips. (RDR)
                                                                                    Introducing mixed-use development in
                                                                                    existing regional commercial centers
                                                                                    creates more attractive buildings and
                                                                                    public spaces that enhance retail
                                                                                    viability, promotes walking and transit
                                                                                    use, and reduces vehicle trips.
                                                                                    Illustration courtesy of Urban Advantage
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                 Page 2-83

                                                                                 Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                              LU 5.4.2	          Enhanced Design Character . The City shall
                                                                 encourage reuse of and reinvestment in existing regional
                                                                 commercial centers into dynamic mixed-use centers
                                                                 by replacing surface parking with structured parking,
                                                                 replacing parking area drive aisles with pedestrian-
                                                                 friendly shopping streets, infilling parking areas with
                                                                 multi-story mixed-use buildings, and creating attractive,
                                                                 well-appointed streetscapes and plazas. (RDR)
                                              LU 5.4.3	          Connectivity to Regional Centers . The City shall
                                                                 require greater pedestrian and bicycle connections
                                                                 between mixed-use regional commercial centers and
                                                                 surrounding neighborhoods. (RDR/MPSP)
    Illustration courtesy of Urban Advantage
                                              GOAL LU 5.5
                                              Urban Centers. Promote the development of high-density urban centers
                                              that are readily accessible by transit and contain a dynamic mix of retail,
                                              employment, cultural, and residential uses.
                                              Policies
                                              LU 5.5.1	          Urban Centers . The City shall promote the
                                                                 development of a series of urban centers, as designated
                                                                 in the Land Use & Urban Form Diagram, that create
                                                                 significant opportunities for employment, housing,
                                                                 and commercial activity in areas outside of the Central
                                                                 Business District (CBD). (RDR)
                                              GOAL LU 5.6
    High-density urban centers create         Central Business District. Promote the Central Business District (CBD)
opportunities for housing, employment,        as the regional center of the greater Sacramento area for living, commerce,
and commercial activities and promote
                                 transit use. culture, and government.
                                              Policies
                                              LU 5.6.1	          Downtown Center Development. The City shall
                                                                 encourage development that expands the role of the
                                                                 CBD as the regional center for living, commerce, arts,
                                                                 culture, entertainment, and government. (RDR)
 Page 2-84                                                                                             Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Centers
                                                                                                                LU 5
LU 5.6.2	            Family-Friendly Downtown . The City shall
                     promote the CBD as a family-friendly area by requiring
                     the development of a variety of housing types, daycare
                     and school facilities, family-oriented services, and parks,
                     plazas, and open spaces that will safely and comfortably
                     accommodate those who wish to raise a family. (RDR)
LU 5.6.3	            Mixed-Use Downtown Development . The City
                     shall support a mixed-use, vibrant CBD by encouraging
                     innovative mixed-use development resulting in
                     development consistent with Sacramento’s commitment
                     to environmental sustainability. (RDR)
LU 5.6.4	            Building Height Transitions. The City shall maintain
                     height standards for the adjoining transition areas around
                     the CBD consistent with the General Plan vision for a
                     higher-density Central City and sensitive transitions to
                     surrounding neighborhoods. (RDR)
LU 5.6.5	            Capital View Protection. The City shall ensure
                     development conforms to the Capital View Protection Act.
                     (RDR/IGC)
LU 5.6.6	            Central City Development Projects. The City shall
                     work with the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment
                     Agency (SHRA), the Capitol Area Development
                     Authority (CADA), and private developers to ensure that
                     development efforts in areas surrounding the CBD (e.g.,
                     Railyards, River District, Docks Area, R Street) respect        Redevelopment efforts, in areas like
                                                                                     R Street shown above, will respect
                     and respond to the urban patterns—streets, blocks,              and respond to urban patterns and
                     building heights, massing—and character established in          character established in the CBD.
                     the CBD, and do not undermine the physical centrality,
                     visual primacy, or land use composition of the CBD.               See ERC 4, Arts     and Culture, and
                     (IGC/JP)                                                          ERC 5, Museums,     Zoos, and Other
                                                                                       Major Destination    Attractions, for
LU 5.6.7	            Cultural Facilities Central City. The City shall continue         additional policies on cultural and
                     to support the existing cultural facilities in the Central City   entertainment uses.
                     and encourage the development of additional facilities
                     that promote the city as the regional and historic center
                     for meeting and gathering. (IGC/JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-85

          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-86                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Corridors
                                                                                                              LU 6
Corridors
Policies in this section provide for the transformation of auto oriented
commercial corridors to mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented and transit friendly
environments. Policies promote corridors as community and neighborhood
connectors, transportation routes, and energetic places for living that are
a magnet for mixed-use development and residential uses, are defined by
pedestrian-oriented streetscapes, and frequented as local gathering places (i.e.,
cafes, restaurants, plazas). These areas support surrounding neighborhood
and contribute to a more compact and consistent pattern of development.
Development adjacent to established neighborhoods will transition from
higher intensity uses to lower intensities to limit impacts to residential areas.
                                                                                  The diagram to the left illustrates the
                                                                                  location of Sacramento’s corridors.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-87

                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Suburban
  Corridor
Sacramento’s suburban corridors are envisioned as auto-oriented, moderate-density retail, office, and residential
corridors that support surrounding suburban neighborhoods. Low-rise buildings line auto-oriented corridors with
new development along the corridor contributing to a more compact and consistent pattern, with parking relocated
to the side and rear of buildings. Residential uses are integrated along the corridor, with limited street level frontages
that are mixed with retail, neighborhood services, and restaurants. The streetscape is appointed with landscaping,
lighting, public art, and other amenities that support and enhance shopping and retail activities.
Urban Form Guidelines                    10.	Attractive streetscape with
                                                                                                Buildings sited adjacent to
                                              sidewalks designed to                         1
Key urban form characteristics                accommodate pedestrian
                                                                                                streets
envisioned for suburban corridors             traffic that includes appropriate
include the following:                        landscaping, lighting, and
1.	 A development pattern                     pedestrian amenities/facilities
    with moderate lot coverage,          11.	Public and semi-public
    moderate side yard setbacks,              outdoor spaces such as plazas,
    and buildings sited near the              courtyards, and cafes                  Proper                  Siting not in
    corridor to create a varied but                                                  Siting                  accordance with
                                                                                                             Guidelines
    consistent street wall               Allowed Uses
2.	 Building heights generally           This designation provides for a
    ranging from one to four stories     mix of single-use commercial                        Building heights
                                                                                          2  from 1 to 4 stories
3.	 Highest building heights at          and residential development and
    major intersections and lower        horizontal and vertical mixed-use                             Vertically integrated
                                                                                                       development (residential
    when adjacent to lower-density       development that includes the                            7    over retail/office uses)
    neighborhoods unless near a          following:
    major intersection
                                         ■■  Retail, service, office, and
4.	 Lot coverage generally not               residential uses
    exceeding 50 percent
                                         ■■  Gathering places such as plazas
5.	 Building façades and entrances
                                             or parks
    directly addressing the street
    and have a high degree of            ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
    transparency on street-fronting          and special uses
    façades                              ■■  Large-scale development should
6.	 Buildings with a high degree of          include a mix of nonresidential
    pedestrian-oriented uses located         and residential uses with more                    5   Building façades to be
    at street level                          intense development near major                        street-fronting and highly
                                                                                                   transparent
7.	 Integrated (vertical and                 intersections
    horizontal) residential uses
    along the corridors                  Development Standards
8.	 Parking limited in the front of      ■■  Minimum Density:	 15.0 Units/
    the building and located to the          Net Acre
    side or rear of buildings            ■■  Maximum Density:	 36.0 Units/
9.	 Limited curb cuts along arterial         Net Acre
    streets, with shared access to
    parking and service functions        ■■  Minimum FAR:	          0.15 FAR
                                         ■■  Maximum FAR:	          2.00 FAR
   Page 2-88                                                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Corridors
                                                                                                                             LU 6
                                                                                                                             Suburban
                                                                                                                              Corridor
                                                                       11  Public and semi-public outdoor spaces
              New development/buildings along corridor   1
                                                            Light rail        8    Most parking to side or rear of buildings
                                                             station
                                                                          3  Building heights lowest adjacent to neighborhoods
                                                9    Minimal and shared curb cuts along arterials
  Development Standards Note: Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                         Page 2-89
                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Urban
  Corridor Low
Urban Corridor Low includes street corridors that have multistory structures and more-intense uses at major
intersections, lower-intensity uses adjacent to neighborhoods, and access to transit service throughout. At major
intersections, nodes of intense mixed-use development are bordered by lower-intensity single-use residential, retail,
service, and office uses. Street-level frontage of mixed-use projects is developed with pedestrian-oriented uses. The
streetscape is appointed with landscaping, lighting, public art, and other pedestrian amenities.
Urban Form Guidelines                     11.	Attractive pedestrian
                                               streetscape, with sidewalks                    1
                                                                                                   Buildings sited adjacent to
Key urban form characteristics                 designed to accommodate                             corridor to create street wall
envisioned for Urban Corridor Low              pedestrian traffic, that includes
includes the following:                        appropriate landscaping,
1.	 A development pattern with                 lighting, and pedestrian
    moderate lot coverage, limited             amenities/facilities
    side yard setbacks, and buildings     12.	Public and semi-public
    sited up to the corridor to                outdoor spaces such as plazas,         Proper
                                                                                      Siting
                                                                                                                Siting not in
                                                                                                                accordance with
    create a consistent street wall            courtyards, and sidewalk cafes                                   Guidelines
2.	 More intense mixed-use                                                               3    Building heights from 2 to 4
    development at intersections          Allowed Uses                                        stories
    with stepped down residential         This designation provides for a
    uses in between                       mix of horizontal and vertical
3.	 Building heights generally            mixed-use development and single-
    ranging from two to six stories       use commercial and residential
4.	 Building heights highest              development that includes the
    at major intersections and            following:
    lower when adjacent to                ■■  Retail, service, office, and
    neighborhoods unless near a               residential uses                               Buildings with pedestrian-oriented
    major intersection                                                                   7   uses located at the street level
                                          ■■  Gathering places such as plazas,
5.	 Lot coverage generally not
                                              courtyards, or parks
    exceeding 70 percent
6.	 Building façades and entrances        ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
    directly addressing the street            and special uses
7.	 Buildings with pedestrian-            ■■  Large-scale development should
    oriented uses such as outdoor             include a mix of nonresidential
    cafes located at the street level         and residential uses with more
8.	 Integrated (vertical and                  intense development near major
    horizontal) residential uses              intersections                             9
                                                                                             Parking that is located behind
                                                                                             buildings or accommodated in
    along the corridors                                                                      parking structures
                                          Development Standards
9.	 Parking located to the side
    or behind buildings, or               ■■  Minimum Density:	 20.0 Units/
    accommodated in parking                   Net Acre
    structures                            ■■  Maximum Density:	 110.0 Units/
10.	Limited number of curb cuts               Net Acre
    along arterial streets, with          ■■  Minimum FAR:	          0.30 FAR
    shared and/or rear alley access
    to parking and service functions      ■■  Maximum FAR:	          3.00 FAR
  Page 2-90                                                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Corridors
                                                                                                                          LU 6
                                                                                                                               Urban
                                                                                                                        Corridor Low
                                                                      New development/buildings along corridor     1
                     Parking located to the side or behind buildings, or in parking structures  9
        Public and semi-                                                    12    Public and semi-public outdoor spaces
  public outdoor spaces   12
          (corner plaza)                                   9   Parking located to the side or behind buildings,
                                                               or in parking structures
                                 10   Minimal and shared curb cuts along arterials
  Development Standards Note:             Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                       Page 2-91
                                                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Urban
 Corridor High
Corridors with this designation in urbanized areas include multi-story structures and highly developed transit service.
New development along the corridor contributes to a more compact and consistent pattern that relocates parking
primarily to structures and to the rear of buildings. Street level frontages are lined with retail and other pedestrian-
oriented uses. The streetscape is appointed with pedestrian amenities that support and enhance pedestrian activity.
Urban Form Guidelines                    10.	Limited number of curb cuts
                                              along arterial streets, with           3   Building heights generally 3 to 8
Key urban form characteristics                shared and/or rear alley access            stories
envisioned for Urban Corridor High            to parking and service functions
include the following:
                                         11.	Attractive pedestrian                                                Residential
1.	 Compact development pattern               streetscape, with broad
    with high lot coverage, limited           sidewalks that includes                                             Parking
                                                                                                                  Retail
    side yard setbacks, and buildings         appropriate landscaping,
    sited at or near their front lot          lighting, and pedestrian                   Integrated residential uses along
    lines to create a consistent and          amenities/facilities                   8   corridors
    well-defined street wall             12.	Public and semi-public
2.	 Building heights highest at               outdoor spaces such as plazas,
    intersections and stepped down            courtyards, and sidewalk cafes
                                                                                                                  Parking with
                                                                                                                  alley access
    in between
3.	 Building heights generally           Allowed Uses
                                                                                                                  Active uses
    ranging from three to eight          This designation provides a mix                                          wrapping
    stories                              of horizontal and vertical mixed-                                        parking
4.	 Building heights highest             use development and single-                     Parking located behind
                                                                                     9
    at major intersections and           use commercial and residential                  buildings or integrated into
                                                                                         buildings
    lower when adjacent to               development that includes the
    neighborhoods unless near a          following:
    major intersection
                                         ■■  Retail, service, office, and/or
5.	 Lot coverage generally not               residential uses
    exceeding 80 percent
                                         ■■  Gathering places such as plazas,
6.	 Building façades and entrances
                                             courtyards, or parks
    directly addressing the street
    and having a high degree of          ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
    transparency                             and special uses
                                                                                          pedestrian-oriented uses located at
7.	 Buildings with a high degree of      ■■  Development should include               7   street level
    pedestrian-oriented uses such            a mix of nonresidential and
    as outdoor cafes and restaurant          residential with more intense           11   Attractive pedestrian streetscapes
    seating located at street level          development near major
8.	 Integrated residential, office,          intersections
    and retail uses
9.	 Parking is located behind            Development Standards
    buildings, integrated into           ■■  Minimum Density:	 33.0 Units/
    buildings, or accommodated in            Net Acre
    separate parking structures          ■■  Maximum Density:	 150.0 Units/
                                             Net Acre
                                         ■■  Minimum FAR:	          0.30 FAR
  Page 2-92                              ■■  Maximum FAR:	          6.00 FAR                             Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Corridors
                                                                                                                             LU 6
                                                                                                                                 Urban
                                                                                                                          Corridor High
                                                        Building heights that are highest at major intersections   4
                                                                  Compact development pattern       1
                   Building facades and entrances that directly address the street   6
                                                            Light rail station                    Minimal curb cuts along
                                                                                             10   arterial streets
                                 Parking located behind buildings, integrated into
                                                buildings or in parking structures
                                                                                     9
  Development Standards Note:            Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                         Page 2-93
                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 New corridor development should be
     oriented to and frame the street to
 enhance the pedestrian environment.
                                           GOAL LU 6.1
                                           Corridors. Support the development of major circulation corridors that
                                           balance their vehicular function with a vibrant mix of uses that contribute
                                           to meeting local and citywide needs for retail, services, and housing and
                                           provide pedestrian-friendly environments that serve as gathering places for
                                           adjacent neighborhoods.
                                           Policies
                                           LU 6.1.1	          Mixed-Use Corridors . The City shall create or
                                                              improve mixed-use corridors by requiring compact
                                                              development patterns that are oriented to and frame
                                                              the street, establish a safe and comfortable environment
                                                              for walking, and avoid encroachment upon adjacent
                                                              residential areas. (RDR)
                                           LU 6.1.2	          Transformed Corridors . The City shall facilitate the
See LU 1, Growth and Change, for
                                                              transformation of major thoroughfares dominated by
additional policies on infill development.
                                                              auto-oriented strip commercial uses to include a broader
                                                              mix of uses that provides opportunities for medium- and
                                                              higher-density housing, while also addressing local and
                                                              citywide demand for retail and services and complete
                                                              streets. (RDR)
                                           LU 6.1.3	          Efficient Parcel Utilization . The City shall promote
                                                              the aggregation of small and irregular shaped parcels
                                                              along corridors into larger development sites to facilitate
                                                              their reuse. (MPSP/JP)
Page 2-94                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Corridors
                                                                                                                   LU 6
                                                                                                                       BEFORE
Illustrations courtesy of Urban Advantage                                                                                 AFTER
LU 6.1.4	                 Corridor Uses . The City shall encourage residential,      Redevelopment and upgrading of
                                                                                      existing automobile-oriented corridors
                          mixed-use, retail, service commercial, and other            creates vibrant, mixed-use boulevards
                          pedestrian-oriented development along mixed-use             that balance efficient movement
                          corridors to orient to the front of properties with entries of motor vehicles with attractive
                          and stoops fronting the street. (RDR)                       pedestrian-friendly districts that serve
                                                                                      the adjoining neighborhoods as well as
                                                                                      passing motorists.
LU 6.1.5	                 Higher Intensity Nodes. The City shall generally
                          direct higher-intensity land uses and taller buildings
                          to major intersections along arterial roads to facilitate
                          access, enhance transit service, and promote physical
                          differentiation along the corridor. (RDR)
LU 6.1.6	                 Conversion to Residential . The City shall support
                          proposals to convert nonresidential properties along
                          mixed-use corridors, between major intersections, to
                          residential or mixed-use residential uses. (RDR)
                                                                                      Directing higher-intensity land uses and
LU 6.1.7	                 Shared Parking, Driveways, and Alley Access. The            taller buildings to major intersections
                          City shall encourage the creation of shared parking         promotes physical differentiation along
                          and driveways as alleys along arterial corridors in order   the corridor.
                          minimize driveways and curb cuts. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                               Page 2-95

                                                                    Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                          LU 6.1.8	 Corridor Transit . The City shall require design and
                                                    development along mixed-use corridors that promotes
                                                    the use of public transit and pedestrian and bicycle travel
                                                    and maximizes personal safety through development
                                                    features such as:
See M 6, Parking, for additional policies           ■■ Safe and convenient access for pedestrians between
for parking.                                           buildings and transit stops, parking areas, and other
                                                       buildings and facilities
                                                    ■■ Roads designed for automobile use, efficient transit
                                                       service as well as pedestrian and bicycle travel (RDR/
                                                       MPSP)
                                          LU 6.1.9	 Enhanced Pedestrian Environment . The City shall
                                                    require that sidewalks along mixed-use corridors are wide
                                                    enough to accommodate significant pedestrian traffic
                                                    and promote the transformation of existing automobile-
                                                    dominated corridors into boulevards that are attractive,
                                                    comfortable, and safe for pedestrians by incorporating
                                                    the following:
                                                    ■■ On-street parking between sidewalk and travel lanes
                                                    ■■ Few curb cuts and driveways
                                                    ■■ Enhanced pedestrian street crossings
                                                    ■■ Building entrances oriented to the street
                                                    ■■ Transparent ground floor frontages
                                                    ■■ Street trees
                                                    ■■ Streetscape furnishings
                                                    ■■ Pedestrian-scaled lighting and signage (RDR/MPSP)
Page 2-96                                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Corridors
                                                                                                               LU 6
Wider sidewalks
Streetscape furnishings
On-street parking between sidewalk
and travel lanes
Enhanced pedestrian street
crossings
Pedestrian-scaled
lighting and signage
Street trees
                                                                                 The illustration to the left shows how
                                                                                 auto-dominated corridors can be
                                                                                 transformed into pedestrian-oriented
                                                                                 boulevards.
LU 6.1.10	            Visual and Physical Character. The City shall promote
                                                                                   See M    2, Walkable Communities,
                      development patterns and streetscape improvements that       for additional policies on pedestrian
                      transform the visual and physical character of typical       improvements.
                      automobile-oriented corridors by:
                      ■■ Enhancing the definition of the corridor by locating
                         buildings at the back of the sidewalk, and establishing
                         a consistent street wall
                      ■■ Introducing taller buildings that are in scale with the
                         wide, multi-lane street corridors
                      ■■ Locating off-street parking behind or between
                         buildings (rather than between building and street)
                      ■■ Reducing visual clutter by regulating the number, size
                         and design quality of signs
                      ■■ Removing utility poles and under-grounding overhead
                         wires
                      ■■ Adding street trees (RDR/MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-97

                                                                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                          Locating off-street parking behind or between
                                          buildings
                                          Buildings at the back of the sidewalk, establishing
                                          a consistent street wall
                                          Adding street trees
                                          Introducing taller buildings that are in scale with
                                          the wide street corridors
The illustration to the right shows how
 development and streetscapes along
corridors can be improved to promote
                        better character.
                                          The Existing Corridor                               The Corridor Transformed
                                          (Plan & Section)                                    (Plan & Section)
                                          LU 6.1.11	               Differentiating the Corridor. The City shall promote
                                                                   development patterns that break up long, undifferentiated
                                                                   corridors of commercial strip development by establishing
                                                                   distinct activity nodes or centers that are distinguished by
                                                                   features such as their primary tenants, mix of uses, scale
                                                                   and intensity of development, and architectural character.
                                                                   (RDR)
Page 2-98                                                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Corridors
                                                                                 LU 6
LU 6.1.12	           Compatibility with Adjoining Uses. The City shall
                     ensure that the introduction of higher-density mixed-use
                     development along major arterial corridors is compatible
                     with adjacent land uses, particularly residential uses, by
                     requiring such features as:
                     ■■ Buildings setback from rear or side yard property lines
                        adjoining single-family residential uses
                     ■■ Building heights stepped back from sensitive adjoining
                        uses to maintain appropriate transitions in scale and to
                        protect privacy and solar access
                     ■■ Landscaped off-street parking areas, loading areas, and
                        service areas screened from adjacent residential areas,
                        to the degree feasible
                     ■■ Lighting shielded and directed downward to minimize
                        impacts on adjacent residential uses (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                             Page 2-99

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-100                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Employment
                                                                                                           LU 7
Employment
Policies in this section promote the city’s position as a major regional and
interstate employment center through continuation of existing operations,
promotion of new industries, and improvements in job accessibility. They
provide for the continued growth of the city’s existing employment centers
and encourage the reuse of underutilized, vacant, or obsolete industrial
buildings. These polices provide for new manufacturing, research and
development, flex space, industry incubators, professional office, and
similar uses that range from high-intensity, mixed-use office centers, large
business parks, warehouses, and distribution facilities to manufacturing and
other heavy industrial areas. “Clean” industries, such as light manufacturing,
research and development, and high technology, will take advantage of the
education and skills of the city’s emergent population. Employment policies
promote improvements in site planning to create business parks on sites with
attractive architecture and landscaping, to make employment areas accessible
to pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit and to encourage the integration of
additional employment support uses such as retail, services, and in some
cases, mixed-use residential areas.
                                                                               The diagram to the left illustrates the
                                                                               location of Sacramento’s existing and
                                                                               planned employment areas.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-101

                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Employment
 Center Low Rise
Employment Center Low Rise (business parks) plays an important role in the city by supporting businesses and
providing employment. It is not anticipated that there will be any significant change in the form and character of areas
designated Employment Center Low Rise in the foreseeable future. Changes are likely to be more subtle, including
improvements in accessibility to pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit and the integration of additional support uses.
Urban Form Guidelines                   Allowed Uses
Key urban form characteristics          This designation provides for                      7  Surface parking behind or to the
                                                                                              side of buildings rather
envisioned for Employment Center        employment generating uses that
Low Rise areas include the following:   generally do not produce loud                      1  Building heights that generally
1.	 Building heights generally          noise or noxious odor including the                   range from 1 to 3 stories
    ranging from one to three           following:
    stories                             ■■  Industrial or manufacturing
2.	 Lot coverage generally not              that occurs entirely within an
    exceeding 60 percent                    enclosed building or an enclosed
3.	 Building entrances oriented             outdoor area with appropriately
    to the primary street frontage          landscaped setbacks
    rather than to parking areas        ■■  Office flex-space (i.e., industrial
4.	 Sidewalks along all streets             structures converting to office or
    to accommodate pedestrian               research and design uses)
    movement, with connecting           ■■  Residential and commercial flex-
    walkways from sidewalks into            space (i.e., industrial structures
    individual sites                        converting to residential or
5.	 Bicycle lanes along key                 commercial uses) in areas
    roadways                                expected to transition to urban                   Building entrances oriented to
                                            development                                    3
6.	 Transit stops near business park                                                          the primary street frontage
    entries                             ■■  Office uses
7.	 Location of surface parking         ■■  Retail and service uses that
    behind or to the side of
                                            provide support to employees
    buildings rather than between
    primary street and primary          ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public,
    street façade                           and special uses
8.	 Location of outdoor storage
    and production yards so that        Development Standards
    they are screened from public       ■■  Minimum FAR:	          0.15 FAR
    view by buildings, fencing and/     ■■  Maximum FAR:	          1.00 FAR
    or landscaping
9.	 Easily accessible support uses
 Page 2-102                                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Employment
                                                                                                                             LU 7
                                                                                                                          Employment
                                                                                                                    Center Low Rise
                                              4   Sidewalks along all streets
                                                         3    Building entrances oriented to the street
                                                                       7    Surface parking behind or to the side of buildings
                  9   Easily accessible support uses
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                          Page 2-103
                                                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Employment
 Center Mid Rise
Employment Center Mid Rise areas play a critical role in accommodating new businesses and creating new jobs.
The combination of high-density buildings and low site coverage in existing employment centers provides the
opportunity for new infill development in these areas with complementary uses that transforms the existing single-
use areas into more self-sufficient mixed-use areas with reduced dependence on automobile transportation.
Urban Form Guidelines                   10.	Bicycle lanes along key
                                            roadways                                     1
                                                                                             Buildings sited up to adjacent
                                                                                             streets to define public realm
Key urban form characteristics
                                        11.	Transit stops within office parks
envisioned for the employment
center mid rise areas include the       12.	Shuttle bus and/or public
following:                                  transportation that provide
                                            connections to retail shopping
1.	 A more compact development              districts
    pattern with buildings sited at
    or near front lot lines along       Allowed Uses                                Proper
                                                                                    Siting
                                                                                                            Siting not in
                                                                                                            accordance with
    primary streets to add character                                                                        Guidelines
    and spatial definition to the       This designation provides for large
                                                                                               Reduced areas of surface
    public realm                        mixed-use         office/employment                6   parking and greater use of
                                        centers that include the following:                    structured parking
2.	 Building heights generally
    ranging from three to twelve        ■■ Office complexes                                    Building heights that generally
    stories (taller heights are                                                            2   range from 3 to 12 stories
                                        ■■ Support retail and service uses,
    acceptable if supported by             such as restaurants, dry-cleaners,
    context and market)                    gym/fitness centers, markets,
3.	 Lot coverage generally not             hotels, and office services (e.g.,
    exceeding 70 percent                   printing/copying/shipping)
4.	 Building façades and entrances      ■■ Landscaped gathering places that
    directly address the street            include support uses
    and having a high degree of
    transparency                        ■■ Residential uses as a supportive
5.	 Greater integration of                 mixed use or adjacent to large
    residential, retail, and service       employment center
    uses                                ■■ Compatible public, quasi-public,
6.	 Reduced areas of surface               and special uses
    parking and greater use of
    structured parking                  Development Standards                             4   Building façades and entrances
                                                                                              that directly address the street
7.	 Convenient and attractive           ■■ Minimum Density:	 18.0 Units/
    pedestrian and vehicular               Net Acre
    connections from adjoining          ■■ Maximum Density:	 60.0 Units/
    neighborhoods                          Net Acre
8.	 Building entrances oriented
                                        ■■ Minimum FAR:	         0.25 FAR
    to the primary street frontage
    rather than to parking areas        ■■ Maximum FAR:	         2.00 FAR
9.	 Sidewalks accommodate
    pedestrian movement, with
    connecting walkways from
    sidewalk into individual sites
 Page 2-104                                                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Employment
                                                                                                                            LU 7
                                                                                                                         Employment
                                                                                                                       Center Mid Rise
                                                                        Convenient and attractive connections to
                                                                    7   adjoining neighborhoods
                                                                                6    Greater use of structured parking
        Compact development pattern with
      buildings sited up to adjacent streets
                                              1                 9   Sidewalks along all streets
                                                          Building facades and entrances that
                                                      4   directly address the street
  Development Standards Note:              Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed
  floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Stand alone residential development shall comply with
  the allowed density range.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                        Page 2-105
                                                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Industrial
Industrial designated areas represent the built form typically associated with manufacturing, warehousing, and other
industrial activities. Development patterns associated with industrial uses can vary significantly, with block sizes
typically large and varied in terms of shape. Industrial area street systems typically are designed to serve large blocks
(i.e., rather than having uses that fit into a prescribed block and street pattern), and are characterized by a limited
number of streets with few interconnections.
Urban Form Guidelines                      Allowed Uses                                      Front, side, and rear yards may
                                                                                         6   serve as parking, storage, and/or
Key urban form characteristics             This designation provides for                     service/loading areas
envisioned for industrial areas            employment generating uses that
include the following:                     may produce loud noise or noxious             10
                                                                                             Wide curb cuts and ample
1.	 Lot coverage highly variable and       odor and tend to have a high volume               internal circulation space
                                                                                             permit large trucks to enter
      dependent upon the needs of a        of truck traffic. These uses include              and maneuver within individual
      given activity                       the following:                                    parcels
2.	 High building coverage high            ■■ Industrial or manufacturing that
      (e.g., 50 to 75 percent) or quite       may occur within or outside a
      low (e.g., 25 percent or less) in       building
      areas where outdoor storage or       ■■ Office, retail and service
      production processes are the            uses that provide support to
      primary activity                        employees
3.	 Very large floor plates                ■■ Compatible public, quasi-public,
4.	 Generally single-story buildings,         and special uses
      with ceiling heights typically
      quite high (the equivalent of        ■■ This designation should not be
      two- and three-story buildings)         located adjacent to a residential
      to accommodate production               neighborhood or center without
      and storage                             substantial buffers (employment
                                              center low rise, parks, greenways,
5.	 Minimal setbacks                          or open space)                              4  Generally high-ceiling, single
6.	 Front, side, and rear yards may                                                          story buildings (the equivalent of
                                                                                             2- and 3-story buildings)
      serve as parking, storage, and/      Development Standards
      or service/loading areas             ■■ Maximum FAR:	         1.00 FAR
7.	 More articulation, detailing, and
      fenestration on facades visible
      from major thoroughfares and
      freeways
8.	 Rooftop equipment screening
      with parapets
9.	 Wide curb cuts and ample
      internal circulation space
      permit large trucks to enter
      and maneuver within individual
      parcels
10.	Landscaping used to buffer
      adjacent sensitive uses
 Page 2-106                                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Employment
                                                                                                           LU 7
                                                                                                           Industrial
                                     Bike                          Front, side and rear yards serve as
                                     trail                     6   parking, storage and/or service
                                                               Wide curb cuts and ample internal vehicular
                                                            10 circulation space
                                           5  Minimal setbacks
                           3  Very large floorplates
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                       Page 2-107
                                                                                    Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                               GOAL LU 7.1
 See the Economic Development Element          Employment Centers. Encourage employee-intensive uses throughout the
 for additional policies related to employment
                                               city in order to strengthen Sacramento’s role as a regional and West Coast
 growth.
                                               employment center and to encourage transit ridership and distribute peak
                                               hour commute directions.
                                               Policies
                                               LU 7.1.1	           Employment Intensive Uses. The City shall encourage
                                                                   employee-intensive uses such as medical and professional
                                                                   offices, light industry, research, and skill training. (RDR)
                                               LU 7.1.2	           Housing in Employment Centers . The City shall
                                                                   require compatible integration of housing in existing
                                                                   and proposed employment centers to help meet housing
                                                                   needs and reduce vehicle trips and commute times, where
                                                                   such development will not compromise the City’s ability
                                                                   to attract and maintain employment-generating uses.
                                                                   (RDR)
                                               LU 7.1.3	           Accessory Support Uses. The City shall require new
                                                                   employment centers and industrial development to
                                                                   incorporate such accessory uses as public open space
                                                                   amenities, transit amenities, child care facilities, and non-
                                                                   office retail uses based on the size and location of the
                                                                   development and the availability and capacity of existing
                                                                   accessory uses. (RDR)
                                               LU 7.1.4	           Urban Design . The City shall require that new and
                                                                   renovated employment center development be designed
                                                                   to accommodate safe and convenient walking, biking,
                                                                   and transit use, and provide an attractive, high-quality
                                                                   “campus environment,” characterized by the following:
                                                                   ■■ A highly interconnected system of streets and walkable
                                                                      blocks
                                                                   ■■ Buildings sited around common plazas, courtyards,
                                                                      walkways, and open spaces
                                                                   ■■ Extensive on-site landscaping that emphasizes special,
                                                                      features such as entryways, and screens parking lots
                                                                      and service areas
                                                                   ■■ A coordinated and well-designed signage program for
                                                                      tenant identification and way finding
                                                                   ■■ Attractive streetscapes and lighting to promote
                                                                      pedestrian activity
Page 2-108                                                                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Employment
                                                                                   LU 7
                     ■■ Clearly marked entrance drives, pedestrian routes,
                        and building entries that minimize potential conflict
                        between service vehicles, private automobiles, and
                        pedestrians
                     ■■ Facilities and services such as child care, cafes, and
                        convenience retail that address employee needs. (RDR)
LU 7.1.5	            Transitions to Urban Development. The City shall
                     support changes in land use designation from Employment
                     Center Low Rise to higher intensity land uses, on parcels
                     located within a half-mile walking distance of a light rail
                     station or other major transit stop, when appropriate
                     market conditions and infrastructure are in place. (RDR)
GOAL LU 7.2
Industrial Development. Maintain industrial districts that provide for the
manufacturing of goods, flex space, and research and development that are
attractive, compatible with adjoining nonindustrial uses, and well-maintained.
Policies
LU 7.2.1	            Industrial Growth. The City shall encourage the
                     protection, continued intensification, and expansion of
                     existing industrial, warehousing, and distribution facilities
                     and provide for new warehousing/distribution activities
                     in select locations when found to be compatible with
                     existing surrounding neighborhoods, to provide a range
                     of employment opportunities for Sacramento’s residents.
                     (RDR)
LU 7.2.2	            Internal Movement. The City shall require industrial
                     uses proposed near existing and planned residential areas
                     to be designed to limit the impacts of truck traffic on
                     these residential areas. (RDR)
LU 7.2.3	            Industrial Uses along Rivers. The City shall prohibit
                     new heavy industrial uses along the American River
                     Parkway and prevent incompatible industrial development
                     adjacent to the American and Sacramento Rivers. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                               Page 2-109

                                                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                            LU 7.2.4	 Industrial Conversion. The City shall promote, when
                                                      appropriate, the conversion of existing industrial,
                                                      warehousing, and distribution facilities to flex space and
                                                      business incubators (i.e., light industrial and research and
                                                      development uses) that provide new jobs and comparable
                                                      employment opportunities without the environmental
                                                      impacts of traditional industrial uses. (RDR)
                                            LU 7.2.5	 Transitional Uses. The City shall encourage development
                                                      of transitional uses (e.g., housing and retail) between
                                                      industrial areas and transit centers/stops. (RDR)
                                            LU 7.2.6	 Industrial Development Design. The City shall require
                                                      that new and renovated industrial properties and structures
                                                      incorporate high-quality design and maintenance. (RDR)
                                            LU 7.2.7	 Property Maintenance. The City shall encourage and,
See PHS     6, Code Enforcement, for
                                                      where legally permissible, require owners of visually
additional policies on property maintenance
and regulation.
                                                      unattractive or poorly maintained industrial properties
                                                      to upgrade existing structures and properties to improve
                                                      their visual quality. (RDR)
                                            LU 7.2.8	 Hazardous Industries. The City shall require industrial
See PHS 3, Hazardous Materials, for                   uses that use solvents and/or other toxic or hazardous
additional policies on hazardous material             materials to be sited in concentrated locations away
use, transport, and disposal.
                                                      from existing or planned residential, commercial,
                                                      or employment uses and require the preparation of
                                                      Hazardous Substance Management Plans to limit the
                                                      possibility of contamination. (RDR)
Page 2-110                                                                                     Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Employment
                                                                 LU 7
                                   page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                             Page 2-111
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-112                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Public/Quasi-Public and Special Uses
                                                                                                              LU 8
Public/Quasi-Public and
Special Uses
Policies in this section provide for a diversity of public and private community-
supportive uses that are located equitably throughout the city to support
the needs of Sacramento’s current and future residents and employees. The
policies ensure that the city’s public buildings, sites, and infrastructure are
designed to be compatible in scale, mass, character, and architecture with
the area where they are located. Collaborative and creative solutions are
encouraged with non-city public and private agencies and entities to design
their structures and improvements to achieve a high level of visual and
architectural quality that complements adjoining uses. Consolidation and co-
location of public uses is encouraged to enable them to serve as a centerpiece
of community identity, as well as to maximize the efficient use of land.
                                                                                  The diagram to the left illustrates the
                                                                                  location of Sacramento’s existing and
                                                                                  planned public/quasi-public uses.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-113

                                                Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           Public/Quasi-Public
           The Public/Quasi-Public designation describes areas with unique uses and
           typically unique urban forms. These areas host community services and/or
           educational, cultural, administrative, and recreational facilities often located
           within a well-landscaped setting. Most of these areas provide a public
           function and as a result, existing buildings often include a significant amount
           of surface parking lots and structured parking to accommodate users of the
           facilities. It should be noted that many Public/Quasi-Public uses are also
           allowed and are located in other land use and urban form designations.
           Urban Form Guidelines
           Building forms vary due to the variety of activities, though most buildings
           tend to be fairly large floor-plate, multi-story structures containing meeting
           rooms, classrooms, offices, assembly areas, and research space. Generally,
           automobile access and parking are limited to the periphery of the site in
           order to create a park-like pedestrian zone. Similarly, recreation facilities such
           as parks, greenways, stadiums, tracks, ball fields, and tennis courts are located
           on the perimeter of the public use.
           Sacramento’s existing public developments are generally built out, and it
           is assumed that their physical form will remain relatively unchanged in the
           future.
           Allowed Uses
           This designation provides for public and quasi-public uses including the
           following:
               ■■  Government buildings
               ■■  Public and private schools
               ■■  Schools/Colleges
               ■■  Hospitals
               ■■  Cemeteries
               ■■  Airports
               ■■  Transportation and utility facilities
               ■■  Other compatible public, quasi-public uses
           Special Uses
           Special Use policies provide for special uses (e.g., assembly facilities, live-
           work studios, and care facilities) that are included within several Land Use
           and Urban Form designations.
Page 2-114                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Public/Quasi-Public and Special Uses
                                                                                     LU 8
GOAL LU 8.1
Public/Quasi-Public. Provide for governmental, utility, institutional,
educational, cultural, religious, and social facilities and services that are
located and designed to complement Sacramento’s neighborhoods, centers,
and corridors and to minimize incompatibility with neighborhoods and
other sensitive uses.
Policies
LU 8.1.1	            Public Places. The City shall create vibrant public places
                     in Sacramento’s neighborhoods, centers, and corridors
                     that serve as gathering places. (MPSP/SO)
LU 8.1.2	            Adequate Community Supporting Uses. The City
                     shall seek to ensure that all manner of public and private
                     community-supportive facilities and services are located
                     throughout the city to provide places that serve the varied
                     needs of the community, provide for community meeting
                     places, and provide community and neighborhood
                     landmark buildings and places. (MPSP/IGC/JP)
LU 8.1.3	            Adequate Sites. The City shall proactively seek to
                     acquire land throughout the city to provide for adequate
                     parks and public facilities, particularly in infill areas where
                     available land is scarce. (MPSP/SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                 Page 2-115

                                                                   Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                       LU 8.1.4	 Excellence in Public Projects. The City shall lead by
                                                 example, demonstrating design excellence in City projects,
                                                 and City-subsidized reuse projects. (MPSP/SO)
                                       LU 8.1.5	 LEED Standard for City-Owned Buildings . The
                                                 City shall ensure that new or renovated City-owned
                                                 buildings are energy efficient and meet, as appropriate,
                                                 LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
                                                 Silver or equivalent standard. (RDR/SO)
                                       LU 8.1.6	 Architecture and Planning that Complements
                                                 Adjoining Uses. The City shall strive to ensure that
                                                 the City-owned buildings, sites, and infrastructure are
                                                 designed to be compatible in scale, mass, character, and
California Environmental Protection
                                                 architecture with the district or neighborhood in which
Agency Headquarters Building (Cal/               they are located. (MPSP)
EPA) in downtown Sacramento became
the first LEED for Existing Buildings  LU 8.1.7	 Compatibility of Non-City Public Uses. The City
Platinum certified building in 2004.             shall encourage school and utility districts and other
                                                 government agencies that may be exempt from City land
                                                 use control and approval to plan their properties and
                                                 design buildings at a high level of visual and architectural
                                                 quality that maintains the character of the district or
                                                 neighborhood in which they are located. (RDR/IGC/JP)
                                       LU 8.1.8	 Public Art. The City shall promote the incorporation of
                                                 public art in the design of the public realm to:
                                                 ■■  Add visual variety and richness.
                                                 ■■  Delight, surprise, amuse, and inspire.
                                                 ■■  Educate and inform.
                                                 ■■  Engage and involve.
Public art incorporated into the
landscape of the Federal Courthouse in           ■■  Celebrate Sacramento’s heritage and environment.
downtown Sacramento.                                 (RDR/MPSP)
  See ERC 4, Arts and Culture, for     LU 8.1.9	 Co-location of Community Facilities. The City shall
  additional policies on public art.             promote the co-location of parks, schools, police and fire
                                                 facilities, health services, and other community facilities to
                                                 support community interaction, enhance neighborhood
                                                 identity, and leverage limited resources. (MPSP/IGC/JP)
 Page 2-116                                                                                Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Public/Quasi-Public and Special Uses
                                                                                                               LU 8
LU 8.1.10	           College Campus Development. The City shall
                     encourage colleges to integrate uses such as residential,
                     retail, services, and other public facilities in and around
                     their campuses to augment the economic vitality of the
                     neighborhood and ensure that other public enhancements
                     that contribute to a greater quality of life, such as arts,
                     culture, athletic, public lectures, and/or medical facilities,
                     are accessible to the community. (RDR/IGC/JP)
LU 8.1.11	           Joint Development. The City shall encourage public/
                     private partnerships when developing surplus City
                     properties to enhance the surrounding community and
                     provide a source of revenue to fund improvements to city
                     services or facilities. (RDR/SO/IGC)
LU 8.1.12	           Facility Strategy. In addition to business considerations,
                     the City shall include economic development and
                     revitalization criteria in its ranking criteria for the
                     placement of City offices and facilities. (RDR/SO)
LU 8.1.13	           Medical Centers. The City shall work with owners of
                     existing and planned medical centers to develop master
                     plans that advance the City’s economic development
                     objectives, maintain definable medical districts, provide
                     for compatibility with surrounding areas, and achieve
                     cohesive and integrated land uses. (RDR/IGC/JP)
LU 8.1.14	           Medical Center Expansions. The City shall prohibit the
                     rezoning of any parcel that is residentially zoned for the
                     purposes of expanding a major medical facility. (RDR)
LU 8.1.15	           Airport Compatibility. The City shall work with the
                     Sacramento County Airport System (SCAS) and the
                     Airport Land Use Commission to ensure that new                 See M 8, Aviation, for additional policies
                     development near the area’s airports is compatible with        on aviation and airports.
                     airport operations and Airport Land Use Compatibility
                     Plans. (RDR/IGC)
LU 8.1.16	           Consistency with Airport Land Use Commission
                     Policies. The City shall ensure that all development
                     is consistent with the policies adopted by the SACOG
                     Airport Land Use Commission. (RDR)
LU 8.1.17	           Deed Notice. The City shall require that all new
                     development within an airport-defined over-flight zone
                     provide deed notices to future residents and property
                     owners upon transfer of title concerning airport over
                     flights and noise. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-117

                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                        LU 8.1.18	            Airport Related Land Uses. The City shall encourage
                                                              commercial and industrial developments requiring air
                                                              service to locate in the vicinity of an airport. (RDR)
                                        GOAL LU 8.2
                                        Special Uses. Provide for the development of Special Uses (e.g., assembly
                                        facilities, live-work studios, and care facilities) that are included within several
                                        Land Use and Urban Form Designations.
                                        Policies
                                        LU 8.2.1	             Assembly Facilities and Event Centers. The City shall
                                                              encourage and support development throughout the city
                                                              of assembly facilities for social, cultural, entertainment,
                                                              sports, educational, and religious activities. (RDR)
     Ethel MacLeod Hart Multipurpose
     Senior Center located in Marshall
 Park in midtown Sacramento provides
  supportive services and programs for
                               seniors.
                                        LU 8.2.2	             Artist Enclaves/Live-Work Studios . The City
                                                              shall support and encourage the development, reuse,
                                                              and conversion of certain areas of the city and existing
                                                              buildings to create art districts, live-work studios, and
                                                              affordable residential enclaves for artists and their
                                                              families. (RDR/MPSP)
                                        LU 8.2.3	             Care Facilities. The City shall encourage the
                                                              development of senior daycare facilities, assisted living
                                                              facilities, hospice, child care, and other care facilities in
                                                              appropriate areas throughout the city. (MPSP/RDR)
Page 2-118                                                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Public/Quasi-Public and Special Uses
                                                                                                                 LU 8
LU 8.2.4	            Child Care Supply. The City shall consider the impact
                     of residential and employment development projects
                     on the supply of local child care and encourage the
                     incorporation of on-site or off-site facilities, require in-
                     lieu fees to provide facilities, or require other measures to
                     provide for affordable, quality child care. (RDR)
LU 8.2.5	            Expanded Emergency Care Facilities. The City
                     shall support the efforts of the health care sector to        See PHS 4, Emergency Response and
                                                                                   Disaster Preparedness, for additional
                     provide expanded emergency health services throughout
                                                                                   policies on the provision of emergency care
                     Sacramento, especially north of the American River.
                                                                                   facilities.
                     (RDR/JP)
LU 8.2.6	            Farmers/Public Markets . The City shall continue
                     to support existing farmers markets, public markets,          See ER 4, Agriculture, for additional
                     and similar activities and encourage the development          policies for agricultural uses and
                                                                                   production.
                     of additional markets throughout the city to provide
                     residents with access to fresh, local produce, and
                     convenient shopping. (RDR)
LU 8.2.7	            Locally-Grown and Organic Foods . The City shall
                     allow urban farms and market gardens at a scale that is
                     appropriate to Sacramento’s neighborhoods, particularly
                     in areas that lack access to fresh healthy foods, and have
                     vacant or underutilized land. (RDR/PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-119

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-120                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Open Space, Parks, and Recreation
                                                                                                          LU 9
Open Space, Parks, and
Recreation
Open Space, Parks, and Recreation policies provide for the preservation,
continued growth, and enhancement of Sacramento’s rich resource of
parklands, recreational areas, and surrounding open spaces such as the
American River Parkway. They promote the integration and connection of
parklands and natural open spaces through greenways and trails that enhance
the city’s urban character and provide Sacramento’s residents and workforce
with opportunities to enjoy the natural environment, provide visual “relief ”
from urban development, protect significant plant and animal habitats,
and protect development from natural environmental hazards. Additional
policies promote enhancement of existing amenities, as well as development
of new parks, greenways, and open spaces as character-defining resources
that emphasize the retention of natural landforms and plant communities.
                                                                              The diagram to the left illustrates the
                                                                              location of Sacramento’s existing
                                                                              and planned open space, parks, and
                                                                              recreation areas.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                       Page 2-121

                                                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                   These policies provide for natural open space and other areas primarily
                                   used for recreation within easy access of all city residents. These areas
                                   are characterized by a high degree of open area, and a limited number of
                                   buildings connected through an integrated system of greenways. In urban
                                   areas of the city, smaller parks, plazas, and boulevard parks will provide open
                                   space and recreation opportunities.
                                   Open Space
                                   The Open Space designation includes areas that are intended to remain
                                   essentially open with limited or no development. This urban form type
                                   includes largely unimproved open spaces used primarily for passive
                                   recreation, resource protection, and/or hazard avoidance.
                                   Urban Form
                                   Open space is an important component of all urban areas that is essential
                                   to preserving natural features, establishing quality living environments,
                                   and maintaining boundaries and buffers between communities and
                                   noncompatible uses.
                                   Allowed Uses
                                   This designation provides for natural, managed, and cultivated open space,
                                   including the following:
Natomas Basin habitat conservation    ■■  Natural parks
area.
Photograph courtesy of
                                      ■■  Woodlands
The Natomas Basin Conservancy
                                      ■■  Habitat
                                      ■■  Agriculture
                                      ■■  Floodplains
                                      ■■  Areas with permanent open space easements
                                      ■■  Buffers between urban areas
                                      ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public, and selected special uses
 Page 2-122                                                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Open Space, Parks, and Recreation
                                                                                                            LU 9
Parks and Recreation
The designation includes greenways, large developed parks, and other areas
primarily used for recreation (smaller parks and recreation facilities are
included as elements within other urban form types). Typically, these areas
are characterized by a high degree of open area, and a limited number of
buildings. Recreational facilities frequently include sports fields, playground
equipment, picnic areas, sitting areas, concession businesses, open turf
and natural areas, trails, and golf courses. Examples of this designation in
Sacramento include regional parks, such as Granite and William Land, and         Bing Maloney Golf Course.
the Bing Maloney Golf Course.
Urban Form
The intensive public use associated with parks, greenways, and recreation
facilities often requires the provision of off-street parking facilities. Sports
fields and other facilities may include lighting for evening use, and require
the use of amplified sound systems for announcers or music. These uses
can generate large crowds, and so care must be taken when locating these
types of facilities near neighborhoods. The city’s existing facilities have been
established to serve the public’s outdoor recreational needs, and are not
expected to undergo significant changes in the coming years, except where
new facilities will be added to increase usability or capacity.
Allowed Uses
This designation provides for public and private recreational opportunities
to surrounding neighborhoods, communities, and the region including the
following:
    ■■  Parks (community and regional parks)
    ■■  Greenways and trails                                                     Universal playground accessible to
                                                                                 people of all ages and abilities.
    ■■  Golf courses and commercial recreation facilities with an emphasis
        on outdoor
    ■■  Compatible public, quasi-public, and selected special uses
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-123

                                                                                Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                           GOAL LU 9.1
 See ERC 2, Parks and Recreation, and      Open Space, Parks, and Recreation. Protect open space for its recreational,
 ER 2, 3, and 4, Biological Resources,
                                           agricultural, safety, and environmental value and provide adequate parks and
 Urban Forest, and Agriculture, for
                                           open space areas throughout the city.
 additional policies on open space, parks,
 and recreation.
                                           Policies
                                           LU 9.1.1	            Open Space Preservation. The City shall place a high
                                                                priority on acquiring and preserving open space lands for
                                                                recreation, habitat protection and enhancement, flood
                                                                hazard management, public safety, water and agricultural
                                                                resources protection, and overall community benefit.
                                                                (RDR/MPSP)
Page 2-124                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Open Space, Parks, and Recreation
                                                                                                              LU 9
LU 9.1.2	            New Parks and Open Spaces. The City shall ensure that
                     sufficient parks, open space, water corridor parkways, and
                     trails are planned throughout the city, to ensure adequate
                     facilities are available to existing and future residents.
                     (RDR/MPSP)
LU 9.1.3	            Connected Open Space System . The City shall
                     ensure that new development does not create barriers
                     to the connections among the various parts of the city’s
                     parks and open space systems. (RDR)
                                                                                See ERC 2, Parks and Recreation, for
LU 9.1.4	            Open Space Buffers. The City shall use traditional,        specific standards related to the provision
                                                                                of parks, open space, and recreation
                     developed parks and employ innovative uses of open
                                                                                facilities.
                     space to “soften” the edges between urban areas and the
                     natural environment. (RDR/MPSP)
LU 9.1.5	            Private Boat Docks and Marinas. The City shall
                                                                                See M 3, Public Transit, for additional
                     discourage development along the rivers of privately
                                                                                policies on private water transportation.
                     owned boat docks and marinas that are not available to
                     the general public. (RDR)
LU 9.1.6	            American River Parkway Plan. The City recognizes
                     the American River Parkway Plan as an important State
                     land use and policy document prepared through the
                     Urban American River Parkways Preservation Act (Public
                     Resources Code 5840, et al). (RDR/MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                          Page 2-125

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-126                       Adopted March 3, 2015
LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Special Study Areas and Planned Development
                                                                                                          LU 10
Special Study Areas and
Planned Development
Policies in this section ensure that areas mostly on the edges of the city are
planned through a process that addresses regional, local, and site specific
issues. They also provide opportunities for the City to explore possible
expansions into adjoining lands or where inter-jurisdictional cooperation is
needed with the County and other entities to resolve issues regarding the
nature, timing, extent of development, the appropriate mechanism to achieve
flood protection and open space preservation, and other related challenges.
Of particular concern is the need to determine the timing and extent of
development planned in the Natomas Joint Vision Study Area, including
preservation of a one-mile open space buffer.
                                                                               The diagram to the left illustrates the
                                                                               location of Sacramento’s Special Study
                                                                               Areas and Planned Development.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-127

                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                           Special Study Areas
 See Part 3, Community Plan Areas and      The Special Study Areas designation is applied to five potential annexation
 Special Study Areas for a discussion of   areas that may become part of the City in the future after additional studies
 the five Special Study Areas.             have identified the fiscal and service delivery implications on City functions.
                                           These include Arden Arcade Study Area, East Study Area, Fruitridge Florin
                                           Study Area, Natomas Joint Vision Study Area, and Town of Freeport Study
                                           Area. The future land use and urban form for these areas will include a
                                           combination of several land use and urban form designations applied
                                           in conjunction with a General Plan amendment. (See Part 3 of the 2035
                                           General Plan for a discussion of these areas.)
                                           Planned Development
                                           The Planned Development designation is applied to four areas with pending
                                           projects that are in the development review process as of March 2014. These
                                           include McKinley Village, Panhandle, Camino Norte, and Natomas Crossing.
                                           Specific land use and urban form designations (i.e., designations outlined in
                                           this plan) will be applied to these areas once planning is complete and the
                                           City has approved the development.
                                           GOAL LU 10.1
                                           Growth and Change. Ensure annexation and city expansion is consistent
                                           with the Regional Blueprint principles, SACOG MTP/SCS, and the City’s
                                           Vision and Guiding Principles, and provides regional and community
                                           benefits.
                                           Policies
                                           LU 10.1.1	           Special Study Areas and Interagency Coordination.
 See LU 1, Growth and Change, for                               The City shall engage in cooperative planning with
 additional policies on new development in
                                                                Sacramento County, school districts, Sacramento Local
 Special Study Areas.
                                                                Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo), and other
                                                                public agencies to ensure that mutual benefits can be
                                                                derived from potential future development of Special
                                                                Study Areas adjacent to the city’s boundaries. (IGC)
Page 2-128                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Special Study Areas and Planned Development
                                                                                                                                    LU 10
LU 10.1.2	                 Comprehensive Planning for Special Study Areas.
                           The City shall require that Special Study Areas be planned
                           comprehensively prior to annexation and development,
                           and subject to the following processes:
                           ■■  Amendment of the General Plan, including completion
                               of a new Community Plan chapter where applicable.
                           ■■  Approval of a Sphere of Influence amendment by the
                               LAFCo prior to annexation request where applicable.
                               (Sacramento LAFCo local policies discourage
                               concurrent Sphere of Influence Amendment and
                               Annexation).
                           ■■  Completion and adoption of Master Plans, Specific
                               Plans, pre-zoning, and Development Agreements,
                               as appropriate, in order to establish the timing,
                               phasing, costs, and responsible parties associated with
                               development in the area to be annexed. (MPSP/RDR)
LU 10.1.3	                 Regional and Community Benefits . The City shall
                           require that regional and community benefits are achieved
                           as the result of annexations and development approvals
                           in any Special Study Area or Planned Development Area,
                           consistent with the goals and policies outlined in this Plan.
                           Examples include, but are not limited to, the following:
                           ■■  A mix of land uses that results in a full range of jobs,
                               housing, amenities, services, and open space, resulting
                               in complete neighborhoods and dynamic centers that
                               have strong linkages with the city and region.
                           ■■  Transportation systems, including transit and roadways
                               that are substantially improved and expanded, in a
                               manner that provides enhanced mobility for all sectors
                               of the community and benefits regional air quality.
                           ■■  Sustainable infrastructure and community facilities,
                               where adequate land is provided for such facilities, and
                               construction and ongoing maintenance are funded by
                               proposed development.
                           ■■  Conservation of open space, including important
                               agricultural lands, sensitive habitat areas and wildlife
                               corridors, and other non-urbanized areas that serve as
                               buffers or “greenbelts” for public use.
(1)
    The Fruitridge Florin Study Area is located in the Fruitridge Broadway Community Plan Area and the South Area Community Plan Area. The Town
of Freeport Study Area is already within the South Area Community Plan. The unincorporated portion of Arden Arcade Study Area lies within the Arden
Arcade Community Plan boundary. Natomas Joint Vision Study Area and East Study Area would require new Community Plan chapters.
(2)
    Town of Freeport Study Area and Fruitridge Florin Study Area are already within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                                                  Page 2-129

                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                      ■■ Net fiscal benefits are achieved by both the City and
                         County, with minimal impacts to affected special
                         districts. (MPSP/RDR)
           LU 10.1.4	 Planned Development. The City shall require areas
                      designated Planned Development on the Land Use
                      and Urban Form Diagram be developed consistent
                      with the General Plan’s Vision and Guiding Principles
                      and obtain a General Plan Amendment to designate
                      the area consistent with the proposed project using the
                      appropriate designations contained in the Land Use and
                      Urban Design Element. (RDR)
           LU 10.1.5	 Planned Development Sunset. The City shall not
                      designate any other areas Planned Development beyond
                      those shown on the Land Use and Urban Form Diagram
                      as of March 3, 2009. (RDR/MPSP)
Page 2-130                                                  Adopted March 3, 2015

LAND USE AND URBAN DESIGN : Special Study Areas and Planned Development
                                                                        LU 10
                                     page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                    Page 2-131
MOBILITY
The City of Sacramento recognizes the importance
of maintaining investments in the transportation
network and is committed to developing a first
class, efficient, multi-modal transportation network
that minimizes impacts to the environment and
neighborhoods. The Mobility Element contains
policies to create a well-connected transportation
network, help walking become more practical for
short trips, support bicycling for both short- and
long-distance trips, improve transit to serve key
destinations, conserve energy resources, reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution, and do
so while continuing to accommodate auto mobility.
The element also includes policies related to parking,
goods movement, airports, and transportation
funding. Achieving a balanced transportation
system will require a greater investment in transit,
pedestrian, and bicycle infrastructure. Additional
policies that address connectivity support increased
densities and a mix of uses in multimodal districts,
and provide for pedestrian ways, bicycle routes,
transit, and road facilities can be found in the Land
Use and Urban Design Element.
                                                       Page 2-163
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-164                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Circulation System
                                                                                M1
Circulation System
Policies in this section provide for increased transportation choices through
the development of an integrated, multi-modal transportation system. A
flexible Level of Service (LOS) standard will support planned development
and require enhanced infrastructure to support transit, walking, and biking
in multi-modal districts. The transportation network will be well-connected.
Emerging technologies that promote a balanced transportation system will
be supported.
GOAL M 1.1
Comprehensive Transportation System. Provide a multimodal
transportation system that supports the social, economic and environmental
vision, goals, and objectives of the City, and is effectively planned, funded,
managed, operated, and maintained.
Policies
M 1.1.1        	     Right-of-Ways. The City shall preserve and manage
                     rights-of-way consistent with: the circulation diagram,
                     the City Street Design Standards, the goal to provide
                     Complete Streets as described in Goal M 4.2, and the
                     modal priorities for each street segment and intersection
                     established in Policy M4.4.1: Roadway Network
                     Development, Street Typology System. (SO)
M 1.1.2        	     Transportation System. The City shall manage the
                     travel system to ensure safe operating conditions. (SO)
M 1.1.3        	     Emergency Services. The City shall prioritize emergency
                     service needs when developing transportation plans and
                     making transportation network changes. (IGC/JP)
M 1.1.4        	     Facilities and Infrastructure. The City shall effectively
                     operate and maintain transportation facilities and
                     infrastructure to preserve the quality of the system. (SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                           Page 2-165

                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                            GOAL M 1.2
                                            Multimodal System. Increase multimodal accessibility (i.e., the ability
                                            to complete desired personal or economic transactions via a range of
                                            transportation modes and routes) throughout the city and region with an
                                            emphasis on walking, bicycling, and riding transit.
                                            Policies
Sacramento Regional Transit bus.            M 1.2.1     	    Multimodal Choices. The City shall develop an
                                                             integrated, multimodal transportation system that
  Ensure the City’s transportation’s system                  improves the attractiveness of walking, bicycling, and
  supports and enriches the quality of                       riding transit over time to increase travel choices and
  life for present and future generations                    aid in achieving a more balanced transportation system
  by improving mobility and accessibility                    and reducing air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.
  through investment in a balanced, multi-                   (MPSP/SO)
  modal system.
                                            M 1.2.2      	   Level of Service (LOS) Standard. The City shall
                                                             implement a flexible context- sensitive Level of Service
                                                             (LOS) standard, and will measure traffic operations
                                                             against the vehicle LOS thresholds established in this
                                                             policy. The City will measure Vehicle LOS based on
                                                             the methodology contained in the latest version of the
                                                             Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) published by the
                                                             Transportation Research Board. The City’s specific vehicle
                                                             LOS thresholds have been defined based on community
                                                             values with respect to modal priorities, land use context,
                                                             economic development, and environmental resources
                                                             and constraints. As such, the City has established variable
                                                             LOS thresholds appropriate for the unique characteristics
                                                             of the City’s diverse neighborhoods and communities.
                                                             The City will strive to operate the roadway network at
                                                             LOS D or better for vehicles during typical weekday
                                                             conditions, including AM and PM peak hour with the
                                                             following exceptions described below and mapped on
                                                             Figure M-1:
                                                             A. Core Area (Central City Community Plan Area) -
                                                             LOS F allowed
                                                             B. Priority Investment Areas – LOS F allowed
                                                             C. LOS E Roadways - LOS E is allowed for the
                                                             following roadways because expansion of the roadways
                                                             would cause undesirable impacts or conflict with other
                                                             community values.
 Page 2-166                                                                                         Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Circulation System
                                                                              M1
                     ■■ 65th Street: Elvas Avenue to 14th Avenue
                     ■■ Arden Way: Royal Oaks Drive to I-80 Business
                     ■■ Broadway: Stockton Boulevard to 65th Street
                     ■■ College Town Drive: Hornet Drive to La Rivera Drive
                     ■■ El Camino Avenue: I-80 Business to Howe Avenue
                     ■■ Elder Creek Road: Stockton Boulevard to Florin
                        Perkins Road
                     ■■ Elder Creek Road: South Watt Avenue to Hedge
                        Avenue
                     ■■ Fruitridge Road: Franklin Boulevard to SR 99
                     ■■ Fruitridge Road: SR 99 to 44th Street
                     ■■ Howe Avenue: El Camino Avenue to Auburn
                        Boulevard
                     ■■ Sutterville Road: Riverside Boulevard to Freeport
                        Boulevard
                    LOS E is also allowed on all roadway segments and
                    associated intersections located within ½ mile walking
                    distance of light rail stations.
                    D. Other LOS F Roadways - LOS F is allowed for the
                    following roadways because expansion of the roadways
                    would cause undesirable impacts or conflict with other
                    community values.
                     ■■ 47th Avenue: State Route 99 to Stockton Boulevard
                     ■■ Arcade Boulevard: Marysville Boulevard to Roseville
                        Road
                     ■■ Carlson Drive: Moddison Avenue to H Street
                     ■■ El Camino Avenue: Grove Avenue to Del Paso
                        Boulevard
                     ■■ Elvas Avenue: J Street to Folsom Boulevard
                     ■■ Elvas Avenue/56th Street: 52nd Street to H Street
                     ■■ Florin Road: Havenside Drive to Interstate 5
                     ■■ Florin Road: Freeport Boulevard to Franklin Boulevard
                     ■■ Florin Road: Interstate 5 to Freeport Boulevard
                     ■■ Folsom Boulevard: 47th Street to 65th Street
                     ■■ Folsom Boulevard: Howe Avenue to Jackson Highway
                     ■■ Folsom Boulevard: US 50 to Howe Avenue
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                         Page 2-167

                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                      ■■  Freeport Boulevard: Sutterville Road (North) to
                          Sutterville Road (South)
                      ■■  Freeport Boulevard: 21st Street to Sutterville Road
                          (North)
                      ■■  Freeport Boulevard: Broadway to 21st Street
                      ■■  Garden Highway: Truxel Road to Northgate Boulevard
                      ■■  H Street: Alhambra Boulevard to 45th Street
                      ■■  H Street 45th: Street to Carlson Drive
                      ■■  Hornet Drive: US 50 Westbound On-ramp to Folsom
                          Boulevard
                      ■■  Howe Avenue: US 50 to Fair Oaks Boulevard
                      ■■  Howe Avenue: US 50 to 14th Avenue
                      ■■  Raley Boulevard: Bell Avenue to Interstate 80
                      ■■  South Watt Avenue: US 50 to Kiefer Boulevard
                      ■■  West El Camino Avenue: Northgate Boulevard to
                          Grove Avenue
                      E. If maintaining the above LOS standards would, in
                      the City’s judgment be infeasible and/or conflict with
                      the achievement of other goals, LOS E or F conditions
                      may be accepted provided that provisions are made
                      to improve the overall system, promote non-vehicular
                      transportation, and/or implement vehicle trip reduction
                      measures as part of a development project or a city-
                      initiated project. Additionally the City shall not expand
                      the physical capacity of the planned roadway network to
                      accommodate a project beyond that identified in Figure
                      M4 and M4a (2035 General Plan Roadway Classification
                      and Lanes).
           M1.2.3 	   Transportation Evaluation. The City shall evaluate
                      discretionary projects for potential impacts to traffic
                      operations, traffic safety, transit service, bicycle facilities,
                      and pedestrian facilities, consistent with the City’s Traffic
                      Study Guidelines.
           M 1.2.4  	 Multimodal Access. The City shall facilitate the
                      provision of multimodal access to activity centers such as
                      commercial centers and corridors, employment centers,
                      transit stops/stations, airports, schools, parks, recreation
                      areas, medical centers, and tourist attractions. (MPSP/SO)
Page 2-168                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

                                                                                                                                  Figure M1
                                                                                                    Vehicle Level of Service Exception Areas
                                                                                                        W Elkhorn Blvd
                                                                                                                                    Bridgecr o
                         þ
                         }
                         |
                         ·
                                                                                                                   Natomas Blvd
                                                                                       r
                         99                                                                                                                                               ss
                                                                           Maybro o k D
                                                     y                                                                                                                      Dr
                                                 Wa
                                             ce
                                          o m m er
"
$5
!
#
                                           EC                              N Park Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dry Creek Rd                   Raley Blvd
                                                                                                                                  N Bend Dr
                                                            Del Paso Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                      Main Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rio Linda Blvd
                                                                                                                                    Gateway Park Blvd
                       El Centro Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bell Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Winters St
                                                     Arena Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Watt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   North Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Norwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Grand Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            South Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n   Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ev                                                               bur
                           El Centro Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ille                                                       Au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ford Rd                                                                                                                   Ro
                                                                                                                                                   San Juan Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Arcad e Blv d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Northgate Blvd
                                                                                "
                                                                                $w a
                                                                                !
                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                             Truxel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bl
                                                                              te                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vd
                                                                           Ga
                                                                                                   ak s D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Eleanor Ave                                                                            n
                                                                                                yO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Au
                                                                                                                           WE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                              Orchard Ln
                                                                                                     r                                  l C amin o Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             El Camino Ave
                                               r      Dr
                                            ve
                                          Ri                                                                                       en H
                                                                                                                                       wy                                                                                                                                              Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d
                                W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ethan Way
                                                                                                                              rd                                                                                                                                               s  o                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                   Ga                                                                                                                                                  l    Pa
                         y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          De                                                                                              Ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       de
                       Hw                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nW
           rd     en                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ay
        Ga
                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                    $5
                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                    #                                    Richa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Exp
                                                                                                                                                                                      rds                                                                                                                                                                 osition Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ethan Way
                                                                                                                                                                                               l vd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St                                  E lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Coloma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HS                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                                                                                                                        sB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 St                                                                                                      Fair O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      39T                                                                     56Th S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 51St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Howe Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h
                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t                                                                                                                                                                           W a tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E lv                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T St                                                           Fo                                                                                                                                                             ie r a D                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A                                                                                                                                                           Av
                                                                                                                   Vallejo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ls           om                          as                                                                                                       La R iv
                                                                                                                                                                                             2Nd                                                                                                                                                                   Blv
                                                                                                                                             Way                                                 Ave                                                                                                                                                                   d                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                  r                                                                                                                                                                                                     S St
                                                                                                                                                          P ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         59Th St
                                                                                                                                                              kD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kiefer Blvd
                                                                                                                                                        Lan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 24Th                                                                                                                                                             65Th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     kso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12Th Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                           Su                                                                                                                                                                                                         14Th Ave
                                                                                                                                   tte
                                                                                                                                       rvi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Belvedere Ave
                                                                                                                                           lle
                                                                                                                                                                Rd            d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                           rt Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21St Ave
                                                                                                                                                                         Freep
                                                                                                                                                                              o     Irvin Way                    26Th Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65Th Street Expy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fruitridge Rd                                                                                                   ck                                                                                                                                             Fruitridge Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Florin Perkins Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to n
                                                                                                                                                                                                       24Th St
                                                                                                                          35Th Ave
                                                                                                         ark D r                                                                                                                                                     lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               klin B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S Watt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lemon Hill Ave
                                                                                                    S La n
                                                                                                          dP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  47Th Ave                                                                 Elder Creek Rd
                                                                                 Gr e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Power Inn Rd
                                                                                     e nh
                                                     r
                                                 ia D
             vd                             Glor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  53Rd Ave
        Bl                                                                                 a ve n
     sid
  er
         e                                                                            Dr                                                                                                                                                                                                                   þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           99
R iv
                                                                                                                                                                                     Florin Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            29 T h S t
                                                                                                                                                                                  21St St
                                                     Ru
                                                          sh R
                                                                   iver Dr                                     "
                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                               $5
                                                                                                               #                                   Am
                                                                                                                                                         he                                                                                                                                                 ld D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Broo kf ie                            r
                                                                                                                                                            r st S t
                                                                                                                                                                                       Meadowview Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F ran
                                             Po
                                                     ck e                                                                                                                                              Dr
                                                            t Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                       n    S t il l                                                                                                         klin
                                                                                                                                                                                  Jo h                                                                                                                                           Mack Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Blvd                                              nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Valle                                     kwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        er P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y Hi D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C o su
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mn e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s Riv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e r Bl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         vd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Brucev ille Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C alvin e Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n to A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sheldon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                              Legend
                                                                 Core Area                                                                                                                                                                               City Limits
                                                                 Tier 1 Priority Investment Areas                                                                                                                                                        Waterways
                                                                 LOS F Roadway Segments
                                                                 LOS E Roadway Segments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0                           1                 2 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Data Source: City of Sacramento, 2012.


MOBILITY : Circulation System
                                                                                                           M1
GOAL M 1.3
Barrier Removal . Improve accessibility and system connectivity by
removing physical and operational barriers to safe travel.
Policies
M 1.3.1       	      Grid Network. To promote efficient travel for all modes,
                     the City shall require all new residential, commercial, or
                     mixed-use development that proposes or is required to
                     construct or extend streets to develop a transportation
                     network that is well-connected, both internally and to
                     off-site networks preferably with a grid or modified grid-
                     form. (RDR)
                     The City shall require private developments to provide
                     internal complete streets (see Goal M.4.2) that connect to
                     the existing roadway system. (RDR)
M 1.3.2       	      Eliminate Gaps. The City shall eliminate “gaps” in
                     roadways, bikeways, and pedestrian networks. To this end:
                     a. The City shall construct new multi-modal crossings of
                     the Sacramento and American Rivers.
                     b. The City shall plan and pursue funding to construct
                     grade-separated crossings of freeways, rail lines, canals,
                     creeks, and other barriers to improve connectivity.
                     c. The City shall construct new bikeways and pedestrian
                     paths in existing neighborhoods to improve connectivity.
                     (MPSP/SO)
                                                                                Pedestrianway and bikeway connection
                                                                                between Sacramento State and the
                                                                                adjacent commercial district and
                                                                                residential neighborhoods.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                      Page 2-171

                                                                          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                            M 1.3.3   	 Improve Transit Access . The City shall support the
 Complete Streets	
                                                        Sacramento Regional Transit District (RT) in addressing
 Complete streets include facilities
 and designs that enable safe access
                                                        identified gaps in public transit networks by working
 for all users (i.e., pedestrians,                      with RT to appropriately locate passenger facilities and
 bicyclists, motorists and transit                      stations, pedestrian walkways and bicycle access to transit
 riders) of all ages and abilities.                     stations and stops, and public rights of way as necessary
 Characteristics of complete streets                    for transit- only lanes, transit stops, and transit vehicle
 include the following:                                 stations and layover. (RDR/MPSP/IGC)
 ■■ A comprehensive, integrated, and
    connected network                       M 1.3.4   	 Barrier Removal for Accessibility. The City shall
 ■■ Balanced design to accommodate                      remove barriers, where feasible, to allow people of all
    walking, cycling, transit, driving,                 abilities to move freely and efficiently throughout the city.
    parking, and deliveries                             (MPSP/SO)
 ■■ Variety of uses and activities that
    create a varied streetscape             M 1.3.5   	 Connections to Transit Stations . The City shall
 ■■ Design that relates well to the
                                                        provide and improve connections to transit stations
    street’s bordering uses and allows for
                                                        by identifying, roadways, bikeways and pedestrian
    continuous activity
 ■■ Pedestrian and biking facilities that
                                                        improvements within walking distance (1/2 mile) of
    promote safety and maximize access to               existing and planned transit stations. Such improvements
    bordering uses                                      shall emphasize the development of complete streets.
 ■■ Aesthetically designed street lights                (MPSP/SO)
    that provide sufficient illumination of
    sidewalks                               M 1.3.6 	   Multi-Jurisdictional         Transportation       Corridors.
 ■■ Consistent landscaping that includes                The City shall work with adjacent jurisdictions and the
    street trees and landscaped medians                 Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG)
    and sidewalks                                       to identify existing and future transportation corridors
 ■■ Sustainable design that minimizes                   that should be linked across jurisdictional boundaries
    runoff, minimizes heat island effects,              to provide desired upstream and downstream traffic
    and responds to climatic demands and                operations and to preserve sufficient right-of-way. (IGC)
    conserves scarce resources
 ■■ Well-maintained facilities
                                            M 1.3.7 	   Regional Transportation Planning. The City
                                                        shall continue to actively participate in Sacramento
                                                        Area Council of Government’s (SACOG’s) regional
                                                        transportation planning efforts to coordinate priorities
                                                        with neighboring jurisdictions and continue to work with
                                                        all local transit providers and the California Department
                                                        of Transportation (Caltrans) on transportation planning,
                                                        operations, and funding. (IGC/FB)
Page 2-172                                                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Circulation System
                                                                                                           M1
GOAL M 1.4
Transportation Demand Management. Reduce reliance on the private
automobile.
Policies
M 1.4.1 	            Increase Vehicle Occupancy . The City shall work
                     with a broad range of agencies (e.g., SACOG, SMAQMD,
                                                                                 Meadowview Light Rail Station
                     Sacramento RT, Caltrans) to encourage and support           with pedestrianway and bikeway
                     programs that increase regional average vehicle occupancy,  improvements.
                     including the provision of traveler information, shuttles,
                     preferential parking for carpools/vanpools, transit pass
                     subsidies, road and parking pricing, and other methods.
                     (MPSP/PI)
M 1.4.2      	       Automobile Commute Trip Reduction . The
                     City shall encourage employers to reduce the number
                     of single-occupant vehicle commute trips to their sites by
                     enforcing the existing trip reduction ordinance in the City
                     Code. (JP/PI)
M 1.4.3      	       Transportation Management Associations . The
                     City shall encourage commercial, retail, and residential
                     developments to participate in or create Transportation
                     Management Associations to reduce single-occupant
                     vehicle trips. (JP/PI)
M 1.4.4      	       Off-Peak Deliveries. The City shall encourage business
                     owners to schedule deliveries at off-peak traffic periods.
                     (JP/PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                      Page 2-173

                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                         GOAL M 1.5
                                         Emerging Technologies and Services. Use emerging transportation
                                         technologies and services to increase transportation system efficiency.
                                         Policies
                                         M 1.5.1      	    Facilities for Emerging Technologies . The City
                                                           shall assist in the provision of support facilities such as
                                                           advanced fueling stations (e.g., electric and hydrogen) for
                                                           emerging technologies. (RDR/JP)
                                         M 1.5.2      	    Use of Public Rights-of-Way . The City shall provide
                                                           for the use of public rights-of-way at transit stations and
                                                           major activity centers, where appropriate for emerging
                                                           technology support facilities such as advanced fueling
                                                           stations. (RDR/SO)
                                         M 1.5.3      	    Public-Private Transportation Partnerships. The
   Electric vehicle parking at a City of
         Sacramento parking garage.
                                                           City shall cooperate with public-private transportation
                                                           partnerships (such as car sharing companies) to establish
                                                           programs within the City that support the goals and
                                                           policies of the General Plan. (IGC/JP)
                                         M 1.5.4      	    Regional Emissions Reductions . The City shall
                                                           support its partner agencies in their efforts to remove
                                                           gross polluters from the regional vehicle fleet. (IGC/JP)
                                         M 1.5.5      	    Support Zero- and Low-Emission Vehicle Adoption
                                                           . The City shall continue to collaborate with its State
                                                           and regional partners to support)rapid adoption of
                                                           zero-emissions and low-emission vehicles, including
                                                           standardizing infrastructure and regulations for public
                                                           electric vehicle charging stations, streamlining the permit-
                                                           process for private electric vehicle charging stations
                                                           (including home charging stations), developing guidelines
                                                           and standards for dedicated and preferential parking for
                                                           zero- and low-emissions vehicles (including charging
                                                           stations for plug-in-electric vehicles, where necessary).
                                         M 1.5.6      	    Support State Highway Expansion. The City shall
                                                           support State highway improvement projects and
                                                           management plans consistent with the SACOG MTP/
                                                           SCS. (RDR/MPSP/IGC)
Page 2-174                                                                                          Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Circulation System
                                                                               M1
M 1.5.7       	      Freeway Improvement Coordination. The City shall
                     work with Caltrans and adjacent jurisdictions to identify
                     funding for improvements that address cumulative
                     effects of planned development on the freeway system.
                     (FB/IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                          Page 2-175

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-176                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Walkable Communities
                                                                                                                 M2
Walkable Communities
Policies in this section support the goal of making Sacramento a model
pedestrian-friendly city—the “Walking Capital.” Safe, walkable environments
will be created through the provision of a continuous pedestrian network
with sidewalks that are safe and enjoyable places to walk. Residents will
be encouraged to integrate walking into their daily activities to promote a
healthier lifestyle and improve energy resource conservation goals.
                                                                                Pedestrianway connecting K Street Mall
                                                                                and L Street, on the north side of the
                                                                                State Capitol.
GOAL M 2.1
Integrated Pedestrian System. Design, construct, and maintain a universally
accessible, safe, convenient, integrated and well-connected pedestrian system
that promotes walking.
Policies
                                                                                  See the City of Sacramento Pedestrian
M 2.1.1        	     Pedestrian Master Plan . The City shall maintain            Master Plan, Pedestrian Corridors and
                     and implement a Pedestrian Master Plan that carries          Nodes Map. Pedestrian street corridors
                     out the goals and policies of the General Plan. All new      are areas targeted for upgraded pedestrian
                     development shall be consistent with the applicable          improvements, and pedestrian nodes are
                     provisions of the Pedestrian Master Plan. (MPSP)             areas within the city with the highest levels
                                                                                  of pedestrian demand.
M 2.1.2        	     Sidewalk Design . The City shall require that
                     sidewalks wherever possible be developed at sufficient
                     width to accommodate all users including persons with
                     disabilities and complement the form and function of
                     both the current and planned land use context of each
                     street segment (i.e. necessary buffers, amenities, outdoor
                     seating space). (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-177

                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           M 2.1.3 	 Streetscape Design . The City shall require that
                     pedestrian-oriented streets be designed to provide a
                     pleasant environment for walking and other desirable
                     uses of public space, including such elements as shade
                     trees; plantings; well-designed benches, trash receptacles,
                     news racks, and other furniture; pedestrian-scaled lighting
                     fixtures; wayfinding signage; integrated transit shelters;
                     public art; and other amenities. (MPSP)
           M 2.1.4 	 Cohesive and Continuous Network . The City shall
                     develop a pedestrian network of public sidewalks, street
                     crossings, and other pedestrian paths that makes walking
                     a convenient and safe way to travel citywide. The network
                     should include a dense pattern of routes in pedestrian-
                     oriented areas such as the Central City and include
                     wayfinding where appropriate. (MPSP)
           M 2.1.5 	 Housing and Destination Connections . The
                     City shall require new subdivisions and large-scale
                     developments to include safe pedestrian walkways
                     that provide direct links between streets and major
                     destinations such as transit stops and stations, schools,
                     parks, and shopping centers. (RDR)
           M 2.1.6 	 Pedestrian Awareness Education. The City shall
                     continue pedestrian safety outreach to the public through
                     the City’s website and develop partnerships with local
                     organizations to develop educational materials and
                     programs that promote pedestrian awareness. (IGC/PI)
Page 2-178                                                   Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Walkable Communities
                                                                             M2
M 2.1.7       	      Safe Pedestrian Crossings . The City shall improve
                     pedestrian safety at appropriate intersections and mid-
                     block locations by providing safe pedestrian crossings.
                     (SO)
M 2.1.9       	      Safe Sidewalks . The City shall require pedestrian
                     facilities to be constructed in compliance with adopted
                     design standards. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                        Page 2-179

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-180                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Public Transit
                                                                                                           M3
Public Transit
Policies in this section seek to foster increased transit use through the
provision of new service lines and the extension of existing lines, increased
frequency of service, and the provision of direct pedestrian and bicycle
access to transit station areas. Increased transit use will further the City’s
efforts to become more sustainable and energy efficient. Transit and land use
will be tightly linked, with transit stations integrated into walkable, transit-
oriented districts and neighborhoods. Plans will be developed for new transit
service such as high speed rail, regional rail, bus rapid transit, streetcars, new
bus routes between urban centers, and neighborhood bus service.
Figures M2 and M3 shows transit corridors including existing and future
light rail routes, the Capitol Corridor rail line, the proposed high speed rail
alignment, and candidate transit corridors. The candidate transit corridors
shown on these figures do not represent specific routes but indicate links
between major activity centers that are anticipated to be served in the future
by bus service such as bus rapid transit, enhanced bus, and/or express bus
service.
GOAL M 3.1
Safe, Comprehensive, and Integrated Transit System . Create and
maintain a safe, comprehensive, and integrated transit system as an essential      Sacramento Regional Transit trolley.
component of a multimodal transportation system.
Policies
M 3.1.1        	     Transit for All . The City shall support a well-designed
                     transit system that provides accessibility and mobility for
                     all Sacramento residents, workers and visitors. The City
                     shall enhance bicycle and pedestrian access to stations.
                     (IGC)
M 3.1.2        	     Increase Transit Service . The City shall work with          Amtrak regional rail.
                     transit operators and community partners to increase
                     public transit service (i.e. frequency, number of lines and
                     stops, dedicated transit lanes) above and beyond what is
                     already planned in the MTP/SCS, as funding is available.
M 3.1.3        	     Expand Transit Coverage . The City shall work with
                     transit operators and community partners to develop
                     and implement a policy that expands affordable public
                     transportation coverage to within walking distance of all
                     city residents, as funding is available. (IGC)                Sacramento Regional Transit light rail.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                       Page 2-181

                                                                         Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                            M 3.1.4   	 Maintain Services . The City shall work with transit
                                                        providers to maintain and enhance services within the
                                                        city that are frequent, reliable, timely, cost-effective, and
                                                        responsive to growth patterns and enhance transit where
                                                        feasible and as funding allows. (IGC)
                                            M 3.1.5   	 Variety of Transit Types . The City shall consider
                                                        a variety of transit types including high speed rail, inter-
                                                        city rail, regional rail, light rail transit, bus rapid transit,
                                                        trolleys (streetcars), enhanced buses, express buses, local
                                                        buses, car sharing, bike sharing, neighborhood shuttles,
                                                        pedi-cabs, and jitneys to meet the needs of residents,
                                                        workers, and visitors. (MPSP)
                                            M 3.1.6   	 Reduced Fares and Universal Transit Pass
                                                        Programs. The City encourage Regional Transit to plan
                                                        and implement reduced fare programs and/or universal
                                                        “fare free” transit pass programs for certain high density/
                                                        intensity areas (e.g., Central Business District) of the city,
                                                        and to expand access to such programs among major
                                                        employees and institutions, to facilitate increased transit
                                                        ridership. (IGC)
                                            M 3.1.7 	   Unified Traveler Information System. The City shall
Traffic signalization providing priority to             work with Regional Transit and SACOG to support local
transit to improve mobility circulation.                transit providers in developing and maintaining a unified
                                                        traveler information system. (IGC/PI)
                                            M 3.1.8  	  Safe System . The City shall coordinate with Regional
                                                        Transit to maintain a safe, clean, comfortable, and rider-
                                                        friendly waiting environment at all transit stops within the
                                                        city. (IGC)
 Page 2-182                                                                                         Adopted March 3, 2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure M2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Light Rail Facilities
                                                                             W Elkhorn Blvd
                           þ
                           }
                           |
                           · 99
                                                                                   Natomas Blvd
"
$
!
#
5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Raley Blvd
                                                    Del Paso Rd
      Natomas Central Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Main Ave
                           El Centro Rd
                                                          E
                                                              m
                                                           Co
                                                                er                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bell Ave
                                                               m
                                                                   ce
                                                Arena Blvd             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Watt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                                                                    $
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                    #       80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Norwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         le Blvd                                                                                     80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd                                       Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  vil                                     bu   rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Marys
                               El Centro Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     le                                Au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           vil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    se
                                                                                                                                  San Juan Rd
                                                                                                                                                                           Northgate Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ma
                                                               "
                                                               $
                                                               !
                                                               #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rco
                                                                                                                    Truxel Rd
                                                                  80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bl vd                             ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bl                                ur                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vd                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o                             b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                el
                                                                                                          W El Camino Ave                                                                                                                          Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         El Camino Ave                s
                                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                                   Garden Hw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Arden Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          , 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ethan Way
                             y
                           Hw
                     en
    Ga
       rd
                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                    $
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                    #    5                      Rich
                                                                                                                                    a         rds B
                                                                                                                                                   lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ·160                 Exp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 os            ition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ethan Way
                                                                                                                                                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                 th
                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                   IS                                            St
                                                                                                        tre
                                                                                                              et                               12th
                                                                                                                   Br                 t
                                                                                                                      g           9th
                                                                                                                                      S        I St     St
                                                                                                                                  L St                16th
                                                                                                      3rd                        NS                           St                                                  h St
                                                                                                          St                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vd
                                                                                                  5th                                                       19th                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bl
                                                                                                      St             QS
                                                                                                                       t                        St                                                  29th                                                                                                                                           s                                             St
                                                                                                                                                     P St        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                         St                                                                                                                                      ak
                                                                                                                                                                                                 bra
                                                                                                                       St                     15th                                                                                                                                                                                    O                                                     Mu
                                                                                                                                                             21s                                                                                                                                                                   ir
                                                                                                                   10th                                          t                                   Blvd 30t                                                                                                                   Fa                                                             nro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    St                                                                                             e
                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                          +
                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                          )   80                 XS
                                                                                                                                          t         W
                                                                                                                                                Broa St
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alha
                                                                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Howe Ave
                                                                                                                                                    dwa                                                                                                                Fo                                                                                                                                                                            tt
                                                                                                                                                        y                                                                                                                 ls   om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                               Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lvd                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           59th St                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          65th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jac          Kiefer Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k     son
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                   Su                                                                                                       12th Ave
                                                                                      tt           erv                                                 rv    ille Rd
                                                                                                                                                 Sutte
                                                                                                         ille
                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           · 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Frankli
                                                                                                                                   rt Blv
                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                Freep
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Florin Perkins Rd
                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S Watt Ave
                                                                  Seam                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fruitridge Rd
                                                                       a   s Ave                                                                            Fruitridge Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            65th Street Expy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lv                                                     ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                             klin B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sto
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S Watt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Power Inn Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                d                                                              Blvd
                                                     B   lvd
                                                side
                                          River
                                                                                                                                                                   47th Ave                                                                                      47th Ave                            Elder Creek Rd
                                                                                                                                              Florin Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              99
                                                                             "
                                                                             $
                                                                             !
                                                                             # 5
                                                                                                                                               Meadowview Rd
                                                                              Pocket Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   klin B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mack Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cosumnes Riv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       er                                                Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bruceville Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             · 99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sheldon Rd
     Light Rail Station
     Light Rail Line
                                              Existing
                                              Proposed
                                              Existing
                                                                                                    Proposed Streetcar Line
                                                                                                    Potential Streetcar Stops
                                                                                                    City Limits
                                                                                                    Policy Area
                                                                                                    Waterways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .              1                          2 Miles
                                              Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Data Source: City of Sacramento


                                                                                                                                                                  Figure M3
                                                                                                                                       Existing/Planned Heavy Rail Corridors
                                                                                                          W Elkhorn Blvd
                                                                                                                                       Bridgecr o
                         þ
                         }
                         |
                         ·
                                                                                                                       Natomas Blvd
                                                                           Ma ybro o k D
                         99                                                                                                                                                  ss
                                                                                                                                                                               Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          To Yuba City
                                                     ay
                                             ce
                                                W                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                          o m m er
                                                                                  r
"
$5
!
#
                                           EC                              N Park Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dry Creek Rd                   Raley Blvd
                                                                                                                                      N Bend Dr
                                                           Del Paso Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                        Main Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rio Linda Blvd
                                                                                                                                       Gateway Park Blvd
                       El Centro Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      To Reno
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bell Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Winters St
                                                     Arena Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Watt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     North Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Norwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Grand Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n   Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ev                                                             bur
                           El Centro Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ille                                                     Au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ford Rd                                                                                                                   Ro
                                                                                                                                                      San Juan Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Arcad e Blv d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Northgate Blvd
                                                                                 "
                                                                                 $
                                                                                 !
                                                                                 #w a
                                                                                                                                                                Truxel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bl
                                                                              te                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 vd
                                                                           Ga
                                                                                                     a ks D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Eleanor Ave                                                                            n
                                                                                                  yO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Au
                                                                                                                               WE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b
                                                              Orchard Ln
                                                                                                      r                          l C amino Ave
                                                       r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      El Camino Ave
                                                     rD
                                            ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                          Ri                                                                                             n Hw y                                                                                                                                         Blv
                                W                                                                                                 rd e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ethan Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                s  o                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                       Ga                                                                                                                                               l    Pa
                         y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           De                                                                                              Ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        de
                       Hw                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nW
          rd      en                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ay
       Ga
                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                       $5
                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                       #                                    Richa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Exp os
                                                                                                                                                                                         rds                                                                                                                                                                        ition B lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                B l vd
                                                       To Bay Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ethan Way
                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       St                                  E lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Coloma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HS                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t                                                                                                                        sB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St                                                                                                      Fair O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       39T                                                                     56Th S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  51St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Howe Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h
                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                           +
                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t                                                                                                                                                                         Wa tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E lv                                                                                                                                        r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T St                                                           Fo                                                                                                                                                        ie r a D                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A                                                                                                                                                         Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              La R iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ls           om                          as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             To Folsom
                                                                                                                       Vallejo                                                                  2Nd                                                                                                                                                                  Blv
                                                                                                                                                 Way                                                Ave                                                                                                                                                                  d                         ve
                                                                                                                                                                    Dr                                                                                                                                                                                                   S St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          59Th St
                                                                                                                                                              ar k
                                                                                                                                                           Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kiefer Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   24Th                                                                                                                                                            65Th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    kso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12Th Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                               Su                                                                                                                                                                                                      14Th Ave
                                                                                                                                      tte                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belvedere Ave
                                                                                                                                                 r vi
                                                                                                                                                            lle
                                                                                                                                                                R      d         d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                              rt Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21St Ave
                                                                                                                                                                            Freep
                                                                                                                                                                                 o     Irvin Way                   26Th Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       65Th Street Expy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fruitridge Rd                                                                                                  ck                                                                                                                                            Fruitridge Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Florin Perkins Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                         24Th St
                                                                                                                              35Th Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                          to n
                                                                                                              ark Dr                                                                                                                                                  lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                klin B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S Watt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fran
                                                                                                       dP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lemon Hill Ave
                                                                                                    S L an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   47Th Ave                                                                 Elder Creek Rd
                                                                                  Gre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Power Inn Rd
                                            Glor
                                                 ia D
                                                     r
                                                                                           e nh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            To Stockton
      eB
           lv d
                                                                                           a ve n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   53Rd Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
Riv                                                                                        Dr                                                                                                                                                                                                               þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ·
   er
     sid
                                                                                                                                                                                        Florin Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                To Stockton                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              29 T h S t
                                                                                                                                                                                     21St St
                                                     Ru
                                                          sh R
                                                                   iver D r                                      "
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                 $
                                                                                                                 #5                                   Am
                                                                                                                                                            he                                                                                                                                               ld D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Broo kf ie                            r
                                                                                                                                                               r st S t
                                                                                                                                                                                         Meadowview Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F ran
                                             Po
                                                     ck e
                                                          t   Rd                                                                                                                                    t il l D r
                                                                                                                                                                                               nS                                                                                                             klin
                                                                                                                                                                                     Jo h                                                                                                                                         Mack Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Blvd                                               nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Valle                                     kwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         er P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y                 Hi D r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C osu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mn e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s Riv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 er Bl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          vd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     To Stockton             4                                                                                                                                                                                                       tock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Brucev ille Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C a l vi n e R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ve                                                                     lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n to A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sheldon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                              Legend
                                                                           California High Speed Rail                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                           Passenger Rail                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Waterways
                                                                           Freight Rail                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                           1             2 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Data Source: City of Sacramento, 2012; Census 2010


MOBILITY : Public Transit
                                                                                                                 M3
M 3.1.9      	       Transit Amenities . The City shall work with transit
                     providers to incorporate features such as traffic signal
                     priority, queue jumps, and exclusive transit lanes to
                     reduce transit passenger delay, and improve transit speed,
                     reliability and operating efficiency. (MPSP/SO/IGC)
M 3.1.10         	   Transit Service . The City shall support the
                     enhancement and improvement of transit service,
                     particularly in Frequent Transit Corridors and street
                     segments where transit is prioritized in the Roadway         Photograph courtesy of Paratransit, Inc.
                     Network and Street Typologies section. (IGC)
M 3.1.11        	    Demand-Responsive Service. The City shall support
                     the provision of demand- responsive service (e.g.,
                     paratransit) and other transportation services for those
                     unable to use conventional transit. (IGC/JP)
M 3.1.12         	   New Facilities . The City shall work with transit
                     providers and private developers to incorporate transit
                     facilities into new private development and City project
                     designs including incorporation of transit infrastructure
                     (i.e., electricity, fiber-optic cable, etc.), alignments for
                     transit route extensions, new station locations, bus stops,
                     and transit patron waiting area amenities (i.e. benches,
                     real- time traveler information screens). (MPSP/IGC)
M 3.1.13         	   Right-of-Way Preservation . The City shall assist
                     Regional Transit in identifying and preserving rights-of-
                     way suitable for transit services and/or non- motorized
                     transportation facilities. (MPSP/IGC)
M 3.1.14         	   Direct Access to Stations . The City shall ensure
                     that development projects located in the Central City and
                     within ½ mile walking distance of existing and planned
                     light rail stations provide direct pedestrian and bicycle
                     access to the station area, to the extent feasible. (RDR)
M 3.1.15        	    Light Rail Extensions and Enhancements . The
                     City shall support the extension of light rail service to
                     Sacramento International Airport, further extension in
                     South Sacramento, and other improvements to facilities
                     such as the 65th Street, Royal Oaks, and Swanston
                     stations. (MPSP/IGC)
M 3.1.16       	     Streetcar Facilities . The City shall support the
                     development of streetcar lines and related infrastructure
                     and services in the Central City and other multi-modal
                     districts. (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-187

                                                                         Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                         M 3.1.17       Dedicated Bus Facilities . The City shall consider
                                                        the provision of dedicated bus lanes and related
                                                        infrastructure where transit is clearly prioritized in the
                                                        Roadway Network and Street typologies section of this
                                                        General Plan. (MPSP)
                                         M 3.1.18       Developer Contributions . Consistent with the City’s
                                                        established transportation impact analysis and mitigation
                                                        guidelines, the City shall require developer contributions
                                                        for bus facilities and services and related improvements.
                                                        (RDR/FB)
                                         M 3.1.19       Transit Extension Studies . The City shall continue
                                                        to support transit service extension and expansion studies.
                                                        (PSR)
                                         M 3.1.20       City Defined Transit Infrastructure and Services .
                                                        The City shall work with transit operators toward delivery
                                                        of public transit facilities and services that are aligned
                                                        with the City’s priorities consistent with the goals and
                                                        policies of the General Plan. (IGC/FB)
                                         GOAL M 3.2
                                         Long-Distance Passenger Rail Services. Support long-distance passenger
                                         rail service.
        Amtrak train station passenger
                           waiting area.
                                         Policies
                                         M 3.2.1        Passenger Rail Service . The City shall encourage and
                                                        promote the enhancement of passenger rail service to and
                                                        through the Sacramento area, including the development
                                                        of new infrastructure and services associated with the
                                                        California High Speed Rail Project. (IGC/PI)
Page 2-188                                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Public Transit
                                                                                                          M3
M 3.2.2      	       Sacramento Intermodal Transportation Facility
                     . The City shall support the development of the
                     Sacramento Intermodal Transportation Facility. (MPSP/
                     JP)
                                                                              The City’s intermodal station will serve
                                                                              local, regional, and transcontinental
                                                                              travelers.
M 3.2.3      	       Transcontinental Passenger Rail Service . The City
                     shall support the continued provision and enhancement
                     of transcontinental passenger rail service to Sacramento
                     by Amtrak. (IGC)
M 3.2.4       	      Capitol Corridor . The City shall support Capitol
                     Corridor and other regional rail service to downtown
                     Sacramento. (IGC)
M 3.2.5	             High Speed Rail Service . The City shall support
                     and advocate extension of High Speed Rail service to
                     Sacramento. (MPSP/IGC)
GOAL M 3.3
Private Transit Services. Support the development and provision of
privately funded and/or privately-operated transit services that support
citywide and regional goals by reducing single- occupant vehicle (SOV) trips,
vehicle miles traveled and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
Policies
M 3.3.1     	        Inter-City Bus Service . The City shall promote the
                     continued operation and expansion of private inter-city
                     bus service. (JP/PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                     Page 2-189

                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                       M 3.3.2 Taxi Service. The City shall promote the continued
                                               operation of taxi service, including the provision of
                                               dedicated, on-street loading spaces where appropriate,
                                               incremental improvements in gas mileage, and improved
                                               access for passengers with disabilities. (MPSP/JP)
      Dedicated, on-street parking for
                            taxicabs.
                                       M 3.3.3 Private Water Transportation Services. The City shall
                                               support the development of private water transportation
                                               services, where appropriate, along the Sacramento River
                                               by continuing to operate publicly owned dock facilities.
                                               (MPSP/JP)
                                       M 3.3.4 Private Shuttle Services. The City shall support the
                                               integration of privately- operated shuttle services into the
                                               transportation system that complement existing public
                                               bus and rail transit service. (MPSP/JP)
Page 2-190                                                                             Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Public Transit
                                                        M3
                          page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                   Page 2-191
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-192                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Roadways
                                                                                                               M4
Streets and Roadways
Policies in this section provide for streets that are designed to balance the
diverse needs of pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, and motorists. Streets
will be categorized according to both function and typology, considering the
surrounding land use context. Street improvements are designed to minimize
environmental and neighborhood impacts.
GOAL M 4.1
Street and Roadway System. Create a context-sensitive street and roadway
system that provides access to all users and recognizes the importance that
roads and streets play as public space. As such, the City shall strive to balance
the needs for personal travel, goods movement, parking, social activities,
business activities, and revenue generation, when planning, operating,
maintaining, and expanding the roadway network.
Policies
M 4.1.1      	       Emergency Access. The City shall develop a roadway
                     system that is redundant (i.e., includes multiple alternative
                     routes) to the extent feasible to ensure mobility in the
                     event of emergencies. (MPSP)
M 4.1.2        	     Balancing Community, Social, Environmental, and
                     Economic Goals. The City shall evaluate and strive
                     to address community, environmental, and citywide
                     economic development goals when adding or modifying
                     streets, roads, bridges, and other public rights-of-way.
                     (MPSP/PSR)
M 4.1.3       	      Community Outreach. The City shall conduct public             The Tower Bridge provides a bridge
                     outreach to community organizations and members of            crossing over the Sacramento River
                     the general public in corridor planning early in the project  for pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles
                                                                                   connecting Sacramento to the City of
                     development process to identify feasible opportunities to
                                                                                   West Sacramento.
                     provide community benefits and to lessen any potential
                     impacts of modifications to local streets and roadways.
                     (PI)
M 4.1.4        	     Partnerships with Other Agencies. The City shall work
                     with Caltrans, SACOG, Sacramento County, and other
                     agencies to inspect and maintain bridge facilities. (IGC)
M 4.1.5          	   Bridge Crossings. The City shall continue to work with
                     adjacent jurisdictions and other agencies (i.e. Regional
                     Transit) in the context of multimodal corridor planning
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-193

                                                                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                                       to determine the appropriate responsibilities to fund,
                                                                       evaluate, plan, design, construct, and maintain new river
                                                                       crossings. (IGC)
                                                 M 4.1.6        	      Roundabouts . Where feasible, the City shall consider
                                                                       roundabouts as an intersection traffic control option with
                                                                       demonstrated air quality, safety, and mobility benefits.
                                                                       (MPSP)
                                                 M 4.1.7        	      Sutters Landing Interchange. The City shall continue
                                                                       to evaluate the need for the Sutter’s Landing Parkway and
                                                                       Interchange depicted on the Circulation Diagram, and
                                                                       shall assess it within the citywide transportation network
                                                                       as part of the next five-year General Plan Update. (MPSP/
                                                                       PSR)
       Well-marked pedestrian crossings
               provide pedestrian safety at
  intersections and mid-block locations
            that helps encourage walking.
                          Photograph courtesy of
                                 Michael Zwahlen
 See M 2, Walkable Communities and LU            GOAL M 4.2
 4, Neighborhoods, LU 5, Centers, LU 6,
 Corridors, and LU 7, Employment for             Complete Streets . The City shall plan, design, operate and maintain
 additional policies on pedestrian facilities.   all streets and roadways to accommodate and promote safe and convenient
                                                 travel for all users – pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, and persons of all
                                                 abilities, as well as freight and motor vehicle drivers.
                                                 Policies
                                                 M 4.2.1          	    Accommodate All Users . The City shall ensure that
 See ER 3, Urban Forest for additional                                 all new roadway projects and any reconstruction projects
 policies on the city’s street tree canopy.
                                                                       designate sufficient travel space for all users including
                                                                       bicyclists, pedestrians, transit riders, and motorists except
                                                                       where pedestrians and bicyclists are prohibited by law
                                                                       from using a given facility. (MPSP)
Page 2-194                                                                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Roadways
                                                                                                                M4
M 4.2.2      	       Pedestrian and Bicycle-Friendly Streets . In areas
                     with high levels of pedestrian activity (e.g., employment
                     centers, residential areas, mixed-use areas, schools),
                     the City shall ensure that all street projects support
                     pedestrian and bicycle travel. Improvements may include
                     narrow lanes, target speeds less than 35 miles per hour,
                     sidewalk widths consistent with the Pedestrian Master
                     Plan, street trees, high-visibility pedestrian crossings, and
                     bikeways (e.g. Class II and Class III bike lanes, bicycle
                     boulevards, separated bicycle lanes and/or parallel multi-
                     use pathways). (MPSP)
M 4.2.3      	       Adequate Street Tree Canopy . The City shall ensure
                     that all new roadway projects and major reconstruction
                     projects provide for the development of an adequate
                     street tree canopy. (MPSP)
M 4.2.4        	     Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities on Bridges . The
                     City shall identify existing and new bridges that can be
                     built, widened, or restriped to add pedestrian and/or
                     bicycle facilities. (MPSP)
M 4.2.5        	     Multi-Modal Corridors . Consistent with the
                     Roadway Network and Street Typologies established
                     in this General Plan, the City shall designate multi-
                     modal corridors in the Central City, within and between
                     urban centers, along major transit lines, and/or along
                     commercial corridors appropriate for comprehensive
                     multimodal corridor planning and targeted investment
                     in transit, bikeway, and pedestrian path improvements if
                     discretionary funds become available. (MPSP)
                                                                                   Safe pedestrian crossings, on-street
                                                                                   parking, street trees, and landscaped
                                                                                   medians on Del Paso Boulevard.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-195

                                                                           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Traffic circle in midtown Sacramento.
                                        M 4.2.6       	    Identify and Fill Gaps in Complete Streets . The
                                                           City shall identify streets that can be made “complete”
                                                           either through a reduction in the number or width of travel
                                                           lanes or through two-way conversions, with consideration
                                                           for emergency vehicle operations. The City shall consider
                                                           including new bikeways, sidewalks, on-street parking, and
                                                           exclusive transit lanes on these streets by re- arranging
                                                           and/or re-allocating how the available space within the
                                                           public right of way issued. All new street configurations
                                                           shall provide for adequate emergency vehicle operation.
                                                           (PSR)
                                        GOAL M 4.3
                                        Neighborhood Traffic. Enhance the quality of life within existing
                                        neighborhoods through the use of neighborhood traffic management and
                                        traffic calming techniques, while recognizing the City’s desire to provide a
                                        grid system that creates a high level of connectivity.
                                        Policy
                                        M 4.3.1     	      Neighborhood Traffic Management . The City shall
                                                           continue wherever possible to design streets and approve
                                                           development applications in a manner as to reduce high
                                                           traffic flows and parking problems within residential
                                                           neighborhoods. (RDR/MPSP)
                                        M 4.3.2	           Traffic Calming Measures . Consistent with the
                                                           Roadway Network and Street Typology policies in this
                                                           General Plan and Goal M 4.3, the City shall use traffic
                                                           calming measures to reduce vehicle speeds and volumes
                                                           while also encouraging walking and bicycling.
Page 2-196                                                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Roadways
                                                                                  M4
GOAL M 4.4
Roadway Functional Classification and Street Typology. Maintain
an interconnected system of streets that allows travel on multiple routes by
multiple modes, balancing access, mobility and place- making functions with
sensitivity to the existing and planned land use context of each corridor
and major street segment.
Policy
M 4.4.1        	     Roadway Network Development. The City shall
                     develop the roadway network depicted in the Circulation
                     Diagram is shown in Figures M4 and M4a. The lanes
                     shown in these figures represent the number expected
                     to be constructed by 2035 based on current funding
                     projections.
                    Street Functional Classification
                    The City of Sacramento’s streets are classified b ased
                    on the following functional classifications.
                     ■■ Major Arterial: A four to six-lane street that serves
                        longer distance trips and serves as the primary route
                        for moving traffic through the city connecting urban
                        centers, residential neighborhoods, and commercial
                        centers to one another, or to the regional transportation
                        network. Movement of people and goods, also known
                        as “mobility,” rather than access to adjacent land uses,
                        is the primary function of an arterial street. These
                        streets carry moderate-to-heavy vehicular movement,
                        low-to-high pedestrian and bicycle movements, and
                        moderate-to-high transit movement. Typical major
                        arterials have right-of-way widths of 80 to 150 feet.
                        Arterials configured as boulevards have right-of-way
                        widths of 90 to 180 feet.
                     ■■ Minor Arterial: A two-lane street that serves longer
                        distance trips and provides access to the regional
                        transportation system. These streets carry low-to-
                        moderate vehicular movement, low-to-high pedestrian
                        and bicycle movements, and moderate-to-high transit
                        movement. These roadways typically have high levels
                        of access control. Typical minor arterial streets have
                        right-of-way widths of 50 to 90 feet.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                             Page 2-197

                                                        Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                     ■■  Major Collector: A two-to four-lane street that primarily
                                         provides travel between arterial streets and collector
                                         or local streets and, secondarily, provides access
                                         to abutting properties. These streets carry low-
                                         to- moderate vehicular movement, low-to-heavy
                                         pedestrian movement, moderate-to-heavy bicycle
                                         movement, and low-to-moderate transit movement.
                                         These roadways have medians and moderate access
                                         control. Typical major collector streets have right-of-
                                         way widths of 60 to 120 feet.
                                     ■■  Minor Collector: A two-lane street that connects
                                         residential uses to the major street system. These
                                         roadways are undivided and have lower levels of access
                                         control to abutting properties control than arterials or
                                         major collectors. Typical minor collector streets have
                                         right-of-way widths of 40 to 80 feet.
                                     ■■  Local: A two-lane street that provides direct access
                                         to abutting land uses. Local streets serve the interior
                                         of a neighborhood. These streets carry low vehicular
                                         movement, low-to-heavy pedestrian movement, and
                                         low-to- moderate bicycle movement. Typical local
                                         streets have right-of-way widths of 40 to 60 feet.
                                    Street Typology
                                    Street typologies expand upon the functional
                                    classification and take into account street context,
                                    land use context, and travel mode prioritization. This
                                    typology ensures that street standards are not uniformly
                                    applied but consider a street’s relation to surrounding
                                    land uses, appropriate travel speeds, and need to
                                    accommodate multiple travel modes and user abilities.
                                    Table M 1 lists the street types appropriate for each
                                    functional classification.
           Table M 1	      Street Typology System Integrating Street Function and
                           Type
                                                            Street Type
              Functional
                 Class       Residential         Mixed-Use           Commercial       Industrial
                               Street              Street               Street          Street
           Major Arterial                                                l               l
           Minor Arterial       l                   l                    l               l
           Major Collector      l                   l                    l               l
           Minor Collector      l                   l                    l               l
           Local                l                   l                                    l
Page 2-198                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Roadways
                                                                                 M4
                    Most street types can be found in more than one
                    functional class, and vice versa. Street design should
                    consider both street function and street type when
                    improvements are made to the multi-modal street
                    system. For example, a street that has an arterial
                    function and a residential type will have different
                    characteristics and design features than a residential
                    street with a collector or local access function.
                    Residential arterial streets serve longer distance trips
                    than residential collector or local streets. As such,
                    maintaining the through capacity should be a higher
                    priority on a residential arterial than on a residential
                    collector or local street. Similarly, a mixed-use collector
                    street and an industrial collector street have different
                    characteristics. A mixed-use collector emphasizes
                    accommodating several transportation modes while an
                    industrial collector emphasizes accommodating heavy
                    trucks and automobiles.
                     ■■ Residential Streets: Residential Streets serve two major
                        purposes. Minor arterials that serve as residential
                        streets balance multi-modal mobility with land access.
                        As collector or local streets, residential streets are
                        designed to emphasize walking, bicycling, and property
                        access. In both cases, residential streets tend to be
                        more pedestrian-oriented than commercial streets.
                     ■■ Mixed Use Streets: Mixed Use Streets serve retail
                        and mixed land uses including downtown areas
                        and neighborhood centers and corridors. Unlike
                        commercial streets, mixed use streets are designed to
                        promote walking, bicycling, and transit with attractive
                        streetscape and pedestrian- oriented design elements,
                        and on-street parking to serve adjacent retail uses.
                        Narrower street widths can be used to reduce travel
                        speeds on main street segments.
                     ■■ Commercial Streets: The most common commercial
                        streets are strip commercial arterials. Strip commercial
                        arterials have historically served commercial areas
                        containing numerous small retail strip centers with
                        buildings set back behind fronting parking lots. Many
                        commercial streets are anticipated to transition over
                        time, as redevelopment/reuse occurs, to incorporate
                        many of the characteristics of the Mixed-Use Street
                        typology.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                            Page 2-199

                                           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                         ■■  Industrial Streets: Industrial Streets are designed to
                             accommodate significant volumes of large vehicles
                             such as trucks, trailers, and other delivery vehicles.
                             Because these areas are relatively low-density, bicycle
                             and pedestrian travel is more infrequent than in other
                             types of neighborhoods, but still should be minimally
                             accommodated.
           M 4.4.2     	 Transportation Performance Metrics . The City
                         shall apply appropriate transportation performance
                         metrics and thresholds in a manner consistent with
                         State law and the community values expressed in the
                         goals and policies of this general plan when measuring
                         transportation system impacts for subsequent projects,
                         making General Plan consistency determinations, and
                         developing transportation financing programs. (RDR/
                         MPSP/FB)
           M 4.4.3   	   One-way to Two-way Street Conversions . The City
                         shall consider one-way streets for potential conversion
                         into two-way to make them more transit, bicycle, and
                         pedestrian friendly. (MPSP/PSR)
           M 4.4.4 	     Traffic Signal Management . To improve traffic
                         flow and associated fuel economy of vehicles traveling
                         on city streets, the City shall synchronize the remaining
                         estimated 50 percent of the city’s eligible traffic signals by
                         2035, while ensuring that signal timing considers safe and
                         efficient travel for all modes.
Page 2-200                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015

                                                                                                                                                                             Figure M4
                                                                                                                                                          Citywide Circulation Diagram
2(6)                                                            2(6)                                                                        4(4)
                                                                                                         2(2)
   0(4)
   0(2)                           þ
                                  }
                                  ·
                                  |
                                  99
                                                         2(2)
                      0(4)
                      0(4)
                                       2(4 )                                                                                        0(2)
                                                                                                                                    0(2)
              "
              $5
              #
              !
                                                                                                  4(6)
                                                          )
                                                      2(2
                                  0(42)                                                              2(2)                                                                                                                           2(2)
       4(6)                                                                                                                         4(6)                                                                                                                 2(4)
                                                                    4(6)           6(6)
                                                                                                                                                              4(4)                              4(4)
                                                                                                                          4(4)                                                                                                   2(3)
                                2(2)                     0(2)
                                                                                                 8(8)                                             6(6                                                               2(4)
                                       4(4)          6(6)                                                                                             )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2(2)                                    4(4)                                                           4(4)
                                                         2(2
                                                                )
                                                                     4(4)                                                 2(2)                                "
                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                              $
                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2(4 )
                                                                             2(4)                                                                               4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3(3)
                                                      2)
                                                    0(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2(3)
                                                                                                                     6(6)                                2(2)
                                                                                   0(2)
                                                                                                            4(4)                                                                                2(2)
                                                                      "
                                                                      $
                                                                      #
                                                                      !
                                                                      80
                                                                                              2(2)                                                              4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4(4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             )
                                       2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                4(4 )                  2(2 )
                                                                              4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2(4)                                                      2(4)
                                                                                                                                                                            2(2)
                                                                                                                                      2(2)
                                                           2(2)                                       2(4)
                  )                                                                                                                                                         4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2(2) 4(4)
              2(2                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                       4(2)                                                                                                                                                                                              6(6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2(2)       8(8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                              See Figure Inset                                                                                                                                      )
                                                                                                                                    0(2)                                           þ
                                                                                                                                                                                   }
                                                                                                                                                                                   ·
                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                            4(4                                              4(4)
                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                      $5
                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                      !             4(4)                                                           160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6(6)
                                                                                                                          3(4)
                                                                                                                                   2(4)
                                                                                                                     2(2)
                                                                                                                                           4(4)                                                                                                                                          6(6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2(4)
                                                                                                  4(41)(14)        3(3)
                                                                                                           ( 3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                            3(3)                                       2(2)                                                                                                                                             4(4
                                                                                                                                   3(2)                                                                                                                                                                                     4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                     2(2)                                                                2(2)
                                                                                           3(3)                                     2(3)                                    4(4)                                                                                                                                                             6(6)
                                                                                                 2(3                 2(2)                                                                                                                                                                               3(3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             )
                                                                                                     )                       3(3)                                                                                                                        4(2                                                      2(2)
                                                                                               2(4)
                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                            +
                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                            3(4)
                                                                                                                     4(4)                                                                2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       4(2)                                                                      2(2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4(4)                                                                2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2(2)                   3(2 )                                                                                                                 4(4
                                                                                                            4(3)                                  4(4)                                                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                        2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6(6
                                                                                                                                                  2(2)       3(3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                4(4 )                                           4(4)                        4(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (                                          4(4)                              4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0(2)                    6(6)
                                                                                          2(4)
                                                                                                                            4(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                             2(4)
                                                                                                                                                                     2(4)                                                                                                                                                                                       4(6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2(2)                                                   4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2(2)                      0(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                      4(4)                                                                                          4(4)
                                                                                                      2(2)                                                           4(4)                                                                                                                                                        4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1(1)                                               4(6)
                                                                                                                                                                                   2(2)
                                                                                                                                   2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                           4(4)                                                                                                                                                  2(4)
                                                                                              4(4)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2(6)
                                                              2(2                                                                                                                                                                                            4(4)
                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2(2)                               4(4)                           4(4)
                                                                                                 2(2
                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                                                   6(6)                            4(4)                                                                                                                          2(4)                  2(2)
                                                                                                                                                  4(4)
                                                                           2(2 )
                        2(2)                                                                     4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                    4(4)
                                              4(4)                                                                                                                                                                                  4(4)                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                                                                          þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                          }
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                          99                                                                                                             4(4
                                                  2(2)                                                                                        4(4)                                                                        6(6)                                           4(4)
                                                                       4(4)                   2(2)
                                                                               4(2
                                                                                   )
                                                                                                         4(4)                                             2(2)
                                   )                                                   "5
                                                                                       !
                                                                                       $
                                                                                       #                                                                                                               4(4)                                                                                         4(4)
                               4(4
                                              )                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4(6)
                                          2(2                                                                                                                4(4)                                                            2(2)
                                                                                                                   2(2)
                                                                                                                                           0(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4(4)                     2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                      0(6))              0(20)(4                                                                   2(2)                                           4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                       0(40(4
                                                                                                                                                                           ) )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4(4)                              4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Notes:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The number of lanes shown represents the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ultimate size of the roadway, however the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4(4)              5(5)                                              City may provide fewer lanes than indicated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            so long as the width of the right-of-way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is maintained.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ..
                                   Legend
                                          X(Y)
                                          X(Y)             Existing (Future) Number of Lanes                                                                                Planned Local Road                                                                      City Limits
                                                           Freeway                                                                                                          Planned Arterial                                                                        Waterways
                                                           Arterial                                                                                                         Planned Major Collector
                                                           Major Collector                                                                                                  Planned Minor Collector                                                                                                                                              0                            1                 2 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Miles
                                                           Minor Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Data Source: City of Sacramento, 2012;


                                                                                                                                                                           Figure M4A
                                                                                                                                       Citywide Circulation Diagram - Central City Inset
                                                                                                         4( 4 )   4( 4 ) (4)                          2(24( 4                                                                                             4(4)                   6(6)          6(6)     4(4)
                                  2(2 )                2(2)                                                              4                               ) )                                                                                   2(2)    4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                             4( 4 )
      4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                       }·|
                                                                                                                                                                       þ
                                                                                                                                                                     160
    2(4)
                                                                             0( 2 )                                                                                    160
                                                                                                                                                                          þ
                                                                                                                                                                          }
                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                          ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6(6)
                                                                                              22((22))
                                                  2(2)                 0(2)
                        2(2)                                                       4( 4 )
                                       4(4)               4(4)
                                                        0(4)
"
!
$
#                      0(2 )                       3(4)
                                                 3(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                        0( 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                                                                                0(4                                                                                                                                                    2(2)
                                                2(2)                           2(4)                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2( 2 )                                                   2(2)
                                                                                      4(4)
    2(2)                                      0(2)                                                   2(2)2(2)
                                                                                                                   4(4)
                       )
                    0(3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2( 2 )
                )
             3(3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2( 2
                                                                                                                                                         2(2)                                                             2(2)2(2)                                                                                                                                      )
           8( 8 )                                                                     3(3)       3(3)
                                               2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2(2)                                                                       2(2)                                         4(2)
                                                          3(3)                                                                                                    2(2)
                                                                 3(3)                                                                                              3(3)
                                                                                                                                                                  3(3)                                                                                                                       4(2)
                                3(3)                                                                                                                                2(2)                                  4(4)                                                                                                                                                                   3(32( 2)
                                         3(3)    3(3)                                                                                                              2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                               )
              4(4)
                       1(1 )    4(3)                                                                                                           2(2)
                                                                                                           3(3)                                                                                3(3)                                                              2(2)
                                                                                                             3(2)                                                            2(2)              3(3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2(2)                                                                             2(2(2)2)       2( 2)
                                                                                                                                                                             2(2)                                                                                                                                             2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4(2)
                        3(3)                                                          2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                               3(3)7(7)
                                        3(3)                                             3(3)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4( 2)
                                                                                                                  2(3)                                   2(2)                                                                 2(2)
                                              3(3)                                                                                                                           2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4( 4 4(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
              7( 7 )                                                                                               3(3)
                                                                                                                  3(3)           2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4(4)
                                                                                   2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                2(2)
                         3(3)          2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                             4( 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2(2)                                             )                                        2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2( 2 ) 2(2)
                                   2(3)                                                                                                                                                                                     8( 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2(2)
                                                          ,- ) -
                                                               ,
                                                               +
                                                               *                                                                                        3(3)    3(3)                                                                                                                4(4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        )
           8( 8 )
                                  2(4)                 3(4)
                                                         80
                                                           )*+                                      10(10)
                                                                                                  4(4)                                                           4(4) 3(3)
                                                                                                          3(3)
                                2(4)                     3(4)                                4(4)
                                                                               4(34(3)
                                                                                   )                                                                                                                                           4(4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2( 2 )
                                  2(2)                                                                                                                                                                                      4( 4 )
                                                                                                                                                         2(2)                                                                   )
                                                                                                                                                                                      2( 2 )
                                                                                                         2(2)                          2(2 )
                                              2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2(2) 2( 2 )                                                                                                        4( 4 )
                                                                         2( 2)                                                 2(2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7( 7 )
                                                                                                                                          0(2)                                                                                              2( 2 )                                                                                             4(4 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2(4)                                                     2( 2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                                                  4(4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2( 4 )
                                                                                                                                                      4(2)                            2( 2 )                                                                                                                                                                            1(1)
                                                                                                          2(2)
                                                                                                                                                      4(2 )                                                                                                                                 Notes:
                                                                                                           2(2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4(4 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2( 2 )
                                                                 2(4)2( 4)                                                                                                                                  4( 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )                                                                          The number of lanes shown represents the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2(2)
                                                                                                                                                                         )                                                                                                                  ultimate size of the roadway, however the
                                                                                                                                                                     4(4                                                                                                                                       fewerr lanes than indicated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City may provide few                                       2(2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            so long as the width of the right-of-way
                                                                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                            2(4)                                                  4( 4                   4( 4 )                                                                                             is maintained.
                                                                             Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                        X(Y)              Existing (Future) Number of Lanes                                                              Planned Local Road                                                                    City Limits
                                                                                          Freeway                                                                                        Planned Arterial                                                                      Waterways
                                                                                          Arterial                                                                                       Planned Major Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0            0.25               0.5 Miles
                                                                                          Major Collector                                                                                Planned Minor Collector
                                                                                          Minor Collector                                                                                                                                                                                                          Data Source: City of Sacramento, 2012;

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-204                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Bikeways
                                                                                                                M5
Bikeways
Policies in this section support and encourage bicycling, given that 40 percent
of all trips are 2 miles or shorter. The construction of a comprehensive
citywide bikeway network, support facilities such as convenient and secure
bicycle parking, and an educated driving public will facilitate increased
bicycling.
GOAL M 5.1
Integrated Bicycle System . Create and maintain a safe, comprehensive,
and integrated bicycle system and set of support facilities throughout
the city that encourage bicycling that is accessible to all. Provide bicycle
facilities, programs and services and implement other transportation and
land use policies as necessary to achieve the City’s bicycle mode share goal as
documented in the Bicycle Master Plan.
Policies
M 5.1.1            	  Bicycle Master Plan . The City shall maintain and
                      implement a Bicycle Master Plan that carries out the goals
                      and policies of the General Plan All new development
                      shall be consistent with the applicable provisions of the
                                                                                    Safe and convenient bikeways reduce
                      Bicycle Master Plan. (MPSP)                                   conflicts between bicyclists and motor
                                                                                    vehicles on streets, and bicyclists, and
M 5.1.2           	   Appropriate Bikeway Facilities . The City shall              pedestrians on sidewalks.
                      provide bikeway facilities that are appropriate to the street
                      classifications and type, number of lanes, traffic volume,
                      and speed on all rights-of-way. (MPSP)
M 5.1.3         	     Continuous Bikeway Network . The City shall
                      provide a continuous bikeway network consisting of bike-
                      friendly facilities connecting residential neighborhoods
                      with key destinations and activity centers (e.g., transit
                      facilities, shopping areas, education institutions,
                      employment centers). (PI)
M 5.1.4        	      Conformance to Applicable S t a ndards . The
                      City shall require all bikeways to conform to applicable
                      Federal, State, and City standards while considering a full
                      range of innovative bikeway design best practices. (MPSP)
M 5.1.5      	        Motorists, Bicyclists, and Pedestrian Conflicts .
                      The City shall develop safe and convenient bikeways,
                      streets, roadways, and intersections that reduce conflicts
                      between bicyclists and motor vehicles on streets, between
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-205

                                                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                           bicyclists and pedestrians on multi-use trails and
                                                           sidewalks, and between all users at intersections. (MPSP/
                                                           PI)
                                          M 5.1.6     	    Connections between New Development and
                                                           Bicycle Facilities . The City shall require that new
                                                           development provides connections to and does not
                                                           interfere with existing and proposed bicycle facilities.
                                                           (RDR)
                                          M 5.1.7      	   Bikeway Requirements . The City shall provide
                                                           bike lanes on all repaved and/or reconstructed arterial
                                                           and collector streets to the maximum extent feasible.
                                                           The appropriate facility type for each roadway segment
                                                           shall be consistent with the Roadway Network and Street
                                                           Typologies defined in this General Plan. (RDR)
                                          M 5.1.8  	       Connections between New Development and
                                                           Bikeways . The City shall ensure that new commercial
                                                           and residential development projects construct bikeway
                                                           facilities identified in the Bicycle Master Plan that have a
                                                           direct nexus with the project. (RDR)
                                          M 5.1.9    	     Conversion of Underused Facilities . The City
                                                           shall convert underused rights-of-way, including
                                                           drainage canals, freeway easements, railroad corridors,
                                                           and underutilized travel and parking lanes to bikeways
                                                           bicycle and/or pedestrian facilities where possible and
                                                           appropriate. (MPSP/SO)
                                          M 5.1.10       	 Bike Safety for Children . The City shall support
                                                           infrastructure improvements and programs that
                                                           encourage children to bike safely to school. (MPSP/SO)
                                          M 5.1.11      	  Bike Facilities in New Developments . The City
A Sacramento Police officer properly fits                  shall require that major new development projects (e.g., ,
a bicycle helmet for elementary school                     employment centers, educational institutions, recreational
students.
                                                           and retail destinations, and commercial centers) provide
                                                           bicycle parking (i.e., short-term bicycle parking for
                                                           visitors and long-term bicycle parking for residents or
                                                           employees), personal lockers, showers, and other bicycle-
                                                           support facilities. (RDR)
                                          M 5.1.12       	 Bicycle Parking at Transit Facilities . The City shall
                                                           coordinate with transit operators to provide for secure
                                                           short- and long-term bicycle parking at all light rail
                                                           stations, bus rapid transit stations, and major bus transfer
                                                           stations. (IGC/JP)
 Page 2-206                                                                                         Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Bikeways
                                                                                                          M5
                                                                                Gathering at the State Capitol to kick-
                                                                                off bicycle commute month for the
                                                                                Sacramento Region.
M 5.1.13        	    Public Information and Education . The City
                     shall promote bicycling through public information
                     and education, including the publication of literature
                     concerning bicycle safety and the health and environmental
                     benefit of bicycling. (PI)
M 5.1.14      	      Encourage Bicycle Use . The City shall encourage
                     bicycle use in all neighborhoods, especially where short
                     trips are most common. (PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                      Page 2-207

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-208                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Parking
                                                                                                                 M6
Parking
Policies in this section focus on providing sufficient parking for businesses,
while protecting adjacent neighborhoods and the environment. Reduced
parking requirements will be provided where appropriate to promote
walkable communities and non-automobile forms of transportation. On-
street parking use will be maximized through the use of parking management
tools. Parking pricing will continue to be applied in appropriate locations.
GOAL M 6.1
Managed Parking. Provide and manage parking such that it balances
the citywide goals of economic development, livable neighborhoods,
sustainability, and public safety with the compact multi-modal urban
environment prescribed by the General Plan.
Policies
M 6.1.1          	   Appropriate Parking . The City shall manage public
                     parking and regulate the provision and management of
                     private parking to support parking availability and auto
                     access to neighborhoods across the city, with consideration
                     for access to existing and funded transit service, mixed-
                     use development, and shared parking opportunities.
                     (RDR)
M 6.1.2        	     Reduce Minimum Parking Standards . The City
                     shall reduce minimum parking standards over time and
                     eliminate minimum parking requirements when and
                     where appropriate to promote walkable neighborhoods
                     and districts and to increase the use of transit and bicycles.
                     (RDR/PSR)
M 6.1.3          	   Identify Parking Deficiencies and Conflicts. The City
                     shall monitor the supply and utilization of public parking
                     to identify deficiencies in its availability and/or conflicts
                     as they develop, particularly in the Central City. (PSR)
M 6.1.4      	       Reduction of Parking Areas . The City shall strive
                     to reduce the amount of land devoted to parking through
                     such measures as the elimination or reduction of minimum
                     off-street parking requirements in selected areas or
                     citywide, support for the development of shared public
                     parking structures, the application of shared parking
                     for mixed-use developments, and the implementation             Multi-level parking structure.
                     of transportation demand management plans to reduce
                     parking needs. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-209

                                                                     Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                        M 6.1.5 	   Maximize On-Street Parking Turnover. The City
                                                    shall implement parking management tools (including
                                                    emerging technology) that maximize on-street parking
                                                    turnover, where appropriate. (RDR)
                                        M 6.1.6  	  Residential Permit Parking. The City shall manage the
                                                    city’s Residential Permit Parking (RPP) areas in a way that
                                                    protects the residential character of the neighborhoods,
                                                    ensures adequate parking availability for residents, and
                                                    supports the needs of small, neighborhood-supporting
                                                    businesses. (RDR/SO)
                                        M 6.1.7  	  Disincentives for Single-Occupant Vehicle Trips
                                                    . The City shall discourage single-occupant vehicle
                                                    trips through parking supply and management programs
                                                    and policies, including pricing of on-street and/or off-
                                                    street parking, where appropriate to maintain adequate
                                                    availability. (RDR/SO)
                                        M 6.1.8   	 Separate Parking Costs . The City shall allow
                                                    projects to separate the cost of parking from the cost
                                                    of commercial and/or residential space in lease or sale
                                                    agreements. (RDR)
     Sacramento neighborhood with a
residential parking permit requirement.
Page 2-210                                                                                 Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Parking
                                                    M6
                      page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                               Page 2-211
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-212                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Goods Management
                                                                                   M7
Goods Movement
Policies in this section support the movement of goods via rail, truck,
marine (i.e., port), and air transportation modes. Policies also seek to reduce
the impacts of rail and truck operations on adjacent neighborhoods and
sensitive land uses.
GOAL M 7.1
Safe Movement of Goods. Provide for the safe and efficient movement
of goods to support commerce while maintaining livability in the city and
region.
Policies
M 7.1.1       	      Efficient Goods Movement. The City shall support
                     infrastructure improvements and the use of emerging
                     technologies that facilitate the clearance, timely movement,
                     and security of trade, including facilities for the efficient
                     intermodal transfer of goods between truck, rail, marine,
                     and air transportation modes. (MPSP)
M 7.1.2         	    Goods Movement by Rail. The City shall work with
                     railroad operators to facilitate the transport by rail of
                     goods through the city. (JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                              Page 2-213

                                                 Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           M 7.1.3         	   Minimize Freight Trains during Peak Hours. The
                               City shall work with railroad operators to coordinate
                               schedules to keep freight trains out of Central City during
                               peak travel hours. (JP)
           M 7.1.4      	      Train Noise Minimization. The City shall work with
                               railroad operators to minimize the impact of train noise
                               on adjacent sensitive land uses. (RDR/JP)
           M 7.1.5       	     Truck Traffic Route Designation. Consistent with the
                               Roadway Network and Street Typologies in this General
                               Plan Element, the City shall designate official truck
                               routes, where goods movement and loading/unloading
                               are priority functions of the street/roadway to minimize
                               the impacts of truck traffic on residential neighborhoods
                               and other sensitive land uses. (MPSP)
           M 7.1.6         	   Truck Traffic Noise Minimization. The City shall
                               seek to minimize noise and other impacts of truck
                               traffic, deliveries, and staging in residential and mixed-use
                               neighborhoods. (RDR)
           M 7.1.7	            Port of Sacramento. The City shall support the Port of
                               Sacramento’s proposed deep water dredging and facility
                               expansion plans. (IGC)
           Port of Sacramento.
Page 2-214                                                               Adopted March 3, 2015

MOBILITY : Goods Management
                                                          M7
                            page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                     Page 2-215
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-216                       Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Airports
                                                                                                             M8
Aviation
Policies in this section support general and commercial aviation, while
protecting surrounding uses and promoting efficient ground connections to
airport facilities.
                                                                                  See LU 8, Public/Quasi-Public and
                                                                                  Special Uses, for additional policies on
                                                                                  aviation and airports.
                                                                                 Sacramento International Airport.
GOAL M 8.1
Aviation Facilities. Promote general and commercial aviation facilities
within the parameters of compatible surrounding uses.
Policies
M 8.1.1         	    Aviation Services. The City shall work with the
                     Sacramento County Airport System (SCAS) to plan for a
                     full range of aviation services and promote airline service
                     that meets the present and future needs of residents and
                     the business community. (MPSP)
M 8.1.2       	      Efficient Ground Connections. The City shall
                     promote efficient ground connections to air transport
                     facilities, including the Green Line LRT Extension to the
                     Sacramento International Airport. (MPSP)
M 8.1.3	             Helicopter Use. The City shall maintain designated
                     areas for helicopter use. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-217

                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Del Paso Boulevard street improvements and beautification.
Page 2-218                                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015
MOBILITY : Transportation Funding
                                                                                                                M9
Transportation Funding
Policies in this section support the development of new locally-controlled
transportation funds for the construction, maintenance, management, and
operation of the transportation system. Federal and State funding will
continue to be pursued for projects that serve local and regional travel needs.
The implementation of key transportation facilities will be advanced through
innovative funding measures.
GOAL M 9.1
Transportation Funding. Provide sufficient funding to construct, maintain,
and operate transportation facilities and services needed to achieve the City’s
mobility goals.
Policies
                                                                                    Construction of new light rail tracks.
M 9.1.1      	       New Development. The City shall require new
                     development to contribute towards the construction of
                     offsite facilities and provision of services to achieve the
                     City’s mobility goals. (RDR/FB)
M 9.1.2      	       Dedicated Funding Sources. The City shall investigate
                     additional sources of funding and support the
                     development of a stable, dedicated funding source for
                     all modes to provide continuing maintenance, operation,
                     and management of the city’s transportation network.
                     (FB)
M 9.1.3      	       Use of Pricing . The City shall consider pricing travel
                     and parking, where necessary, to manage the traffic and/
                     or parking demand where appropriate. (FB)
M 9.1.4	             Funding of Facilities for Urban Centers. The City
                     may advance the implementation of transportation
                     backbone facilities in the Central Business District and
                     other urban centers through bonding and innovative
                     funding measures. (FB)
M 9.1.5	             Fair Share for Transportation Infrastructure
                     Improvements. The City shall require all new
                     development to dedicate right-of-way, construct
                     facilities, or pay its fair share for needed transportation
                     infrastructure improvements that support all travel modes,
                     including pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facilities, roadway
                     improvements, and transportation demand management
                     (TDM) programs and services. (RDR/MPSP/FB)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-219

PUBLIC HEALTH
AND SAFETY
The City of Sacramento is committed to sustaining
the health and safety of its residents, labor force,
and visitors and recognizes their importance in
achieving the City’s vision as the most livable city in
the nation. Protection from the risks of natural and
man-made hazards, crime, and disease are essential
in establishing a sense of well-being for residents
and important considerations in attracting new
businesses to the city that will provide quality jobs.
                                                        Page 2-281

                                                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 Police officers utilize vehicle, bicycle, and equestrian modes of travel to keep Sacramento safe.
Page 2-282                                                                                                           Adopted March 3, 2015
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Police Services
                                                                                  PHS 1
Police Services
Policies in this section provide for education, forming relationships with the
community, and the expansion of personnel and facilities commensurate
with population growth to serve and protect the long-term health, safety,
and well-being of all areas of the city. Cooperative programs with adjoining
jurisdictions and State and Federal agencies will continue to be implemented
to facilitate prompt response for a major emergency or event. Cooperative
relationships will be formed with community residents and businesses to
educate them about potential risks and prevention techniques. Development
applications will be reviewed for the layout and design of spaces and buildings
to maximize safety, utilizing “Crime Prevention through Environmental
Design” strategies.
GOAL PHS 1.1
Crime and Law Enforcement. Work cooperatively with the community,
regional law enforcement agencies, local government and other entities to
provide quality police service that protects the long-term health, safety,
and well-being of our city, reduce current and future criminal activity, and
incorporate design strategies into new development.
Policies
PHS 1.1.1	           Police Master Plan. The City shall maintain and
                     implement a Police Master Plan to address staffing and
                     facility needs, service goals, and deployment strategies.
                     (MPSP)
PHS 1.1.2	           Response Time Standards. The City shall strive to
                     achieve and maintain optimal response times for all call
                     priority levels to provide adequate police services for the
                     safety of all city residents and visitors. (MPSP)
PHS 1.1.3	           Staffing Standards. The City shall maintain optimum
                     staffing levels for both sworn police officers and civilian
                     support staff in order to provide quality police services to
                     the community. (MPSP)
PHS 1.1.4	           Timing of Services. The City shall ensure that
                     development of police facilities and delivery of services
                     keeps pace with development and growth in the city.
                     (MPSP/SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                              Page 2-283

                                                                          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           South Area Police Substation.
                                              PHS 1.1.5	 Distribution of Facilities. The City shall expand
                                                         the distribution of police substation type facilities to
                                                         allow deployment from several smaller facilities located
                                                         strategically throughout the city and provide facilities in
                                                         underserved and new growth areas in order to provide
                                                         optimum response to all city residents. (MPSP)
                                              PHS 1.1.6	 Co-Location of Facilities. The City shall seek to co-
                                                         locate police facilities with other City facilities, such as fire
                                                         stations, to promote efficient use of space and provision
                                                         of police protection services within dense, urban portions
                                                         of the city. (MPSP)
                                              PHS 1.1.7	 Development Review. The City shall continue to include
  See the Land Use and Urban Design
  Element for policies related to development
                                                         the Police Department in the review of development
  design.                                                proposals to ensure that projects adequately address crime
                                                         and safety, and promote the implementation of Crime
                                                         Prevention through Environmental Design principles.
                                                         (RDR)
                                              PHS 1.1.8	 Development Fees for Facilities and Services. The
                                                         City shall require development projects to contribute fees
                                                         for police facilities. (RDR/FB)
                                              PHS 1.1.9	 Technology to Improve Safety. The City shall work
                                                         in partnership with appropriate agencies to incorporate
                                                         technology in public and private development to increase
                                                         public and personal safety. (RDR/MPSP)
North Area Police Substation.
 Page 2-284                                                                                        Adopted March 3, 2015

PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Police Services
                                                                                                          PHS 1
PHS 1.1.10	          Crime in Neighborhoods. The City shall work with
                     appropriate agencies and the community to reduce crime
                     in all neighborhoods. (IGC/JP/PI)
PHS 1.1.11	          Communication with the Community. The City shall
                     maintain communication with the community to improve
                     relationships and customer satisfaction, while continually
                     exploring innovative means of communication. (PI)
                                                                                 Police officer on horseback
                                                                                 communicating with a visitor to Old
                                                                                 Sacramento.
PHS 1.1.12	          Cooperative Delivery of Services. The City shall work
                     with local, State, and Federal criminal justice agencies to
                     promote regional cooperation in the delivery of services.
                     (IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-285

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-286                       Adopted March 3, 2015
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Fire Services
                                                                                 PHS 2
Fire Services
Policies in this section provide for coordinated fire protection and emergency
medical services to all areas of the city and address the needs of Sacramento
residents and businesses. Policies ensure a safe and healthy community
through the expansion of fire personnel and facilities commensurate with
population growth. Residents and businesses will be educated regarding
potential risks and fire prevention techniques, while existing and new
development will continue to be required to incorporate fire prevention and
suppression measures.
GOAL PHS 2.1
Fire Protection and Emergency Medical Services. Provide coordinated
fire protection and emergency medical services that address the needs
of Sacramento residents and businesses and maintain a safe and healthy
community.
Policies
PHS 2.1.1	            Fire Department Strategic Plan. The City shall maintain
                      and implement a Fire Department Strategic Plan.(MPSP)
PHS 2.1.2	            Response Time Standards. The City shall strive to
                      maintain emergency response times that provide optimal
                      fire protection and emergency medical services to the
                      community. (MPSP)
PHS 2.1.3	            Staffing Standards. The City shall maintain optimum
                      staffing levels for sworn, civilian, and support staff, in
                      order to provide quality fire protection and emergency
                      medical services to the community. (MPSP)
PHS 2.1.4	            Response Units and Facilities. The City shall provide
                      additional response units, staffing, and related capital
                      improvements, including constructing new fire stations,
                      as necessary, in areas where a fire company experiences
                      call volumes exceeding 3,500 in a year to prevent
                      compromising emergency response and ensure optimum
                      service to the community. (MPSP/SO/FB)
PHS 2.1.5	            Timing of Services. The City shall ensure that the
                      development of fire facilities and delivery of services
                      keeps pace with development and growth of the city.
                      (MPSP/SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                             Page 2-287

                                                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Fire Station No. 5, located on Broadway
        in the O’Neil Park neighborhood.
                                         PHS 2.1.6	 Locations of New Stations. The City shall ensure
                                                    that new fire station facilities are located strategically
                                                    throughout the city to provide optimum response times
                                                    to all areas. (MPSP)
                                         PHS 2.1.7	 Future Station Locations. The City shall require
                                                    developers to set aside land with adequate space for
                                                    future fire station locations in areas of new development.
                                                    (RDR)
                                         PHS 2.1.8	 Co-Location of Facilities. The City shall seek to co-
                                                    locate fire facilities with other City facilities, such as police
                                                    stations, to promote efficient use of space and provision
                                                    of fire protection and emergency medical services within
                                                    dense, urban portions of the city. (MPSP)
                                         PHS 2.1.9	 Advances in Technology. The City shall invest in, and
                                                    incorporate, future technological advances that enhance
                                                    the City’s ability to deliver emergency medical response,
                                                    fire-rescue, and fire prevention services more efficiently
                                                    and cost-effectively. (SO)
 Page 2-288                                                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Fire Services
                                                                                                      PHS 2
PHS 2.1.10	          Regional Cooperative Delivery. The City shall work
                     with the various fire protection districts and other
                     agencies to promote regional cooperative delivery of fire
                     protection and emergency medical services. (IGC)
PHS 2.1.11	          Development Fees for Facilities and Services. The
                     City shall require development projects to contribute fees
                     for fire protection services and facilities. (RDR/FB)
                                                                                Former Sacramento Fire Chief.
GOAL PHS 2.2
Fire Prevention Programs and Suppression. The City shall deliver fire
prevention programs that protect the public through education, adequate
inspection of existing development, and incorporation of fire safety features
in new development.
Policies
PHS 2.2.1	           Education. The City shall provide fire safety, prevention,
                     and emergency preparedness educational programs to
                     the public. (PI)
PHS 2.2.2	           Development Review. The City shall continue to include
                     the Fire Department in the review of development
                     proposals to ensure projects adequately address safe
                     design and on-site fire protection and comply with
                     applicable fire and building codes. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                    Page 2-289

                                                                          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                             PHS 2.2.3	 Fire Sprinkler Systems. The City shall promote
                                                        installation of fire sprinkler systems in new commercial
                                                        and residential development, and shall encourage the
                                                        installation of sprinklers in existing structures when it is
                                                        reasonable and not cost prohibitive. (RDR)
 See U 2, Water Systems, for additional
                                             PHS 2.2.4	 Water Supply for Fire Suppression. The City shall
 policies on water supply and water delivery            ensure that adequate water supplies are available for
 infrastructure and services.                           fire-suppression throughout the city, and shall require
                                                        development to construct all necessary fire suppression
                                                        infrastructure and equipment. (RDR/MPSP/SO)
                                             PHS 2.2.5	 High-Rise Development. The City shall require that
                                                        high rise structures include sprinkler systems and on-site
                                                        fire suppression equipment and materials, and be served by
                                                        fire stations containing truck companies with specialized
                                                        equipment for high-rise fire and/or emergency incidents.
                                                        (RDR)
                                             PHS 2.2.6	 Fire Safety Inspections. The City shall continue to
                                                        maintain a program consistent with requirements of State
                                                        law to inspect buildings not under authority of the Office
                                                        of the State Fire Marshall. (MPSP)
                                             PHS 2.2.7	 Wildland Hazards on City-Owned Spaces. The City
                                                        shall continue to remove excessive/overgrown vegetation
                                                        (e.g., trees, shrubs, weeds) and rubbish from City-owned
                                                        property to prevent and minimize fire risks to surrounding
                                                        properties. (SO)
                                             PHS 2.2.8	 Wildland Hazards on Private Properties. The City
                                                        shall continue to require private property owners to
                                                        remove excessive/overgrown vegetation (e.g., trees,
                                                        shrubs, weeds) and rubbish to the satisfaction of the
                                                        Fire Department to prevent and minimize fire risks to
                                                        surrounding properties. (RDR)
                                             PHS 2.2.9	 Development Review for Emergency Response. The
                                                        City shall continue to include appropriate emergency
                                                        responders (e.g., Fire Department staff) in the review of
                                                        development proposals to ensure emergency response
                                                        times can be adequalty maintainted. (RDR)
Page 2-290                                                                                       Adopted March 3, 2015

PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Fire Services
                                                                    PHS 2
                                      page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                Page 2-291
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-292                       Adopted March 3, 2015
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Hazardous Materials
                                                                                                              PHS 3
Hazardous Materials
Policies in this section continue practices for the documentation, monitoring,
clean up, and re-use of hazardous materials and sites. In addition to their
contribution to the safety and well-being of residents, businesses, and visitors
to Sacramento, these actions are important contributors to the reduction of
surface and groundwater pollution, air pollution, and greenhouse gases.
                                                                                   Sacramento Recycling and Transfer
                                                                                   Station disposal site for household
                                                                                   hazardous waste.
GOAL PHS 3.1
Reduce Exposure to Hazardous Materials and Waste. Protect and
maintain the safety of residents, businesses, and visitors by reducing, and
where possible, eliminating exposure to hazardous materials and waste.
Policies
PHS 3.1.1	            Investigate Sites for Contamination. The City shall
                      ensure buildings and sites are investigated for the presence
                      of hazardous materials and/or waste contamination
                      before development for which City discretionary approval
                      is required. The City shall ensure appropriate measures
                      are taken to protect the health and safety of all possible
                      users and adjacent properties. (RDR)
PHS 3.1.2	            Hazardous Material Contamination Management
                      Plan. The City shall require that property owners
                      of known contaminated sites work with Sacramento
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                           Page 2-293

                                                                            Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                           County, the State, and/or Federal agencies to develop
                                                           and implement a plan to investigate and manage sites
                                                           that contain or have the potential to contain hazardous
                                                           materials contamination that may present an adverse
                                                           human health or environmental risk. (RDR)
                                                PHS 3.1.3	 Household Hazardous Waste Collection Programs.
                                                           The City shall continue to provide household hazardous
                                                           waste collection programs to encourage proper disposal
                                                           of products containing hazardous materials or hazardous
                                                           wastes. (MPSP/SO)
                                                PHS 3.1.4	 Transportation Routes. The City shall restrict transport
                                                           of hazardous materials within Sacramento to designated
                                                           routes. (RDR/MPSP)
                                                PHS 3.1.5	 Clean Industries. The City shall strive to maintain
See LU 7, Employment, for additional                       existing clean industries in the city and discourage the
policies on clean industries that feature light            expansion of businesses, with the exception of health
manufacturing, research and development,                   care and related medical facilities that require on-site
and high technology uses.                                  treatment of hazardous industrial waste. (RDR)
                                                PHS 3.1.6	 Compatibility with Hazardous Materials Facilities.
                                                           The City shall ensure that future development of
                                                           treatment, storage, or disposal facilities is consistent with
                                                           the County’s Hazardous Waste Management Plan, and
                                                           that land uses near these facilities, or proposed sites for
                                                           the storage or use of hazardous materials, are compatible
                                                           with their operation. (RDR/IGC)
                                                PHS 3.1.7	 Education. The City shall continue to educate residents
                                                           and businesses on how to reduce or eliminate the use of
                                                           hazardous materials and products, and shall encourage
                                                           the use of safer, nontoxic, environmentally friendly
                                                           equivalents. (PI)
                                                PHS 3.1.8	 Risks from Hazardous Materials Facilities. The
                                                           City shall review proposed facilities that would produce
                                                           or store hazardous materials, gas, natural gas, or other
                                                           fuels to identify, and require feasible mitigation for, any
                                                           significant risks. The review shall consider, at a minimum,
                                                           the following: presence of seismic or geologic hazards;
                                                           presence of hazardous materials; proximity to residential
                                                           development and areas in which substantial concentrations
                                                           of people would occur; and nature and level of risk and
                                                           hazard associated with the proposed project. (RDR)
Page 2-294                                                                                          Adopted March 3, 2015

PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Hazardous Materials
                                                                   PHS 3
                                     page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                               Page 2-295
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-296                       Adopted March 3, 2015
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Emergency Response and Disaster Preparedness
                                                                                                          PHS 4
Emergency Response
and Disaster
Preparedness
Policies in this section focus on providing a high level of safety and
protection for residents and businesses from natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, urban and wildland fires, and terrorist acts. The policies
continue cooperative agreements with adjoining jurisdictions and State and
Federal agencies that prescribe procedures for preparedness, response, and
disaster recovery.
GOAL PHS 4.1
Response to Natural and Human-Made Disasters. Promote public
safety through planning, preparedness, and emergency response to natural
and human-made disasters.
Policies
PHS 4.1.1	           Multi-Hazard Emergency Plan . The City shall
                     maintain and implement the Sacramento County Multi-
                     Hazard Emergency Plan to address disasters such as
                     earthquakes, flooding, dam or levee failure, hazardous
                     material spills, epidemics, fires, extreme weather, major  The Sacramento Fire Department
                     transportation accidents, and terrorism. (MPSP)            responding to a fire emergency along
                                                                                a 300-foot stretch of an elevated Union
                                                                                Pacific railroad trestle.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                        Page 2-297

                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           PHS 4.1.2	 Post-Disaster Response. The City shall plan for the
                      continued functioning of critical facilities following
                      a major seismic or geologic disaster to help prevent
                      major problems during post-disaster response such as
                      evacuations, rescues, large numbers of injuries, and major
                      clean up operations. (MPSP/IGC/JP/PI)
           PHS 4.1.3	 Emergency Operations Center. The City, in
                      conjunction with other local, State, and Federal agencies,
                      shall ensure operational readiness of the Emergency
                      Operations Center (EOC), conduct annual training for
                      staff, and maintain, test, and update equipment to meet
                      current standards. (SO/IGC)
           PHS 4.1.4	 Emergency and Disaster Preparedness Exercises. The
                      City shall coordinate with local and regional jurisdictions
                      to conduct emergency and disaster preparedness exercises
                      to test operational and emergency plans. (IGC)
           PHS 4.1.5	 Mutual Aid Agreements. The City shall continue to
                      participate in mutual aid agreements to ensure adequate
                      resources, facilities, and other support for emergency
                      response. (MPSP/IGC)
           PHS 4.1.6	 Education Programs. The City shall sponsor and
                      support educational programs regarding emergency
                      response, disaster preparedness protocols and procedures,
                      and disaster risk reduction. (PI)
           PHS 4.1.7	 Vulnerable Populations . The City shall support
                      community organizations that address social equity
                      issues related to climate change effects/impacts to assess
                      resilience of low- income communities and guide relevant
                      future policy/program development. (PSR/IGC)
Page 2-298                                                   Adopted March 3, 2015

PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Emergency Response and Disaster Preparedness
                                                                        PHS 4
                                    page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                    Page 2-299
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-300                       Adopted March 3, 2015
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Public Health and Human Services
                                                                                                            PHS 5
Public Health and
Human Services
Policies in this section support the County of Sacramento as the principal
provider of health and human service facilities and services. Programs to
address the special needs of the disabled, homeless, and senior populations
will be supported. A healthy and active lifestyle for Sacramento residents will
be encouraged to improve overall public health.
                                                                                   Sutter General Hospital is located in
                                                                                   midtown Sacramento and provides
                                                                                   medical services.
GOAL PHS 5.1
Human Services and Healthy Communities. Improve the provision of
human services and promote public health and safety.
Policies
PHS 5.1.1	           Facilities Location. The City shall work with the County
                     on identifying adequate sites for health and human services
                     facilities within the city to ensure that such facilities are
                     easily accessible, distributed equitably throughout the city
                     in a manner that makes the best use of existing facilities,
                     and are compatible with adjoining uses. (RDR/IGC)
PHS 5.1.2	           Co-Location. The City shall encourage the integration
                     of multi-use human service functions within existing and
                     future facilities, where feasible. (RDR/IGC)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                          Page 2-301

                                                                          Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                             PHS 5.1.3	 Disabled Population. The City shall consider access to
                                                        transit, housing, and social services when siting facilities
                                                        to serve the city’s disabled population. (RDR/IGC)
                                             PHS 5.1.4	 Homeless Population. The City shall work with public
                                                        and private social service agencies to site facilities to
                                                        address the human service needs of the city’s homeless
                                                        populations. (IGC/JP)
                                             PHS 5.1.5	 Needs of Seniors. The City shall work with the
                                                        County Health and Human Services Department to
                                                        site facilities that meet basic needs of the city’s senior
                                                        resident population such as nutrition and healthcare and
                                                        the provision of supportive services such as volunteer
                                                        opportunities, youth mentorship, outreach, legal advice,
                                                        advocacy, and case management. (RDR/IGC)
                                             PHS 5.1.6	 Educational Programs. The City shall work with the
                                                        County to promote health education and awareness
                                                        (e.g., obesity, asthma, nutrition, exercise), publicize the
                                                        County’s human service programs, educate the public
  Opened in 1983, Sacramento Loaves                     about the unique needs and capabilities of members of
& Fishes feeds the hungry and shelters                  special needs populations within the city (e.g., the disabled,
  the homeless, providing a welcoming,                  elderly, non-English-speaking, and low-income), and
    safe, and clean facility for homeless
 men, women and children with human
                                                        improve the efficacy of drug and alcohol abuse programs
                           service needs.               within the city. (IGC/PI)
                                             PHS 5.1.7	 Climate Change Impacts . The City shall continue
                                                        to analyze information on potential impacts of climate
                                                        change on government operations and the local economy,
                                                        and actively share results to foster public awareness and
                                                        support for adaptation policy. (PSR)
                                             PHS 5.1.8	 Climate Change Education . The City shall
                                                        incorporate climate change effects and impacts into
                                                        public emergency preparedness education programs,
                                                        with special consideration given to effective methods to
                                                        communicate the issue to a general audience. (PI)
 See M 2, Walkable Communities, and          PHS 5.1.9	 Healthy Communities . The City shall encourage
 M 5, Bikeways, for policies addressing                 the planning of new communities and revitalization
 walkable neighborhoods and bike facilities.            of existing urban areas to achieve improvements in
                                                        overall public health by encouraging a healthier living
                                                        environment that includes walkable neighborhoods,
                                                        access to recreation and open space, healthy foods,
                                                        medical services, and public transit. (RDR)
Page 2-302                                                                                      Adopted March 3, 2015

PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Public Health and Human Services
                                                                                   PHS 5
PHS 5.1.10	          Pest/Vector Management . The City shall coordinate
                     with appropriate agencies (e.g., Sacramento-Yolo
                     Mosquito and Vector Management District) to support
                     pest/vector management strategies (e.g., mosquito
                     control), require drainage of untreated pools and other
                     water features in homes and businesses that are vacant
                     or in sale proceedings, and enhance public awareness of
                     vector control.. (IGC/PI)
PHS 5.1.11	          Integrated Pest Management . The City shall
                     continue development and implementation of the City’s
                     Integrated Pest Management (IPM) program at City
                     facilities. (MPSP)
PHS 5.1.12	          Active Living . The City shall promote active living
                     (i.e., a lifestyle that incorporates physical activity into
                     the routines of daily life) by establishing pedestrian and
                     bicycle connections between neighborhoods, centers,
                     corridors, and transportation facilities. (RDR)
PHS 5.1.13	          Heat Waves . The City shall work with labor
                     organizations, the business community, and County and
                     State health and safety agencies to publicize programs and
                     standards for preventing heat-related illness in employees
                     who work outdoors, and continue to operate cooling
                     centers, and publicize precautions for preventing heat-
                     related illness during heat waves. (IGC/PI)
PHS 5.1.14	          Cooling Centers . The City shall support efforts of
                     the Sacramento Office of Emergency Services to continue
                     to operate “cooling centers” during heat events to ensure
                     adequate space is available for residents at all times of the
                     week (including nights), with backup generators. (MPSP/
                     IGC)
PHS 5.1.15	          Air Quality Alerts . The City shall continue to
                     partner with SMAQMD to enhance awareness of air
                     quality index alerts and related outreach and education to
                     protect the health of residents. (IGC/PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                               Page 2-303

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-304                       Adopted March 3, 2015
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Code Enforcement
                                                                                                            PHS 6
Code Enforcement
Policies in this section focus on enforcing code requirements and providing
adequate code department facilities, services, and staffing. Properties with
public nuisance violations and blighted or deteriorated conditions will not be
permitted, and substandard or dangerous buildings must be either repaired
or demolished. Maintaining communication with residents and businesses
supports public outreach, provides education, and facilitates voluntary
compliance with City ordinances. Core code enforcement services include
preservation of existing housing stock, health and safety code response,
safe and fair business operations, vehicle abatement, and ensuring well-
maintained properties.
GOAL PHS 6.1
Compliance with Health and Safety Codes. Improve the health, safety,
and visual quality of the community by ensuring compliance with State and
City health and safety codes.
Policies
PHS 6.1.1	           Facilities, Services, and Staffing. The City shall provide
                     facilities and staffing to maintain an aggressive and visible
                     code enforcement program. (SO)
PHS 6.1.2	           Code Requirements. The City shall enforce code
                     requirements to ensure that existing housing meets health
                     and safety standards. (RDR)
PHS 6.1.3	           Public Nuisance. The City shall require properties
                     with identified public nuisance violations to eliminate or
                     remove the conditions. (RDR)
PHS 6.1.4	           Abandoned Vehicles. The City shall require removal of
                     abandoned vehicles. (RDR)
PHS 6.1.5	           Graffiti. The City shall require removal of graffiti that is
                     in public view. (RDR)
                                                                                   Trash illegally dumped along a
                                                                                   Sacramento roadway.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                         Page 2-305

                                                                Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                   PHS 6.1.6	  Deterioration, Blight, and Deferred Maintenance.
                                               The City shall require that housing units are maintained to
                                               ensure a safe and healthy living environment, preventing
                                               blight and deterioration resulting from deferred
                                               maintenance. (RDR)
                                   PHS 6.1.7	  Substandard and Dangerous Buildings. The City shall
                                               require all buildings that are identified as substandard or
                                               dangerous be either repaired or demolished. (RDR)
                                   PHS 6.1.8	  Residential Rental Inspection. The City shall require
                                               systematic inspection of all residential rental property.
                                               (RDR)
                                   PHS 6.1.9	  Building Inspection. The City shall enforce code
Dangerous building cited with code             requirements by inspecting buildings requiring a fire code
violations.                                    operational use permit and mandated for inspection by
                                               the California Health and Safety Code. (MPSP)
                                   PHS 6.1.10	 Communication and Education. The City shall work
                                               with residents, businesses, and community organizations
                                               in conducting public outreach and educational programs
                                               to promote voluntary compliance with city ordinances.
                                               (IGC/JP/PI)
                                   PHS 6.1.11	 Safe and Fair Practices. The City shall maintain safe
                                               and fair business operations and ensure the health and
                                               safety of the general public through enforcement of State
                                               and local health and safety statues and codes. (SO)
 Page 2-306                                                                             Adopted March 3, 2015

PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY : Code Enforcement
                                                                   PHS 6
                                     page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                               Page 2-307
UTILITIES
The City of Sacramento recognizes the importance
of and commits to the provision of adequate
infrastructure and services in supporting the needs of
residents and businesses and ensuring a high quality
of life. Water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, solid
waste, energy, and telecommunications systems will
be expanded concurrent with new development,
population, and employment growth. Emphasis is
placed on improving infrastructure in the downtown,
in other urban centers and corridors, and around
transit stations to support infill and intensified
development consistent with priorities for “smart
growth.”
                                                       Page 2-221

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-222                       Adopted March 3, 2015
UTILITIES : Citywide Utilities
                                                                                                                  U1
Citywide Utilities
Policies in this section provide for high-quality and efficient utility services
throughout the city. A level of service for all utilities will be established
and utilities will be managed to meet the established level of service. Utility
policies promote sustainability and seek to limit impacts to environmentally
sensitive areas.
                                                                                    City utility workers providing
                                                                                    infrastructure improvements in
                                                                                    Natomas.
GOAL U 1.1
High-Quality Infrastructure and Services. Provide and maintain efficient,
high-quality public infrastructure facilities and services throughout the city.
Policies
U 1.1.1	             Provision of Adequate Utilities. The City shall continue
                     to provide and maintain adequate water, wastewater, and
                     stormwater drainage utility services to areas in the city, and
                     shall provide and maintain adequate water, wastewater,
                     and stormwater drainage utility services to areas in the
                     city that do not currently receive these City services upon
                     funding and construction of necessary infrastructure.
                     (MPSP/SO)
U 1.1.2	             Citywide Level of Service Standards. The City shall
                     establish and maintain service standards [Levels of Service
                     (LOS)] for water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, and
                     solid waste services. (MPSP/SO)
U 1.1.3	             Sustainable Facilities and Services. The City shall
                     continue to provide sustainable utility services and
                     infrastructure in a cost-efficient manner. (MPSP/SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-223

                                                                             Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                U 1.1.4	 Timing of Urban Expansion. The City shall assure
  See LU 1, Growth and Change, and
                                                         that new public facilities and services are phased in
  LU 10, Special Study Areas and Planned
  Development, for additional policies related           conjunction with the approved urban development they
  to the provision of infrastructure facilities          are intended to serve. (MPSP/SO)
  for new development.
                                                U 1.1.5	 Growth and Level of Service. The City shall require
                                                         new development to provide adequate facilities or pay
                                                         its fair share of the cost for facilities needed to provide
                                                         services to accommodate growth without adversely
                                                         impacting current service levels. (JP)
                                                U 1.1.6	 Infrastructure Finance. The City shall develop and
                                                         implement a financing strategy and assess fees to construct
                                                         needed water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, and solid
                                                         waste facilities to maintain established service levels and
Workers repairing underground utility                    to mitigate development impacts to these systems (e.g.,
infrastructure.                                          pay capital costs associated with existing infrastructure
                                                         that has inadequate capacity to serve new development).
                                                         The City shall also assist developers in identifying funding
                                                         mechanisms to cover the cost of providing utility services
                                                         in infill areas. (MPSP/FB)
                                                U 1.1.7	 Infill Areas . The City shall identify and prioritize infill
                                                         areas for infrastructure improvements. (PS)
                                                U 1.1.8	 Joint-Use Facilities . The City shall support the
                                                         development of joint-use water, drainage, and other
                                                         utility facilities as appropriate in conjunction with schools,
                                                         parks, golf courses, and other suitable uses to achieve
Joint use stormwater drainage/detention                  economy and efficiency in the provision of services and
facility in conjunction with a park.
                                                         facilities. (IGC/SO)
 Page 2-224                                                                                         Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Citywide Utilities
                                                                                                                    U1
U 1.1.9	             Utilities Location. The City shall limit, to the extent
                                                                                     See LU 1, Growth and Change, for
                     financially and technically feasible, the construction of
                                                                                     additional policies related to infill
                     major infrastructure facilities in areas better suited for      development.
                     infill and urban development. (RDR/MPSP)
U 1.1.10	            Safe, Attractive, and Compatible Utility Design. The
                     City shall ensure that public utility facilities are designed
                     to be safe, aesthetically pleasing, and compatible with
                     adjacent uses. (RDR/MPSP)
U 1.1.11	            Underground Utilities. The City shall require
                     undergrounding of all new publicly-owned utility lines,
                     encourage undergrounding of all privately-owned utility
                     lines in new developments, and work with electricity and
                     telecommunications providers to underground existing
                     overhead lines. (RDR/IGC)
                                                                                   The photographs to the left illustrate an
                                                                                   area where overhead utility lines (top)
                                                                                   were undergrounded (bottom).
U 1.1.12	            Impacts to Environmentally Sensitive Lands. The                 See ER 1, Water Resources, and ER 2,
                     City shall locate and design utilities to avoid or minimize     Biological Resources, for additional policies
                     impacts to environmentally-sensitive areas and habitats.        related to natural resource protection.
                     (MPSP/RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                               Page 2-225

                                                           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Sacramento River Water Treatment Plant intake structure.
Page 2-226                                                                       Adopted March 3, 2015
UTILITIES : Water Systems
                                                                                                               U2
Water Systems
Policies in this section ensure existing and future residents a reliable water
supply by utilizing the City’s water rights and maintaining long-term water
supply plans, as well as by updating water rates and water development fees to
cover maintenance and development of infrastructure. Water conservation
policies will be implemented by the City to increase water use efficiency.
Existing water infrastructure will be maintained and priority given to fund
critical infrastructure in need of improvements, while new development will
not be constructed until adequate infrastructure is in place.
GOAL U 2.1
                                                                                 See ER 1, Water Resources, for additional
High-Quality and Reliable Water Supply. Provide water supply facilities to
                                                                                 policies on water and water resources.
meet future growth within the city’s Place of Use and assure a high-quality
and reliable supply of water to existing and future residents.
Policies
U 2.1.1	             Exercise and Protect Water Rights. The City shall
                     exercise and protect its water rights and entitlements in
                     perpetuity. (SO)
U 2.1.2	             Increase water supply sustainability . The City
                     shall maintain a surface water/groundwater conjunctive
                     use program, which uses more surface water when it is
                     available and more groundwater when surface water is
                     limited.(MPSP)
U 2.1.3	             Water Treatment Capacity and Infrastructure. The
                     City shall plan, secure funding for, and procure sufficient
                     water treatment capacity and infrastructure to meet
                     projected water demands. (MPSP/FB/SO)
U 2.1.4	             Priority for Water Infrastructure. The City shall give
                     high priority in capital improvement programming
                     to funding rehabilitation or replacement of critical
                     infrastructure that has reached the end of its useful life.
                     (FB)
U 2.1.5	             Comprehensive Water Supply Plans. The City
                     shall prepare, implement, and maintain long-term,
                     comprehensive water supply plans. (MPSP)
U 2.1.6	             High-Quality Service Provision. The City shall provide
                     water service that meets or exceeds State and Federal
                     drinking water standards. (MPSP/SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                          Page 2-227

                                                                         Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
 See PHS 4, Emergency Response and
 Disaster Preparedness, for additional
 policies on emergency preparedness.
                                              U 2.1.7	  Water Supply During Emergencies. The City shall, to
                                                        the extent feasible, maintain adequate water supply during
                                                        emergencies. (MPSP/SO)
                                              U 2.1.8	  Emergency Water Conservation. The City shall
                                                        reduce water use during periods of water shortages and
 See LU 1, Growth and Change, for
 additional policies related to the provision           emergencies. (PSR/PI)
 of services for new development.
                                              U 2.1.9	  New Development. The City shall ensure that water
                                                        supply capacity is in place prior to granting building
                                                        permits for new development. (RDR)
                                              U 2.1.10	 Water Conservation Standards . The City shall
                                                        achieve a 20 percent reduction in per-capita water use
                                                        by 2020 consistent with the State’s 20x2020 Water
                                                        Conservation Plan (California Water Resources Control
                                                        Board, 2010). (RDR)
                                              U 2.1.11	 Water Conservation Programs . The City shall
                                                        implement conservation programs that increase water use
                                                        efficiency, including providing incentives for adoption of
                                                        water efficiency measures. (RDR/MPSP/SO)
                                              U 2.1.12	 Water Conservation Enforcement . The City shall
                                                        continue to enforce City ordinances that prohibit the
                                                        waste or runoff of water, establish limits on outdoor
                                                        water use, and specify applicable penalties. (RDR)
Page 2-228                                                                                     Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Water Systems
                                                                                   U2
U 2.1.13	            Recycled Water . The City shall continue to
                     investigate the feasibility of utilizing recycled water where
                     appropriate, cost effective, safe, and environmentally
                     sustainable. (PSR)
U 2.1.14	            Rain Capture . The City shall promote the use of
                     rain barrels and rain gardens to conserve water, while not
                     increasing the occurrence of disease vectors. (PI)
U 2.1.15	            Landscaping . The City shall continue to require the
                     use of water-efficient and river-friendly landscaping in
                     all new development, and shall use water conservation
                     gardens (e.g., Glen Ellen Water Conservation Office) to
                     demonstrate and promote water conserving landscapes.
                     (RDR/PI)
U 2.1.16	            River-Friendly Landscaping . The City shall
                     promote “River Friendly Landscaping” techniques which
                     include the use of native and climate appropriate plants;
                     sustainable design and maintenance; underground (water-
                     efficient) irrigation; and yard waste reduction practices.
                     (RDR/PI)
U 2.1.17	            Water Conservation Outreach . The City shall
                     continue providing public education (e.g., Bluethumb
                     Program) and conducting outreach campaigns to
                     promote water conservation efforts. Programs should
                     highlight specific water-wasting activities to discourage,
                     such as the watering of non-vegetated surfaces and using
                     water to clean sidewalks and driveways, and educate the
                     community about the importance of water conserving
                     techniques. Water efficiency training and certification for
                     irrigation designers, installers, and property managers
                     should also be offered. (PI)
U 2.1.18	            Future Water Supply . The City shall continue to
                     explore options for diverting, treating, and conveying
                     surface water. Such options could include: construction
                     of a new water treatment plant on the Sacramento River
                     in Natomas; construction of a raw water pipeline to pump
                     flow back from the Sacramento River to s City water
                     treatment plant for treatment; and/or the expansion of
                     the Sacramento River Water Treatment Plant.
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                              Page 2-229

                                                                  Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
  Sacramento Regional County Sanitation District treatment plant.
  Photograph courtesy of
  Sacramento Regional County Sanitation District
Page 2-230                                                                              Adopted March 3, 2015
UTILITIES : Wastewater Systems
                                                                                                                  U3
Wastewater Systems
Policies in this section provide for adequate and reliable sewer service
by requiring master planned infrastructure for new developments to
meet ultimate capacity needs and avoid future replacement. Plans will be
developed and financing programs proposed for areas where services are or
will soon be deficient. Wastewater outflows will be minimized and capacity
will be developed and maintained to handle additional sewer flows from new
development.
GOAL U 3.1
Adequate and Reliable Sewer and Wastewater Facilities. Provide adequate
and reliable sewer and wastewater facilities that collect, treat, and safely
dispose of wastewater.
Policies
U 3.1.1	             Sufficient Service. The City shall provide sufficient
                     wastewater conveyance, storage, and pumping capacity
                     for peak sanitary sewer flows and infiltration. (MPSP)
U 3.1.2	             New Developing Areas . The City shall ensure
                     that public facilities and infrastructure are designed to
                     meet ultimate capacity needs. For facilities subject to
                     incremental upsizing, initial design shall include adequate
                     land area and any other elements not easily expanded in      See LU 1, Growth and Change, for
                     the future. Infrastructure and facility planning should      additional policies related to the provision
                     discourage over-sizing of infrastructure that could          of services for new development.
                     contribute to growth beyond what is anticipated in the
                     General Plan. (MPSP)
U 3.1.3	             Stormwater Infiltration Reduction. The City shall
                     develop design standards that reduce infiltration into new
                     City-maintained sewer pipes. (RDR/MPSP)
U 3.1.4	             Combined Sewer System Rehabilitation and
                     Improvements. In keeping with its Combined Sewer
                     System (CSS) Long Term Control Plan (LTCP), the City
                     shall continue to rehabilitate the CSS to decrease flooding,
                     CSS outflows and Combined System Overflow (CSO).
                     Through these improvements and new development
                     requirements the City shall also insure that development
                     in the CSS does not result in increased flooding, CSS
                     outflows or CSOs. (SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-231

                                    Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           U 3.1.5	 Methane Recovery . The City shall support the
                    efforts of the Sacramento Regional County Sanitation
                    District (SRCSD) to develop and maintain methane
                    recovery facilities and coordinate efforts to evaluate
                    methane emissions and potential capture at primary and
                    secondary clarifiers and force system mains; maintain
                    methane recovery systems and digester gas combustion
                    systems at wastewater treatment plants; develop waste-
                    to-energy projects at 50 percent of wastewater treatment
                    plants; and evaluate potential for biofuel production at
                    the Sacramento Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant.
                    (IGC)
Page 2-232                                                Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Wastewater Systems
                                                             U3
                               page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                        Page 2-233
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-234                       Adopted March 3, 2015
UTILITIES : Stormwater Drainage
                                                                                                                  U4
Stormwater Drainage
Policies in this section require construction of adequate storm drainage
facilities and services. Policies ensure new drainage facilities are adequately
sized and constructed, support coordinated efforts in the development of
regional stormwater facilities, and require developers to prepare watershed
drainage plans.
GOAL U 4.1
Adequate Stormwater Drainage. Provide adequate stormwater drainage
facilities and services that are environmentally sensitive, accommodate
growth, and protect residents and property.
Policies
U 4.1.1	             Adequate Drainage Facilities. The City shall ensure
                     that all new drainage facilities are adequately sized and
                     constructed to accommodate stormwater runoff in              Construction of a stormwater drainage
                     urbanized areas. (MPSP/RDR)                                  facility with curb and gutter.
U 4.1.2	             Master Planning . The City shall implement a master
                     plan program to:
                     ■■ Identify facilities needed to prevent 10-year event
                        street flooding and 100-year event structure flooding
                     ■■ Ensure that public facilities and infrastructure are
                        designed pursuant to approved basin master plans
                     ■■ Ensure that adequate land area and any other elements
                        are provided for facilities subject to incremental sizing
                        (e.g., detention basins and pump stations)
                     ■■ Consider the use of “green infrastructure” and Low
                        Impact Development (LID). (MPSP)
U 4.1.3	             Regional Stormwater Facilities. The City shall
                     coordinate efforts with Sacramento County and other
                     agencies in the development of regional stormwater
                     facilities. (IGC)                                            Vactor trucks efficiently collect waste
                                                                                  and sediment from catch basins and
                                                                                  manholes.
U 4.1.4	             Watershed Drainage Plans. The City shall require
                     developers to prepare watershed drainage plans for
                     proposed developments that define needed drainage              See EC      2, Flooding Hazards, for
                     improvements per City standards, estimate construction         additional policies on flooding and flood
                     costs for these improvements, and comply with the              protection.
                     City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
                     (NPDES) permit. (RDR)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                             Page 2-235

                                     Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           U 4.1.5	 Green Stormwater Infrastructure . The City shall
                    encourage “green infrastructure” design and Low Impact
                    Development (LID) techniques for stormwater facilities
                    (i.e., using vegetation and soil to manage stormwater) to
                    achieve multiple benefits (e.g., preserving and creating
                    open space, improving runoff water quality). (RDR)
           U 4.1.6	 New Development . The City shall require proponents
                    of new development to submit drainage studies that
                    adhere to City stormwater design requirements and
                    incorporate measures, including “green infrastructure”
                    and Low Impact Development (LID) techniques, to
                    prevent on- or off-site flooding. (RDR)
Page 2-236                                                 Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Stormwater Drainage
                                                              U4
                                page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                         Page 2-237
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-238                       Adopted March 3, 2015
UTILITIES : Solid Waste
                                                                                                            U5
Solid Waste
Policies in this section support a wide range of programs to reduce waste, use
recycled building materials, and support the recycling of construction and
landscaping waste. These policies are consistent with Sacramento’s desire
to be a more sustainable community; recycling can reduce greenhouse gas
emissions through energy savings, and reduced solid waste results in less land
devoted to landfills. The use of disposable, toxic, or non-renewable products
will be reduced in City operations and residents will be educated on the
benefits of waste diversion and recycling. Solid waste and recycling facilities
will be distributed throughout the city and will be designed compatible with
surrounding land uses.
GOAL U 5.1
                                                                                 See LU 2, Citywide Land Use and
Solid Waste Facilities. Provide adequate solid waste facilities, meet or
                                                                                 Urban Design, for additional policies on
exceed State law requirements, and utilize innovative strategies for economic
                                                                                 sustainable practices.
and efficient collection, transfer, recycling, storage, and disposal of refuse.
Policies
U 5.1.1	             Zero Waste . The City shall achieve zero waste
                     to landfills by 2040 through reusing, reducing, and
                     recycling solid waste; and using conversion technology if
                     appropriate. In the interim, the City shall achieve a waste
                     reduction goal of 75 percent diversion from the waste
                     stream over 2005 levels by 2020 and 90 percent diversion
                     over 2005 levels by 2030, and shall support the Solid
                     Waste Authority in increasing commercial solid waste
                     diversion rates to 30 percent. (SO/MPSP)
U 5.1.2	             Landfill Capacity . The City shall continue to
                     coordinate with Sacramento County in providing long-
                     term landfill disposal capacity within the Sacramento
                     Region to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. (IGC)
U 5.1.3	             Transfer Stations. The City shall provide for adequate
                     transfer station facilities to meet the city’s demand.
                     (MPSP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                       Page 2-239

                                                               Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                    U 5.1.4	  Equitably Distributed and Compatible Facilities .
                                              The City shall ensure that solid waste and recycling facilities
                                              are distributed equitably throughout the city, avoiding
                                              over-concentration in areas that are well-served, and shall
                                              ensure that facility location and design are compatible with
                                              surrounding land uses (e.g., by incorporating adequate
                                              buffers, siting facilities appropriately to maintain the
                                              integrity of surrounding development). (MPSP)
A recycling center facility that is
compatible with the surrounding     U 5.1.5	  Residential and Commercial Waste Disposal. The
residential and commercial
neighborhood uses.                            City shall continue to provide curbside trash and recycling
                                              collection service to single-family residential dwellings
                                              and offer collection service to commercial and multi-
                                              family residential development. (SO)
                                    U 5.1.6	  Yard Waste and Street Sweeping. The City shall
                                              continue to provide garden refuse yard waste collection
                                              service to single-family residential dwellings and provide
                                              street sweeping service to commercial and residential
                                              development. (SO)
                                    U 5.1.7	  Neighborhood Clean-Up Program. The City shall
                                              continue sponsoring the Neighborhood Clean-Up
                                              Program. (SO)
                                    U 5.1.8	  Diversion of Waste . The City shall encourage
                                              recycling, composting, and waste separation to reduce
                                              the volume and toxicity of solid wastes sent to landfill
                                              facilities. (MPSP/SO)
                                    U 5.1.9	  Electronic Waste Recycling. The City shall continue to
                                              coordinate with businesses that recycle electronic waste
                                              (e.g., batteries, fluorescent lamps, compact-fluorescent
                                              (CFL) bulbs) and the California Product Stewardship
                                              Council to provide convenient collection/drop off
                                              locations for city residents. (SO)
High school-age volunteers during a
neighborhood clean up day.          U 5.1.10	 Composting and Grasscycling Programs . The
                                              City shall sponsor educational programs on backyard
                                              waste composting and grasscycling (i.e., mulching grass
                                              clippings back into the lawn). (PI)
                                    U 5.1.11	 City Recycling . The City shall serve as a role model
                                              to businesses and institutions regarding purchasing
                                              decisions that minimize the generation of solid waste in
                                              addition to encouraging all City staff to recycle at City
                                              facilities. (SO)
 Page 2-240                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Solid Waste
                                                                                                                 U5
U 5.1.12	            Food Waste Recycling . The City shall develop a
                     food waste recycling program. (PSR/SO)
U 5.1.13	            Recycled Materials for Goods Packaging . The
                     City shall support State legislation calling for the use
                     of recycled materials and smaller packaging of retail
                     goods and require that retail establishments use recycled
                     materials for goods packaging in lieu of plastic bags.
                     (IGC)
U 5.1.14	            Recycled Materials in New Construction . The
                     City shall encourage the use of recycled materials in new
                     construction. (PI)                                          Recycling of construction waste in
                                                                                 downtown Sacramento.
U 5.1.15	            Recycling and Reuse of Construction Wastes .
                     The City shall require recycling and reuse of construction
                     wastes, including recycling materials generated by the
                     demolition and remodeling of buildings, with the
                     objective of diverting 85 percent to a certified recycling
                     processor. (RDR)
U 5.1.16	            Waste for Energy Generation . The City shall
                     continue to use waste (e.g., methane emissions from           See PHS 3, Hazardous Materials, for
                     landfills) for energy generation, and shall support efforts   additional policies on hazardous waste.
                     to remove organic waste from landfills and produce
                     renewable energy from organic waste using technology
                     such as gasification or anaerobic digestion. (SO)
U 5.1.17	            Local Recycled Materials Market . The City
                     shall continue to provide incentives to encourage the
                     development of a local market for recycled materials.
                     (RDR/SO )
U 5.1.18	            Disposable, Toxic, or Non-Renewable Products.
                     The City shall reduce the use of disposable, toxic, or
                     nonrenewable products in City operations. (SO)
U 5.1.19	            Sacramento Regional Recycling Market Development
                     Zone. The City shall support the Sacramento Regional
                     Recycling Market Development Zone (SRRMDZ). (IGC/
                     JP)
U 5.1.20	            Multi-family Recycling Ordinance . The City shall
                     support the Solid Waste Authority to inform and advise
                     multifamily rental property owners and managers of the
                     recycling requirements contained in the Multi-family
                     Recycling Ordinance (SWA Ordinance 21). (RDR/PI/JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                            Page 2-241

                                       Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           U 5.1.21	 Waste Composting and Recycling for Landscapes .
                     The City shall sponsor educational programs regarding
                     the use of waste composing and yard waste recycling for
                     landscapes in lieu of fertilizer. (PI)
           U 5.1.22	 Composting and Vermiculture . The City shall
                     promote home composting and vermiculture to reduce
                     GHG emissions by reducing the amount of organic
                     waste (e.g., cellulose-based waste, paper, food waste) that
                     is sent to landfills. (PI)
           U 5.1.23	 Containerized Yard Waste Program . The City shall
                     provide, in conjunction with the mandatory Green Waste
                     Container Program, education and outreach to residents
                     on the topic of composting leaves, grass trimmings, tree
                     and shrub prunings, Christmas trees, and sod (with dirt
                     removed). (SO/PI)
           U 5.1.24	 Greencycle . The City shall support the Solid Waste
                     Authority’s Sacramento Greencycle effort (i.e., regional
                     garden refuse processing plant). (IGC)
           U 5.1.25	 Educational Programs . The City shall sponsor
                     public educational programs regarding the benefits
                     of solid waste diversion and recycling and encourage
                     residents and businesses to redistribute reusable materials
                     (e.g., at garage sales or materials exchanges). (PI)
Page 2-242                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Solid Waste
                                                      U5
                        page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                 Page 2-243
           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-244                       Adopted March 3, 2015
UTILITIES : Energy Resources
                                                                                                                    U6
Energy Resources
Policies in this section require reducing peak electric load for City facilities,
reducing City fleet fuel consumption, improving energy efficiency of City
facilities, and encouraging city residents to consume less energy. Policies also
support an increasing reliance on renewable energy to reduce Sacramento’s
dependence on nonrenewable energy sources. Businesses that promote
energy efficiency and renewable technologies will be recruited. In addition,
to further increase the city’s environmental sustainability, policies require
that new buildings be designed and sited to maximize energy generation
opportunities (e.g., solar) and promote public education about resource
conservation.
GOAL U 6.1
Adequate Level of Service. Provide for the energy needs of the city and                See LU 2, Citywide Land Use and
                                                                                       Urban Design, for additional policies on
decrease dependence on nonrenewable energy sources through energy
                                                                                       sustainable practices.
conservation, efficiency, and renewable resource strategies.
Policies
U 6.1.1	             Electricity and Natural Gas Services. The City shall              With growing concerns about climate
                     continue to work closely with local utility providers to          change, Sacramento is being proactive
                     ensure that adequate electricity and natural gas services         in reducing the City’s carbon footprint.
                     are available for existing and newly developing areas.            Policies in U 6, Energy Resources, will
                     (IGC/JP)                                                          reduce energy consumption and increase
                                                                                       energy efficiency, in addition to other
U 6.1.2	             Peak Electric Load of City Facilities . The City                 policies throughout this Plan that help
                     shall reduce the peak electric load for City facilities by        minimize the City’s contribution to global
                     10 percent by 2015 compared to the baseline year of               climate change.
                     2004, through energy efficiency, shifting the timing of
                     energy demands, and conservation measures. (SO)
U 6.1.3	             City Fleet Fuel Consumption . The City shall
                     reduce its fleet’s fuel GHG emissions by 75 percent by
                     2020 compared to the baseline year of 2005, and City
                     operations shall be substantially fossil free (e.g., electricity,
                     motor fuels). (SO)
U 6.1.4	             Energy Efficiency of City Facilities . The City shall
                     improve energy efficiency of City facilities to consume
                     25 percent less energy by 2030 compared to the baseline
                     year of 2005. (SO)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                               Page 2-245

                                                                              Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                  U 6.1.5	  Energy Consumption per Capita . The City
                                                            shall encourage residents and businesses to consume
                                                            25 percent less energy by 2030 compared to the baseline
                                                            year of 2005. (SO)
         Solar electric panels at Cal Expo,
   installed in September 2000, produce
 enough energy to power approximately
         180 homes and serve as shaded
                      parking for 1,000 cars.
                         Photograph courtesy of
            Sacramento Municipal Utility District
                                                  U 6.1.6	  Renewable Energy . The City shall encourage
                                                            the installation and construction of renewable energy
                                                            systems and facilities such as wind, solar, hydropower,
                                                            geothermal, and biomass facilities. (RDR/PI)
                                                  U 6.1.7	  Solar Access . The City shall ensure, to the extent
                                                            feasible, that sites, subdivisions, landscaping, and buildings
                                                            are configured and designed to maximize passive solar
                                                            access. (RDR)
                                                  U 6.1.8	  Other Energy Generation Systems . The City
A parking meter that is powered by                          shall promote the use of locally shared solar, wind, and
solar energy.                                               other energy generation systems as part of new planned
                                                            developments. (RDR/PI)
                                                  U 6.1.9	  Green Businesses . The City shall assist regional
  See ED  1, Business Climate, for additional
                                                            organizations in efforts to recruit businesses to Sacramento
  policies on attracting new businesses.
                                                            that research, develop, manufacture, utilize, and promote
                                                            energy efficiency, conservation, and advanced renewable
                                                            technologies such as waste-to-energy facilities. (IGC/JP)
                                                  U 6.1.10	 Utility Programs . The City shall support SMUD and
                                                            PG&E programs that promote energy efficiency, energy
                                                            conservation, renewable energy, and greenhouse gas
                                                            emissions reductions.. (IGC/JP/PI)
 Page 2-246                                                                                            Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Energy Resources
                                                                                 U6
U 6.1.11	            Energy Efficiency Improvements . The City shall
                     develop and implement energy efficiency standards for
                     existing buildings, and provide incentives for property
                     owners to make improvements necessary to meet
                     minimum energy efficiency standards. (RDR/MPSP)
U 6.1.12	            Energy Efficient Incentives . The City shall develop
                     incentives to encourage the use of energy efficient
                     vehicles, equipment, and lighting. (MPSP)
U 6.1.13	            Co-generation Programs . The City shall work with
                     energy providers (e.g., SMUD, PG&E) to encourage the
                     industrial sector to participate in co-generation programs.
                     (IGC/JP/PI)
U 6.1.14	            Energy Efficiency Partnerships . The City shall
                     continue to build partnerships (e.g., Sacramento County
                     Business Environmental Resource Center (BERC) and
                     SMUD) to promote energy efficiency and conservation
                     for the business community and residents. (IGC/JP)
U 6.1.15	            Energy Efficiency Appliances . The City shall
                     encourage builders to supply Energy STAR appliances
                     and HVAC systems in all new residential developments,
                     and shall encourage builders to install high-efficiency
                     boilers where applicable, in all new non-residential
                     developments. (RDR)
U 6.1.16	            Sustainable Development and Resource Conservation
                     Education . The City shall work with appropriate
                     agencies to develop educational materials and activities
                     for residents and developers regarding the objectives
                     and techniques of sustainable development and resource
                     conservation. (IGC/JP/PI)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                            Page 2-247

           Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
Page 2-248                       Adopted March 3, 2015
UTILITIES : Telecommunications
                                                                                                          U7
Telecommunications
Policies in this section provide a wide range of innovative systems and
services to attract and retain state-of-the-art businesses citywide, provide
access to all residents, and facilitate public education. Telecommunication
systems will be incorporated into public buildings and services, as well as
into large-scale planned communities and office and commercial projects, to
increase the accessibility of information. Telecommunication infrastructure
will be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses and to minimize visual
impacts.
                                                                                Telecommunications tower in the
                                                                                Richards Boulevard area, north of
                                                                                downtown Sacramento.
GOAL U 7.1
Telecommunication Technology. Provide state-of-the-art telecommuni-
cation services for households, businesses, institutions, and public agencies
throughout the city that connect Sacramento to the nation and world.
Policies
U 7.1.1	             Access and Availability. The City shall work with service
                     providers to ensure access to and availability of a wide
                     range of state-of-the-art telecommunication systems
                     and services for households, businesses, institutions, and
                     public agencies throughout the city. (JP)
Adopted March 3, 2015                                                                                     Page 2-249

                                      Part Two : CITYWIDE GOALS AND POLICIES
           U 7.1.2	 Adequate Facilities and Service. The City shall
                    work with utility companies to retrofit areas that are
                    not served by current telecommunication technologies
                    and shall provide strategic long-range planning of
                    telecommunication facilities for newly developing areas,
                    as feasible. (JP)
           U 7.1.3	 State-of-the-Art Technology. The City shall encourage
                    local industries, higher educational institutions, and
                    other entities to support innovation in the design and
                    implementation of state-of-the-art telecommunication
                    technologies and facilities. (IGC/JP)
           U 7.1.4	 Co-Location. The City shall encourage compatible co-
                    location of telecommunication facilities and shall work
                    with utility companies to provide opportunities for siting
                    telecommunications facilities on City-owned property
                    and public right-of-ways. (RDR/JP)
           U 7.1.5	 Incorporation into Public Buildings and Uses. The
                    City shall establish requirements for the incorporation
                    and accessibility of state-of-the-art telecommunication
                    systems and services (e.g., internet) for public use in public
                    buildings (e.g., libraries) and support the development of
                    informational kiosks in public places and streetscapes
                    (e.g., parks, plazas, shopping malls). (RDR/PI)
           U 7.1.6	 Large Scale Developments. The City shall establish
                    requirements for the installation of state-of-the-art
                    internal telecommunications technologies in new large-
                    scale planned communities and office and commercial
                    developments (e.g., wiring of all new housing and
                    businesses). (RDR)
           U 7.1.7	 Household Telecommunication Systems. The City
                    shall encourage the installation of telecommunications
                    systems (e.g., internet) in every city household to facilitate
                    resident access to information about public services,
                    transit, emergencies, and other information. (JP/PI)
           U 7.1.8	 City Operations/Public Services. The City shall
                    continue to use telecommunications to enhance the
                    performance of internal City operations and the delivery
                    of public services. (SO)
Page 2-250                                                    Adopted March 3, 2015

UTILITIES : Telecommunications
                                                             U7
                               page left intentionally blank
Adopted March 3, 2015                                        Page 2-251
