                                               SECTION 2.1
                                            INTRODUCTION
The City of Rolling Hills Estates Land Use Element is a state-mandated element and fulfills the requirements
of Section 65302(a) of the California Government Code. The Element contains the goals and
policies regulating future development, a land use plan to implement these goals, and a discussion of the
issues and opportunities which will need to be considered in future land use planning.
The Land Use Element's scope is far greater than that of the other elements although it is directly related
to all of them. For example, the provision of adequate areas to meet housing needs is an important issue
that must be addressed in the Housing Element. The capacity of the existing roadway network
(Transportation Element), open space and recreation areas (Open Space and Recreation Element), areas
with earthquake and geologic hazards (Public Safety Element) and land uses affected by major noise
sources (Noise Element) are other examples of the many issues that the Land Use Element must integrate
into its plan.
The Land Use Element of the Rolling Hills Estates General Plan provides a strategy for the
coordination and integration of all physical development in the City. The Element outlines goals and policies
which promote limited, orderly growth while, at the same time, minimizing the potential for land use
conflicts. The Land Use Element also provides the framework for land use regulations that govern the
location, type, and character of existing and future development in the City.
The Element begins by establishing Land Use Policy that applies to both existing and future development
in the City. Specific standards for various land uses are discussed including those related to the
development intensity (lot coverage) and density. Finally, the Land Use Policy is described in a series of
maps indicating the location and extent of land uses within each of the communities that comprise the City.
                                                    2-1
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN LEFT BLANK.
              2-2
                                                SECTION 2.2
                                       GOALS AND POLICIES
The Land Use Element is a guide for future development and for the potential for land use conflicts. The
element regulates land uses in the City in terms of location and density and the goals and policies of the
Land Use Element address concerns on land use issues and future development. The Element indicates
opportunities for growth and development in the area while being sensitive to the topography, earthquake
faults, geology, flooding potential, availability of services and infrastructure.
Issue: Future Development
With the City almost completely urbanized, opportunities for new development are limited to scattered
undeveloped lots and several key landholdings. Future development should be targeted at enhancing of the
environment and the elimination of incompatible uses. The City is also concerned that future development
not compromise the existing character of the community.
Goal 1            Ensure that future development in the City i s compatible with the existing
                  character of the City and that this development will be sensitive to the
                  local environment.
 Policy 1.1       Development that does not preserve and enhance the quality of the local environment will
                  be discouraged.
         1.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use policy
         and undertake the necessary zoning ordinance revision. The Zoning Ordinance revision will be
         initiated following adoption of the General Plan.
                  Timing: Begin 1992
                  Agency: Planning Department
                  Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.2        Future development must be compatible with and comply with adopted land use plans and
                  standards, traffic facilities, open space requirements and neighborhood compatibility
                  requirements.
         1.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to implement the Neighborhood
Compatibility Ordinance. Ile ordinance will be expanded to ensure that the discretionary review considers
adopted land use plans, open space requirements, and aesthetics.
                                                      2-3
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.3     Maintain the current balance of land uses (residential, commercial, institutional,
               recreational) within the City of Rolling Hills Estates.
               1.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to implement the
               Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance for residential uses. The ordinance should be
               expanded to ensure that the discretionary review considers adopted land use plans, open
               space, and aesthetics. The City Will implement the land use plan for commercial and
               institutional uses.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.4     Promote and encourage increased public participation in City decision-making as it relates
               to land use planning and programs through newsletters, polls, public hearings, and
               voluntary services.
      1.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will utilize the quarterly newsletters as a means
      for residents to indicate a preference on a particular issue. Ile results of the surveys will be
      announced in subsequent issues. The City will continue to use the local public access cable
      television as a means to advertise upcoming Commission and Council meetings.
               Timing: Begin in 1993
               Agency: Planning Department, City Manager
               Funding: General Fund
      1.4.2 Implementation Measure: Agendas for the City Council and Commissions will be
      advertised on the public access cable. Council meetings Will continue to be aired on the local
      cable.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
                                                  2-4
Policy 1.5       Establish monitoring programs, joint use program , and other programs that will aid in co-
                 operative planning efforts with neighboring communities.
        1.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to participate in Southwest Area
        Planning Council Meeting (SWAPC).
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General Fund
Issue: Residential Areas
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is largely developed in residential land uses containing a variety of housing
types at varied densities. The lower density residential character of the Peninsula has provided residents
with a satisfying and desirable community. The quality of the living environment should be maintained
through the development standards as provided for under the General Plan's Land Use Policy.
Goal 2           Growth in the City shall be limited and the objective of future planning
                 shall be directed towards preserving low density and the rural character
                 of the City.
Policy 2.1       Ensure that the character and design of new residential development is consistent with
                 existing development located nearby.
        2.1.1 Implementation Measure: Continue to implement the Neighborhood Compatibility
        Ordinance in review of new development.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.2       Limit development in areas where existing roads, infrastructure, schools, and public
                 services will be adversely impacted.
        2.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy
        and undertake the necessary zoning ordinance revision. Future proposals involving zoning
        ordinance revisions and General Plan amendments will be required to undergo environmental
        review as required by law. Supporting infrastructure must be in place before development can
        occur. The Planning Commission and the City Council are required to make the appropriate
        findings in the approval of future development.
                                                    2-5
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.3     Encourage the maintenance and preservation of existing housing units to prevent the
               deterioration of these units.
      2.3.1 Implementation Measure: Code enforcement efforts will be continued at current
      levels. The nuisance abatement policies will be reviewed and updated.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.4     New residential development, if any, shall be buffered from heavy traffic on major
               roadways whenever and wherever possible.
      2.4.1 Implementation Measure: Open space, landscaping, berms, or other appropriate
      design measures will be required as buffering for new development. City staff will review the Zoning
      Ordinance and Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance to make sure buffering provisions are
      provided.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.5     Encourage and work with other cities on the peninsula to promote the protection of the
               rural residential character of the area through policies in their General Plans, local coastal
               programs and trail network plans.
      2.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will contact all other jurisdictions on the Peninsula
      to make sure Rolling Hills Estates is identified to receive the Notice of Preparation (NOP) of
      reports for future projects.
                                                    2-6
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.6    Develop view preservation guidelines for use within the City and enforce height controls
              to lessen potential view impacts.
.
      2.6.1 Implementation Measure: Revise the Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance as
      appropriate to consider viewsheds pursuant to the guidelines described in the Conservation
      Element. The City will prepare a brochure outlining design guidelines which will include View
      Preservation Guidelines.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.7    Continue to implement the City's Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance and any
              supporting guidelines and policies.
      2.7.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to implement the neighborhood
              compatibility ordinance.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.8    Implement the Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance and the Precise Plan of Design
              Ordinance for residences and businesses requiring that all roofing on a structure or multiple
              structures in the same development be compatible.
      2.8.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review development standards in the City's
      Zoning Ordinance and the Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance. Where appropriate, these
      ordinances will be revised to promote the use of a single type of roofing material on a structure or
      multiple structures in the same development.
              Timing: Begin in 1993
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General Fund
                                                2-7
Policy 2.9      Develop Hillside Development Guidelines for use within the City.
        2.9.1 Implementation Measure: The City will develop Hillside Development Guidelines
        which will include regulations regarding grading, useable area for horse keeping and equestrian uses
        and decks which cantilever into canyons.
                Timing: 1994
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
The commercial areas in the City are limited to the Peninsula Center Area and a few other scattered
parcels. The present commercial locations provide convenient and accessible retail shops and support
services to the area. The City should preserve, maintain, and encourage the enhancement of the existing
commercial uses and the Peninsula Center district.
Goal 3          Maintain and preserve the existing land area within the commercial
                district designated on the General Plan land use map so that the needs of
                area residents are served.
Policy 3.1      Continue to concentrate retail commercialuses in the Peninsula Center Commercial district
                and ensure that future commercial development reflects the rural character of Rolling Hills
                Estates. This development must reflect the City's rural character in terms of site plan
                design, architecture (use of wood, landscape buffering, etc.) and landscaping.
        3.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy
        and undertake the necessary Zoning Ordinance revision, to ensure existing commercial uses are
        retained, and where appropriate, are enhanced.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 3.2      Ensure that commercial developments are compatible with and buffered from surrounding
                land uses that are sensitive to commercial development so that they are protected from
                potentially adverse impacts.
                                                    2-8
          3.2.1 Implementation Measure: Continue to implement the Precise Plan of Design
          Ordinance.
                   Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                   Agency: Planning Department
                   Funding: General Fund
Policy 3.3         Nonconforming commercial and service uses shall be amortized. Strip developments will
                   continue to be prohibited, and all commercial and service facilities will be controlled to
                   benefit the general welfare with public needs considered before investment.
          3.3.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will prepare a list of nonconforming uses in the
          City and establish amortization periods for each one.
                   Timing: 1995
                   Agency: Planning Department
                   Funding: General Fund
Issue: Scientific Research and Development District
The scientific research and development district of the City applies to the site owned by Northrop
Corporation on Crest Road. The facility is used for research related to the aerospace industry. Over the
life of the General Plan, this site may be redeveloped and the General Plan needs to identify the appropriate
uses for this key area whichis subject to the rights of Northrop under the Development Agreement between
the City and Northrop dated November 26, 1983 and which rights will expire on November 26, 2003.
Goal 4             The City should provide for the future development of the Northrop property to ensure
                   that the future redevelopment is beneficial to the City.
Policy 4.1         Ensure that future development other than the expansion of the existing SR-D facilities,
                   contemplated by the development agreement is compatible with the adjacent residential
                   uses.
          The following guidelines will be adhered to when considering future redevelopment of the Northrop
          property. A special studies designation has been assigned to the Northrop property which would
          permit up to 2 units per acre. The actual density, character, extent and location of development will
          be determined in subsequent phases of planning and environmental review.
                                                      2-9
# The project site is designated as Low Density Residential (2 units/acre) in the General
  Plan.
# The development envisioned for the property will maximize open space.
# Existing mature trees on the property will be retained as much as this is possible. A one-
  to-one replacement of mature trees should be adhered to.
# The periphery will be left open for a multi-use trail and/or landscaped open space.
# The project will be compatible with surrounding development and conform                    to
  neighborhood compatibility guidelines.
# Housing units adjacent to the periphery will be single-story. a Development will be sensitive
  to the local topography and grading will be kept to a minimum. Development should be
  concentrated in those areas that are level.
#  The residential units will not exceed the height limitations established by City code (27
  feet).
# Primary access to the property will be from Crest Road.
# Open space areas within the property will be interconnected and connections with
  adjacent open space should be provided.
# A variety in the density of housing units will be considered.
# Existing ocean views from the adjacent Ranch properties will be maintained through the
  use of open space.
# Landscaped open space will account for at least 30% of the total acreage of the property.
# The project shall include a floating overlay zone for properties at periphery/potential for
  equestrian lots adjacent to trails.
                                      2-10
        4.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy
        and undertake the necessary zoning ordinance revision
                Timing: Begin in 1993
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Issue: Quarry District
The Quarry District is the site of the old Chandler Quarry which was used for the mining of sand until 1988.
A portion of the site is currently an engineered landfill with a section used for the manufacture of concrete.
A number of studies have been made to plan for the eventual reuse of the site after landfill operations are
complete. This General Plan Update establishes the location and extent of future development in this area.
Goal 5          Control the use and conversion of the existing quarry operations to best
                serve the needs of the community.
Policy 5.1      Monitor the use of the Chandler Quarry landfill to ensure that the site will be suitable for
                future use with no risks to public health and safety.
        5.1     Implementation Measure: City staff will review closure plans and reclamation plans
        to ensure the public's health and safety are protected.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 5.2      Ensure that future development in the Quarry area is compatible with low density
                residential developments surrounding it. The following guidelines will be adhered to when
                considering future development of the Quarry:
        #       A Cultural Overlay should be designated on the property to protect any cultural
                resources that may be present on the site.
        #       Maintain the existing golf course (the course should be designated as Commercial
                Recreation in the General Plan).
        #       Chandler Trust property should be maintained as 1 unit/5 acres.
                                                    2-11
          #        The certified compacted portion of the quarry should be designated as Very Low Density
                   Residential (zoned RAE 1 house/acre) with an "H" Overlay.
          #        The portions of the site that are uncertified fill should be reserved for Commercial
                   Recreation
          #        The undeveloped portions of the landfill next to the water company property should be
                   designated in such a way to promote affordable housing.
          #        Palos Verdes Drive East could be straightened with a parkland buffer between PVDE and
                   the Bridlewood neighborhood.
Issue: Palos Verdes Landfill
The closed Palos Verdes Landfill covers a large area on the northern limit of the City. The recovery of
gases is ongoing with remedial investigation plans under preparation by the Los Angeles County Sanitation
District.
Goal 6             Control the use and conversion of the former Palos Verdes Landfill to
                   protect public health and safety of area residents.
Policy 6.1         Participate in the ongoing remedial investigation/feasibility study being carried out by the
                   Los Angeles County Sanitation District for the Palos Verdes Landfill site.
          6.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will work with the Los Angeles County
          Sanitation District in the review of a subsequent implementation of the remediation plan.
                   Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                   Agency: Planning Department
                   Funding: General Fund
Policy 6.2         Implement the General Plan Land Use Policy for the Palos Verdes Landfill which will
                   permit the development of commercial/recreation pursuant to the following guidelines:
          #        Portions of the Landfill will be improved as a golf course.
                                                      2-12
       #        The new equestrian facility may be located within the site.
       #        Multi-use trails will be provided within and around the site.
       #        Landscaping and design treatments along Crenshaw and Hawthorne Boulevards must be
                retained.
       #        Methane gas will continue to be monitored and collected over the life of the development.
       #        The City and the Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts will cooperate in future planning
                efforts.
       6.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Issue: Institutional Uses
The City's plans call for the retention of institutional uses throughout the City as much as this is possible.
Once school sites, parkland, and other sites occupied by institutional uses are lost they are difficult and
expensive to replace.
Goal 7          Control the use, expansion, and recycling, to the extent possible, of all
                institutional sites so that the land, existing facilities, and any
                improvements can be reserved for future use as a public school, i f needed,
                and/or by existing activities and other activities.
Policy 7.1      Future institutional uses of the sites which are closed must be compatible with low density
                residential uses surrounding the site.
       7.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy.
       The necessary zoning ordinance revision for institutional zones has already been undertaken.
                                                     2-13
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 7.2      Preserve/retain the existing institutional uses by encouraging the school district to lease its
                property so that the land, facilities, and improvements can be reserved for future use by
                activities which are compatible with residential neighborhoods.
      7.2.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will offer to meet with the school district and other
      special districts to discuss strategies for using the existing facilities in a manner that will enable the
      district to receive revenue from the property.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 7.3      Discourage the removal of classroom buildings, unless replacement buildings can be easily
                used as classrooms in the future.
      7.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review all future applications for future
      development and the extent of demolition anticipated with future development.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 7.4      Retain, to the greatest extent possible, the existing public recreation areas zoned for
                institutional uses for public use.
      7.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy.
      The City will program the future acquisition of public sites for future park use.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                 General Fund
                                                    2-14
Policy 7.5       Retain an even distribution of institutional sites throughout the City to provide for present
                 and future needs of the community.
         7.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy.
                 Timing. Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General Fund
Issue: Support and Public Services
In order to maintain a suitable living environment, future planning in the City of Rolling Hills Estates will
provide support and public services. These include facilities that serve the educational, recreational and
domestic needs of residents including water, sewer, power services and other utilities, law enforcement,
and fire protection.
Goal 8           Maintain areas to serve the educational, recreational, domestic, and other
                 needs of the community and provi de the necessary public services and
                 infrastructure.
Policy 8.1       Maintain high usage public services such as post offices, libraries, medical facilities in
                 non-residential and commercial areas.
         8.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy
         and undertake any necessary zoning ordinance revision required to maintain these uses.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General Fund
Policy 8.2       Identify locations for a permanent site for the City's Equestrian Center and develop a
                 general design and operational plan for the facility.
         8.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy
         and undertake the necessary Zoning Ordinance revision. The Open Space and Recreation Element
         indicates areas where a future Equestrian Center could be constructed.
                                                   2-15
               Timing: Begin in 1995
               Agency: Planning Department/Community Services Dept.
                General Fund
Policy 8.3     Where appropriate all residential neighborhoods should be connected by multi-use
               recreational trails.
      8.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the Master Plan of Trails.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
                General Fund
Policy 8.4     Work with the school district and private institutional uses to maintain existing facilities in
               the City so that the existing and future educational needs of the residents can be met.
      8.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to meet with the School District to
      discuss the district's future plan for facilities in the City.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 8.5     Review available infrastructure and public services to determine current service levels
               required to meet existing and projected demand.
      8.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement a development monitoring system
      as part of its environments: review process. The City will review potential impacts of future
      development.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
                                                     2-16
Policy 8.6   Identify a location for a Community Center.
      8.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy
      and undertake the necessary zoning ordinance revision to accommodate a Community Center.
             Timing: Begin in 1993
             Agency: Planning Department
             Funding: General Fund
                                             2-17
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
           2-18
                                              SECTION 2.3
                                            LAND USE PLAN
INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL PLAN LAND USE POLICY
The Land Use Plan contained in this Element is the most important component of the City of Rolling
Hills Estates General Plan. The land use map indicates the location and extent of permitted
development in the City. In Rolling Hills Estates, the land use map largely corresponds to the current
development in the City since the focus of this General Plan is aimed at growth management rather than
redevelopment.
The State of California planning law requires that land use plans be consistent with the zoning map. This
consistency provision is extremely important since the zoning ordinance will be the primary mechanism used
in the Plan's implementation. For example, an area designated for commercial development on the land use
map must have a corresponding commercial zone district designation. In instances where there is a conflict
and an inconsistency arises, the general plan designation should prevail. The State law indicates that local
governments have a "reasonable amount of time" to amend their zoning ordinances to ensure consistency.
GENERAL PLAN LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
The land use map indicates the location and extent of permitted development throughout the City. Land use
categories or "designations" on the map indicate the type of development that is permitted in specific areas
of the City. These land use categories also contain standards for development intensity and population
density. The reason for these standards is to ensure that citizens, staff, and decision-makers clearly
understand the implications of the land use plan in terms of both existing and future development.
Development intensity refers to the size or degree of development possible within a land use category. For
example, development intensity standards may use the ratio of a building's floor area to the total lot area
(referred to as a floor area ratio), the number of dwelling units per acre, or traffic generation. The
population density standard generally applies to residential land use designations and is most often
expressed in persons per acre. The population standard is commonly derived by multiplying the number
of housing units per acre permitted in a particular land use category by an average household size.
The land use plan for the City of Rolling Hills Estates (shown in Exhibits 2-1 through 2-14) consists of ten
categories of land use. Four of the land use designations relate to commercial development, four categories
correspond to residential development, and a single category each corresponds to
                                                   2-19
institutional uses and open space. Table 2-1 below summarizes the land use designations shown on the
City's current General Plan map.
                                                      TABLE 2-1
                                 SUMMARY OF GENERAL PLAN DESIGNATIONS
 Commercial                  The main commercial district of the City along Silver Spur Road is designated as
 General                     Commercial General on the land use plan
 Commercial/Office           The Commercial / Office applies to office and administrative activities. A number of
                             smaller parcels of land at different locations in the City are identified as Commercial
                             Office, usually at key intersections.
 Neighborhood                Neighborhood Commercial refers to smaller single commercial uses located at key
 Commercial                  intersections.
 Commercial                  A number of private riding dubs, tennis dubs, and golf courses are designated as
 Recreation                  Commercial Recreation.
 Very Low Density            Areas designated as Very Low Density on the land use map correspond to areas that
 Residential                 include the Chandler Trust, the compact portion of Chandler Quarry property and
                             areas along Strawberry Lane.
 Low Density                 This category applies to single-family detached units constructed on large lots. Most
 Residential                 of the areas designated as Low Density Residential correspond to areas within the
                             equestrian overlay.
 Medium Density              This category applies to single-family detached units constructed on smaller lots.
 Residential                 Most of the area designated as Medium Density Residential is located in the
                             Rollingwood area, an area on Crest west of The Ranch and in an area adjacent to
                             Hawthorne Boulevard. Not more than four units per gross acre are permitted.
 High Density                This designation applies to multiple-family detached and attached units constructed
 Residential                 as gross densities of up to eight units per acre. Most of the area designated as High
                             Density Residential is located in three distinct areas in the western portion of the
                             City.
 Institutional               The Institutional category applies to a wide range of public uses including public
                             schools, private schools, churches, City Hall, and other public and quasi-public uses.
 Open Space                  The Open Space category refers to public parks and private land reserved for open
                             spaces.
 Source: City of Rolling Hills Estates General Plan Map.
The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rolling Hills Estates is the primary
implementation mechanism for the General Plan Land Use Policy. The zoning ordinance regulates
                                                         2-20
all development in the City by designating areas where specific land uses are allowed. The zoning ordinance
consists of two primary components: the development standards and the zoning map. The development
standards are detailed in the ordinance text and include lists of permitted uses and various standards
governing setbacks, lot sizes, building height, etc. The zoning map is very specific in that every parcel of
land in the City is assigned a zone district designation. Table 2-2 indicates the Standards for the General
Plan Designations, the corresponding Zone Districts, and the land area included within the designation.
                                                TABLE 2 - 2
                                  LAND USE DESIGNATION STANDARDS
        General Plan Designation               Zone District                          Description
                  (Area)
  Estate Density & Very Low           RAE                             Single-family detached residential units
  Density Residential                                                 with a maximum density of 1 unit per 5
  (111 acres total)                                                   acres or 1 unit per acre and a
                                                                      population density of 3 persons per
                                                                      acre.
  Low Density Residential             RA - 20,000, RPD                Single-family detached residential with
  (822 acres)                                                         a maximum density of 2 units per acre
                                                                      and a population density of 6 persons
                                                                      per acre.
  Medium Density Residential          RA - 10,000, RA - 15,000,       Single-family detached residential with
  (184 acres)                         and RPD                         a maximum density of between 2-4 units
                                                                      per acre, depending on applicable zone
                                                                      district. Population density ranges from
                                                                      6 to 11 persons per acre.
  High Density Residential            RPD                             Multiple-family attached residential
  (93 acres)                                                          development with a maximum density
                                                                      of 8 units per acre and a population
                                                                      density of 22 persons per acre.
  Commercial General                  C-G: Commercial General         Retail Commercial with a maximum floor
  (98 acres)                                                          area ratio of 3 to 1.
  Commercial Office                   C-O: Commercial Office          Professional and administrative office
  (15 acres)                                                          uses with a maximum floor area ratio of
                                                                      1 to 1.
                                                    2-21
                                                     TABLE 2-2
                                    LAND USE DESIGNATION STANDARDS
       General Plan Designation                  Zone District                         Description
                (Area)
 Neighborhood Commercial                C-L: Commercial Limited       Business and professional services and
 (7 acres)                                                            retail with a maximum floor area ratio of 4
                                                                      to 1.
 Commercial Recreation                  C-R: Commercial               Archery ranges, tennis courts,
 (264 acres)                            Recreation                    equestrian facilities, riding dubs, golf
                                                                      courses, and country dubs with a
                                                                      maximum floor area ratio of 0.25 to 1.
 Open Space                             No corresponding zone
 (100 acres)
 Institutional                          I: Institutional              Schools, churches, and other public
 (342 acres)                                                          institutional uses with a maximum floor
                                                                      area ratio of 0.75 to 1.0.
 Note: Population density standards assume an average household size of 2.78.
GENERAL PLAN OVERLAY DESIGNATIONS
The General Plan provides for a number of Overlay Designations which identify additional development
standards that must be considered in future planning and development. These overlay designations are
analogous to overlay zones commonly found in zoning ordinances in that they indicate additional
development requirements above and beyond those included in the base General Plan land use designations
and zone districts. The overlay designations included in the City of Rolling Hills Estates Land Use Element
are listed below:
          #       Cultural Resources Overlay. This designation applies to a portion of the City where
                  archaeological resources are known or suspected to exist. The Conservation Element
                  details appropriate actions that must be followed when property is included within this
                  designation. All areas designated as having a high sensitivity in the Conservation Element
                  are included within the Cultural Resources Overlay.
          #       Horse Overlay. A substantial portion of the City is located within a Horse Overlay zone
                  district which identifies those areas where keeping of horses is permitted and where horse
                  keeping areas are required to be preserved. This General Plan also
                                                        2-22
contains a Horse Overlay designation which is identical to that outlined in the Zoning Ordinance.
#       Scenic Corridor Overlay. The Conservation Element includes an Scenic Corridor
        Overlay designation which applies to a number of important arterial roadways in the City.
        The roadways include Hawthorne Boulevard, Palos Verdes Drive North, Crenshaw
        Boulevard, and Silver Spur Road. The Overlay applies to all properties abutting the
        designated roadways. The Conservation Element outlines specific guidelines that need to
        be adhered to in future development along these corridors.
#       Parks Development Overlay. This designation applies to those areas of the City where
        new park facilities development may occur pursuant to General Plan Land Use Policy. This
        overlay designation is different from the other overlay zone in that it functions like a
        floating zone. The designation indicates a general area where future development is
        likely without identifying specific parcels. Three areas of the City have been included in this
        designation: Dapplegray School, Palos Verdes Landfill, and George F. Canyon.
#       Ecological Resource Overlay. This overlay designation applies to those portions of
        the City where sensitive habitats are located. Any areas within the City identified as having
        a high ecological sensitivity in the Conservation Element is located within this overlay
        designation. The Conservation Element (Section 5.3) indicates specific guidelines that must
        be adhered to when planning and developing in these areas.
#       Multi-use Trait Overlay. The Open Space and Recreation Element contains a Master
        Plan of Trails which identifies both existing and future trails. This designation is consistent
        with the Trails Master Plan in terms of location and classification of the trail.
#       Hazards Management Overlay. The Public Safety Element indicates those areas of
        the City which may be subject to some type of environmental hazard. These areas subject
        to seismic risk, flood hazard, or slope stability are included within the Hazards
        Management Overlay. The Public Safety Element outlines the guidelines that must be
        followed when this designation applies.
                                             2-23
        #       Mixed-Use Overlay. This land use designation is very site specific and applies only to
                those areas included with the Commercial General land use designations. The designation
                permits residential development to be constructed in areas with this land use designation.
                The residential units may either share the structure or parcel. The development density
                cannot exceed 22 units per acre and all applicable parking standards must be met. This
                designation is designed to promote mixed use development in and around the Peninsula
                Center commercial district and at the corner of Hawthorne and Crest, adjacent to Cresta
                Verdes (the old Gelson site).
LAND USE POLICY: PLANNING AREA 1
The Land Use Policy for this planning area calls for the maintenance of the existing residential
neighborhoods that comprise the majority of the planning area. The planning area is almost exclusively
developed as residential and this is reflected in the Land Use Policy which is shown in Exhibit 2-1. Overlay
designations are shown in Exhibit 2-2.
Residential Development
Low Density Residential is the single residential land use designation that applies to this planning area.
The residential designation corresponds to all of the areas presently developed as residential. The
designation also corresponds to those areas designated as RA-20,000 (excluding the open space areas -
George F. Canyon and the Palos Verdes Reservoir).
Public/Institutional
There are several Institutional uses along Palos Verdes Drive North near the easternmost boundary of
the City. There are also three areas designated as Open Space including George F. Canyon, the Palos
Verdes Reservoir, and a small City-owned property at the southwest corner of Palos Verdes Drive North
and Palos Verdes Drive East.
Overlay Designations
The following overlay designations apply to this planning area:
        #       Cultural Resources Overlay. This designation applies to the majority of the planning
                area.
                                                     2-24


        #        Horse Overlay. This designation applies to the majority of the planning area with the
                 exception of a portion of the residential neighborhood located north of Palos Verdes Drive
                 North commonly known as Monticello.
        #        Scenic Corridor Overlay. Palos Verdes Drive North and Palos Verdes Drive East
                 have been included within the Scenic Corridor Overlay.
        #        Parks Development Overlay. This designation applies to the site designated as Open
                 Space at the mouth of George F. Canyon
        #        Hazards Management Overlay. This overlay designation applies to the northernmost
                 portion of the planning area where it is traversed by the Palos Verdes Fault.
LAND USE POLICY: PLANNING AREA 2
The Land Use Policy for this planning area calls for the maintenance of existing land uses in areas that are
presently developed. The Land Use Plan for planning area 2 is shown in Exhibit 2-3. Overlay zones are
shown in Exhibit 2-4.
Residential Development
The majority of the existing residential neighborhoods north of Palos Verdes Drive North are designated
as Low Density Residential which correspond to the existing land use and zoning for these neighborhoods.
The residential neighborhood served by Strawberry Lane is designated as Very Low Density Residential
which also corresponds to both existing development and zoning.
Portions of the Chandler Trust Property not presently included in the Rolling Hills Country Club and the
northern half of Chandler Quarry have been designated for Very Low Density Residential Development
with a density not to exceed 1 unit per 5 acres. In addition, the following development policies have been
adopted for the future reuse of Chandler Quarry:
        #        A Cultural Overlay should be designated on the property to protect any cultural
                 resources that may be present on the site.
        #        Maintain the existing golf course (the course should be designated as Commercial
                 Recreation in the General Plan).
                                                    2-25


         #       The certified compacted portion of the quarry should be designated as Very Low
                 Density Residential with a maximum density of 1 unit per acre with an "H" Overlay.
         #       Maintain the historic Empty Saddle Club and General Store uses.
         #       The portions of the site that are uncertified fill should be reserved for Commercial
                 Recreation as an extension of the existing golf course.
         #       The undeveloped portions of the landfill next to the water company property should be
                 designated in such a way to promote affordable housing.
         #       Palos Verdes Drive East could be straightened with a parkland buffer between PVDE and
                 the Bridlewood neighborhood.
Commercial
A parcel located on the southwest corner of the intersection of Crenshaw Boulevard and Palos Verdes
Drive North has been designated as Commercial Office which corresponds to the existing land uses. The
General Plan Land Use Policy provides for the continuation of the Rolling Hills Country Club with the
Commercial Recreation designation. Any change from the present use will require a General Plan
amendment.
Public/Institutional
There are a number of public and institutional uses within the planning area that are recognized under the
existing Land Use Policy. A number of churches and private schools have been designated as
Institutional which is consistent withthe present zone district designation. The General Plan also provides
for the continuation of the Dapplegray School site as Institutional. Finally, Dapplegray Park has been
designated as Open Space .
Overlay Designations
The following overlay designations apply to this planning area:
         #       Cultural Resources Overlay. This designation applies to those portions of Chandler
                 Quarry that have not been disturbed by past grading and excavation. In addition, this
                                                  2-26
                 overlay applies to the Empty Saddle Club and the corner of Palos Verdes Drive North and
                 Rolling Hills Road in order to preserve these historic landmarks.
         #       Horse Overlay. This designation applies to the entire planning area with the exception of
                 the residential neighborhood along Club View Lane.
         #       Scenic Corridor Overlay. Palos Verdes Drive North has been included within the
                 Scenic Corridor Overlay.
         #       Parks Development Overlay. This overlay designation is applied to property currently
                 being used for recreation uses.
         #       Hazards Management Overlay. This overlay designation applies to the northernmost
                 portion of the planning area where it is traversed by the Palos Verdes Fault.
LAND USE POLICY: PLANNING AREA 3
This planning area is the geographic center of the City. The Land Use Policy for this planning area calls for
the maintenance of existing land uses in areas that are presently developed. In addition, the Land Use Policy
promotes the long-term reuse of the Palos Verdes Landfill for commercial recreation. The Land Use
Policy for planning area 3 is depicted in Exhibit 2-5. Overlay zones are shown in Exhibit 2-6.
Residential Development
All of the residential neighborhoods in this planning area are designated as Low Density Residential
which corresponds to the existing land use and zoning for these neighborhoods. This designation reflects
the City's commitment to the preservation of these neighborhoods. The corresponding zone district for this
land use designation is the RA-20,000.
Commercial
The Palos Verdes Landfill has been designated as Commercial Recreation in this General Plan. This
designation is consistent with ongoing proposals which are being evaluated by the Los Angeles County
Sanitation District. However, the City has established a number of guidelines which must be adhered to
when the landfill is ultimately redeveloped for Commercial Recreation. The guidelines include the following:
                                                    2-27


        #        Portions of the Landfill will be improved as a golf course (9 to 18 hole).
        #        The new equestrian facility could be located within the site.
        #        Multi-use trails will be provided within and around the site.
        #        Landscaping and design treatments along Crenshaw and Hawthorne Boulevards must be
                 retained.
        #        Methane gas will continue to be monitored and collected over the life of the development.
        #        The City and the Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts will cooperate in future planning
                 efforts.
Public/Institutional
This planning area contains a number of public and institutional uses. Three parks (Ernie J. Howlett Park,
Chandler Park, and Silver Spur Park) have all been designated as Open Space . Other Institutional
uses within the planning area that are recognized under the existing Land Use Policy include the City Hall
and one school.
Overlay Designations
The following overlay designations apply to this planning area:
        #        Horse Overlay. This designation applies to the entire planning area with the exception of
                 a portion of the residential neighborhood along Marina and Rollando Drives.
        #        Scenic Corridor Overlay. Palos Verdes Drive North, Crenshaw Boulevard, and
                 Hawthorne Boulevard have been included within the Scenic Corridor Overlay.
LAND USE POLICY: PLANNING AREA 4
Planning area 4 is the smallest of the seven planning areas in terms of size. The entire planning area has been
designated as Medium Density Residential. The rationale for this designation is to conserve
                                                    2-28
the existing housing stock in the community. The Medium Density Residential designation corresponds
to the RA-10,000 zone district. The Land Use Policy for planning area 4 is shown in Exhibit 2-7. Overlay
zones are shown in Exhibit 2-8.
Overlay Designations
The following overlay designation applies to this planning area:
         #       Scenic Corridor Overlay. Hawthorne Boulevard has been included within the Scenic
                 Corridor Overlay.
LAND USE POLICY: PLANNING AREA 5
The Land Use Policy for this planning area calls for the maintenance and preservation of existing land uses.
The entire planning area is completely developed and, as a result, the Land Use Element's focus is to
preserve and maintain the existing neighborhoods. The Land Use Plan for this planning area is shown in
Exhibit 2-9 and overlay zones are shown in Exhibit 2-10.
Residential Development
The existing residential neighborhoods in the planning area are designated as either Low Density
Residential or Medium Density Residential. The former applies to those areas with a RA-20,000
zone designation and the latter applies to the areas zoned RA-10,000.
Commercial
A parcel located on the northwest corner of the intersection of Crenshaw Boulevard and Silver Spur Road
has been designated as Commercial General. The corresponding zone district for this land use
designation is C-G.
Public/Institutional
There are two areas designated as Open Space within this planning area: Rockbluff Park and a
landscaped Open Space parcel along Hawthorne Boulevard south of Palos Verdes Drive North.
Overlay Designations
The following overlay designations apply to this planning area:
                                                   2-29




          #        Horse Overlay. This designation applies to the majority of the planning area designated
                   as Low Density.
          #        Scenic Corridor Overlay. Palos Verdes Drive North, Crenshaw Boulevard, and
                   Hawthorne Boulevard have been included within the Scenic Corridor Overlay.
          #        Multi-Use Trails Overlay. A number of trails are identified in the Trails Master Plan
                   for the planning area.
LAND USE POLICY: PLANNING AREA 6
This planning area contains the greatest variety of land uses compared to the other planning areas. The
Land Use Policy provides for the conservation of the existing housing and retail commercial uses in the
Peninsula Center. The Land Use Plan for planning area 6 is shown in Exhibit 2-11 and overlays are shown
in Exhibit 2-12.
Residential Development
The majority of the existing residential development within the planning area is designated as High
Density Residential. This designation applies to all of the residential development along both sides of
Highridge Road (east of Indian Peak Road). The area designated as High Density Residential
corresponds to those areas designated as RPD (Residential Planned Development) in the Zoning
Ordinance.
A small area in the northernmost portion of the planning area is designated as Low Density Residential
which also corresponds both existing development and zoning.
Commercial
The greatest concentration of commercial development in the City is found in this planning area. The
Peninsula Center has been designated as Commercial General which corresponds to the C-G zone
district. This land use designation underscores the City's commitment to retaining the only major commercial
center in the City.
A smaller parcel located south of Hawthorne Boulevard and west of Indian Peak Road has been
designated as Commercial Office which corresponds to both the existing land use and zoning (CO).
                                                    2-30


Public/Institutional
There are a number of public and institutional uses within the planning area that are recognized by the
General Plan's Land Use Policy. The primary institutional land use in the planning area is Rolling Hills High
School. A number of other uses are located within the Commercial District including the library, post office,
and a fire station.
Overlay Designations
The following overlay designations apply to this planning area:
         #        Mixed-Use Development Overlay. All of those areas designated for Commercial
                  General have been designated for a Mixed-Use Overlay. This designation will permit
                  residential uses to be located above or adjacent to commercial retail and office uses.
         #        Hazards Management Overlay. This overlay designation applies to the central portion
                  of the planning area which is traversed by the Cabrillo Fault.
         #        Scenic Corridor Overlay. Hawthorne Boulevard, Crenshaw Boulevard, and Silver
                  Spur Road are designated Scenic Corridors within this planning area.
LAND USE POLICY: PLANNING AREA 7
The Land Use Policy for this planning area calls for the conservation of existing residential uses in the area
while providing for the future redevelopment of the Northrop property. The planning area will continue to
remain largely residential though two parcels have been designated as Neighborhood Commercial in
recognition of the existing uses and zoning. Another important land use in the Planning Area includes
Highridge Park. The Land Use Plan for this planning area is shown in Exhibit 2-13 and overlay zones are
shown in Exhibit 2-14.
The City of Rolling Hills Estates and the Northrop Corporation entered into a development agreement in
November, 1983. The development agreement permits the property owner to construct an additional
175,000 square feet of leasable floor area and to replace one or more of the existing buildings as long as
the total gross leasable floor area of both existing and new structures does not exceed 297,000 square feet.
No single structure can exceed 150,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. The development
agreement also outlines certain standards that must be adhered to including parking requirements, setbacks,
and number of employees. The terms of the development agreement are transferable if the property is sold.
The agreement will terminate on November 26th, 2003. The development agreement will supersede this
general plan and zoning as long as it applies.
                                                      2-31


Residential Development
The majority of the planning area has been designated as Low Density Residential which corresponds
to the existing land use. Three noncontiguous areas are designated as High Density Residential which
corresponds to the existing density of development. In addition, all three areas are zoned RPD. Three other
areas, one located adjacent to Indian Valley Road and two adjacent to Highridge Road are designated as
Medium Density Residential. Two of these areas are zoned RA-10,000 and a third is zoned RPD.
The land use plan for this planning area provides for the eventual reuse of the Northrop property. The entire
site has been designated as Low Density Residential (2/units/acre) in the General Plan. In addition to
the land use designation, the General Plan provides for the following development guidelines which are
meant to be an aid in future planning.
         #        The project site is designated as Low Density Residential (2 units/acre) in the General
                  Plan.
         #        The development envisioned for the property will maximize open space.
         #        Existing mature trees on the property will be retained as much as this is possible. A
                  one-to-one replacement of mature trees should be adhered to.
         #        The periphery will be left open for a multi-use trail and/or landscaped open space.
         #        The project will be compatible with surrounding development and comply with
                  neighborhood compatibility guidelines.
         #        Housing units adjacent to the periphery will be single story.
         #        Development will be sensitive to the local topography and grading should be kept to a
                  minimum. Development should be concentrated in those areas that are level.
         #        The residential units will not exceed the height limitations established by City code (27
                  feet).
                                                     2-32
        #       Primary access to the property will be from Crest Road.
        #       Open space areas within the property will be interconnected and connections withadjacent
                open space should be provided.
        #       A variety in the density of housing units will be considered.
        #       Existing ocean views from the adjacent Ranch properties will be maintained through the
                use of open space.
        #       Landscaped open space will account for a least 30% of the total acreage of the property.
        #       The project shall include a floating overlay zone for properties at periphery/potential for
                equestrian lots adjacent to trails.
Commercial
Two parcels located adjacent to Crest Road have been designated as Neighborhood Commercial
which corresponds to the existing land uses and the CL (Commercial-Limited) zoning.
Public/Institutional
There are three areas designated for Open Space in this General Plan. Two of these areas are privately
owned open space that have been set aside as conditions of development. A third area designated as
Open Space is Highridge Park.
Overlay Designations
The following overlay designations apply to this planning area:
        #       Cultural Resources Overlay. This designation applies to an area designated as Open
                Space (located along Highridge Road) in the General Plan. This site was left Open
                Space as a means of "capping" an important archaeological site underneath.
                                                    2-33
       #        Horse Overlay. This designation applies to the central portion of the planning area. All
                of the area included within this overlay is designated as Low Density Residential.
       #        Scenic Corridor Overlay. Hawthorne Boulevard has been included within the Scenic
                Corridor Overlay.
       #        Mixed Use Overlay. The northeast corner of Hawthorne Boulevard and Crest Road has
                been designated for mixed use. This designation will permit either residential development
                or the retention of the existing commercial uses. This residential development may include
                either housing for senior citizens (including Section 202 Housing) and market rate housing.
Neighborhood Compatibility Guidelines
The City, through its Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance, has established design criteria and a review
process to protect and preserve the character of all residential neighborhoods in the City. The Compatibility
Ordinance considers the following factors:
       #        Natural Amenities. Improvements to residential property shall respect
                and preserve, to the greatest extent possible, existing topography,
                landscaping and natural features.
       #        Neighborhood Character. Proposals will be compatible with the
                existing neighborhood character in terms of architectural style and
                materials, and the scale of development in relation to surrounding
                residences. The open space and rural character of the surrounding
                neighborhood shall be preserved.
       #        Scale. While many elements can contribute to the scale of a residential
                structure, designs will minimize the appearance of overbuilt property to
                both public and private view. The square footage of the residence and the
                total amount of lot coverage should reflect the rural character of the City
                and the respective neighborhood.
       #        Style. Proposals shall address certain design elements to ensure the
                compatibility of development. These elements include facade treatments,
                structure height, setbacks, roof design, building bulk, and architectural
                style.
                                                     2-34
# Privacy. Proposed development shall be designed to preserve the
  privacy from adjacent residences.
# Landscaping. Designs shall incorporate existing and additional
  landscaping to ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood.
  Landscaping shall not be used to create hedges in front yard areas nor
  diminish the open, spacious character of a neighborhood.
# Views. Development will be designed with respect for neighboring views
  as required by the View Protection Ordinance, Section 1950.
                                  2-35
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN LEFT BLANK.
             2-36
                                              SECTION 2.4
                                      BACKGROUND REPORT
INTRODUCTION TO THE BACKGROUND REPORT
The Land Use Element Background Report provides a discussion of the issues and opportunities in Rolling
Hills Estates that affect land use planning in the City. This section contains information concerning the
location and distribution of existing land uses, a description of development characteristics, and land use
trends. Finally, development constraints that affect existing and future development are evaluated.
DEVELOPMENT TRENDS
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is located in the southwestern portion of Los Angeles County, 23 miles
southwest of downtown Los Angeles and 2 miles east of the Pacific Ocean. The City is part of the Palos
Verdes Peninsula which consists of the cities of Palos Verdes Estates, Rolling Hills, Rolling Hills Estates
and Rancho Palos Verdes (refer to Exhibit 1-2). The Peninsula enjoys a favorable climate and is readily
accessible to beaches and major employment centers.
Rolling Hills Estates was incorporated on September 18, 1957 to preserve and protect its rural community
character. In 1959, the Montecillo area, Chandler Quarry, Country Club Estates and northern Masongate
areas were annexed to the City. Later annexations included land adjacent to the Northrop Corporation,
the Rolling Hills High School site, the Larga Vista area, the Peninsula Shopping Center, Harbor Sight
Ranch, Rolling Hills Park Estates, Highridge Terraces, and Cresta Verde areas. In 1982, the site of the
former Palos Verdes Landfill on Crenshaw Boulevard was annexed to the City.
According to the Los Angeles County Local Agency Formation Commission, two County areas are within
the City's designated sphere of influence. These areas, shown in Exhibit 2-8 include the South Coast
Botanic Gardens and the unincorporated County lands adjacent to Crenshaw Boulevard. The sphere of
influence refers to those unincorporated areas that may be annexed into the City at some future point in
time.
The City has experienced slow growth over the past decade both in terms of development and population.
The 1980 population of 7,701 persons increased to 7,789 persons in 1990, a growth of 88 persons, or
1.14 percent, in ten years. Compared to Los Angeles County, which grew 17.28 percent in the same
period, the population of the City has been fairly stable. Most of the City's growth was due to an increase
in housing units.
                                                    2-37
The City reached a maximum population of 7,923 persons in 1988. Since then, its population has been
decreasing. The City had 7,789 according to the 1990 Census, which is 65 persons less than the 1985
estimated population of 7,854 persons. The population decrease can be attributed to the decrease in
household size, a reflection of an aging population with children who are leaving home. Table 2-3 shows
historical population and housing growth in the City. Population and housing characteristics are discussed
in greater detail in the Housing Element Background Report.
                                                    TABLE 2 - 3
                                    POPULATION AND HOUSING GROWTH
                                                     Population                           H
                 1957                                   2,419                             --
                 1960                                   3,941                           1,005
                 1964                                   5,140                             --
                 1970                                   6,027                           1,571
                 1980                                   7,701                           2,613
                 1983                                   7,744                           2,705
                 1985                                   7,854                           2,721
                 1988                                   7,923                           2,726
                 1990                                   7,789                           2,873
 Source: U.S. Census 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990; California Department of Finance
          Population and Housing Estimates
With the City almost completely urbanized, there have been very few new developments. A number of
parcels have been redeveloped and newer single-family houses have replaced older single-family houses.
Expansion of individual units is the most common form of building activity. Recent major development in
the City includes residential development along Highridge Road in the southwestern section of the City.
CHARACTERISTICS OF EXISTING DEVELOPMENT
The City of Rolling Hills Estates covers an irregular area of approximately 4.18 square miles on the central
and northeastern sections of the Palos Verdes Peninsula. The City is bounded on the north by the Cities
of Torrance and Palos Verdes Estates, on the east by Lomita, unincorporated areas of Los Angeles County
and Rolling Hills, and on the south and west by Rancho Palos Verdes.
                                                       2-38
The City includes a portion of the Palos Verdes Hills. The highest point in the City, at an elevation of 1,200
feet above sea level, is in the southwestern section of the City, near the intersection of Crest Road and
Highridge Road. The majority of the City is located on the north and northeast-facing slopes of the hills.
The land features rough terrain with canyons, winding roads, and lush vegetation. Slopes range from 7 to
25 percent with the steepest slopes near Silver Spur and Indian Peak Roads. Steep slopes, within
urbanized areas, have remained undeveloped.
A network of equestrian trails and equestrian facilities provide a major recreational resource for residents.
Developed areas are predominantly low density residential in nature with very few undeveloped parcels
remaining in the City.
Residential Development
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is predominantly developed with single-family residential units.
Approximately 1,067.8 acres or 49.1 percent of the City is developed with housing at densities ranging
from 1 dwelling unit per acre to 3 units per acre. According to the 1990 Census there are 2,219 detached
single-family units and 527 attached single-family units. A number of multi-family (condominium)
developments, a total of 127 units, are located in the southern portion of the City. These units were all built
before 1980. No new multifamily projects have been constructed since then. The newest residential
development, slated for completion in 1992, is located in the Highridge area and will contain seventy-two
single-family units.
The majority of the housing stock was built between 1960 and 1980. Although these dwelling units are 10
to 30 years old, they are very well-maintained.
Commercial Development
Commercial and retail uses in the City include the 93.4-acre Peninsula Center, the Academy Center, retail
stores on the corner of Crest and Hawthorne, the retail store on the northeast corner of Crest and
Highridge, and real estate offices on Palos Verdes Drive East. The Peninsula Center area is located in a
small valley on Silver Spur and Deep Valley Roads, between Crenshaw and Hawthorne Boulevards.
Peninsula Center includes the Peninsula Shopping Center, the Shops at Palos Verdes, The Village, Town
and Country, and a number of other commercial uses.
There are approximately 200 retail establishments in the City consisting of apparel stores, gasoline stations,
grocery stores, food stores, restaurants, and home furnishing stores, among others. Also, there are a
number of banks, professional, medical, and business offices, theaters, and a host of
                                                    2-39
services in the City. Most office uses serve the local professional services market as opposed to being
regional offices. The majority of these commercial uses are located in the Peninsula Center area. A unique
commercial use at the northwest corner of Palos Verdes Drive North and Rolling Hills Road has been
preserved for future generations as a landmark overlay. Commercial land uses cover approximately 107.6
acres or 4.7 percent of the City.
Industrial Development
The City has a limited amount of land devoted to industrial uses. The Northrop Corporation owns a
34.9-acre research and development facility on Crest Road on the southern edge of the City. The site was
developed as an electronic research facility for the aerospace industry. Concrete manufacturing activities
occur on an isolated section of the Chandler Quarry site. Landfill operations, the primary function of the
Chandler site, have started to fill up the old quarry pits.
Parks and Recreational Facilities
The City owns and maintains a number of parks and recreation facilities. In addition, a network of
equestrian trails and bicycle routes exists throughout the City. Private recreational facilities in the City
include a golf course, riding clubs and a tennis club. The Open Space and Recreation Background Report
discusses parks and recreational facilities in more detail. Existing parks and recreation areas cover
approximately 177.7 acres of parks and 25 miles of trails, accounting for 7.8 percent of the City's land area
Open space areas left undeveloped within residential projects cover 32.6 acres.
Schools
The Palos Verdes Unified School District serves the Peninsula with one elementary school (Rancho Vista),
one middle school (Dapplegray closed since 1987) and one high school (Peninsula High School) located
in the City. A section of Ridgecrest School on Highridge Road is also within City boundaries. Two private
schools (Rolling Hills Country Day School, and Peninsula Heritage School and Rolling Hills Prep School)
are also located in the City. A total of 110.8 acres are occupied by these public and private schools and
their support facilities.
                                                    2-40
Institutional
Institutional uses in the City include the Civic Center, library, and churches. The Civic Center is located on
the northwest corner of the intersection of Crenshaw Boulevard and Palos Verdes Drive North. The Palos
Verdes Library District has a library on Deep Valley Drive between Roxcove and Drybank Roads.
Churches in the City include the Rolling Hills Seventh Day Adventist Church, Rolling Hills Covenant
Church, First Baptist Church of Palos Verdes, Rolling Hills United Methodist Church, and Saint Luke's
Presbyterian Church. Institutional land uses account for 32.2 acres.
,Public and Quasi-Public Uses
Public and quasi-public land uses in the City include the fire station, the post office, and public utility
facilities (Palos Verdes Reservoir, L.A.. County recycling center, Chandler landfill, two Cal-water
waterworks pump stations, and the L.A. County gas-to-energy facilityat the closed Palos Verdes Landfill).
Los Angeles County Fire Station # 106 is on 413 Indian Peak Road at the end of Crossfield Avenue. A
U.S. post office is located on Deep Valley Drive and Silver Spur Road, and a General Store-Post Office
Branch is on Palos Verde Drive North and Rolling Hills Road. The Palos Verdes Reservoir, on Palos
Verdes Drives North and East, is owned by the Metropolitan Water District (MWD). The reservoir has
a capacity for 1,100 acre-feet of water, which MWD sells to the California Water Service Company to
serve the domestic water needs of the Peninsula.
The Los Angeles County Recycling Center on Crenshaw Boulevard purchases paper, glass, aluminum, tin,
and crank case oil for recycling. The closed landfill site, between Crenshaw and Hawthorne Boulevards
north of Palos Verdes Drive North, is currently used for the recovery of landfill gases. There are 445 gas
collection wells and trenches through which landfill gas is brought to the gas-to-energy facility on the
northwest corner of the site. The facility creates electrical energy equivalent to that used by 10,000 homes.
The temporary release of gases from the landfill site is necessary in order to provide for future safe use of
the site.
Quarry
The Chandler Quarry landfill on the northeastern corner of the City was originally used for the mining of
sand and gravel. In 1988, mining operations ceased and landfill operations were started. Concrete
manufacturing operations are still ongoing on a portion of the site. The facility consists of two open pits and
a batch plant on approximately 127 acres.
                                                    2-41
Streets and Highways
City streets and private roads account for 10.1 percent or 227.9 acres of the City land area. Some streets
do not feature sidewalks or street lights in keeping with the rural community character which residents want
to preserve.
Vacant Areas
Vacant areas in the City are limited to approximately ten vacant residential lots consisting of approximately
49.4 acres. This is 2.2 percent of the City.
Land use information was compiled from a survey of aerial photographs and field surveys. This information
was mapped using the ARC-Info GIS mapping system which automatically measures the distribution of the
various categories of land use.
Approximately 52.1 percent of the City is developed with residential land uses. Commercial uses cover
approximately 4.7 percent and industrial land uses cover approximately 1.6 percent of the City. Table 2-4
provides a breakdown of the existing land uses shown in Exhibit 2-15.
                                                    TABLE 2-4
                                              EXISTING LAND USES
                                 Very Low Residential               Acreage      Percent
                   Residential
                   Very Low Density Residential                        49.4        2%
                   (1 unit or less/acre)
                   Residential
                   Low Density Residential                            821.5        36%
                   (more than 1 up to 2 units/acre
                   Residential
                   Medium Density Residential                         149.0        7%
                   (more than 2 up to 4 units/acre
                   Residential
                   High Density Residential                            84.5        4%
                   (more than 4 up to 8 units/acre
                   Commercial                                         107.6        5%
                   Industrial                                          35.6        2%
                                                      2-42

                                                      TABLE 2-4
                                               EXISTING LAND USES
                                Very Loan Residential             Acreage    Percent
                   Institutional/Public                              342         15%
                   Open Space, Parks and Recreation                  371         15%
                   Facilities (including private recreational
                   facilities)
                   Streets and Highways                              227.9       10%
                   Vacant Areas                                       49.4        2%
                   Source: David Evans and Associates, Inc., 1990
DENSITY AND INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT
The overall density of development in the City is low and ranges from 1 to 3 units per acre. The majority
of the residential neighborhoods are zoned RA-20,000 which provides for a minimum lot size of 20,000
square feet. The one area of the City where higher intensity development is found is located along Silver
Spur where the Peninsula Center is located. Both higher density residential development and a regional
commercial retail center are being located there.
EXISTING LAND USE PLANS
Previous General Plans
The City adopted its first General Plan in 1965. This first General Plan consisted of five elements, which
together, provided long-term goals for development in the City of Rolling Hills Estates. In 1973 and 1975,
the elements of the General Plan were updated and four other elements were added. Since then,
subsequent amendments have been adopted for the land use, housing and safety elements.
As required by state law, the General Plan shall embody the City's goals and policies for long-term
development. The current General Plan contains the seven mandatory elements, plus other elements the
City deems necessary to outline its development policies. The General Plan shall supersede all other City
ordinances including the zoning ordinance.
                                                         2-43
    Zoning Ordinance
    The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rolling Hills Estates is the primary mechanism for the
    implementation of the General Plan land use policies. As required by State law, it is necessary for the
    Zoning Ordinance to be consistent with the General Plan. The existing Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance
    regulates all development in the City by designating areas where specific land uses are allowed and the
    standards that have to be observed in the establishment and operation of these land uses. A summary of
    each zoning district as contained in the City's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance is presented in Table 2-5.
                                                         TABLE 2-5
                                                     ZONING DISTRICT
  ZONE                             DISTRICT                                                  LAND USE
  R-A-E        Single Family Residential - Limited Agricultural  Single family residences, one dwelling unit per lot, guest
               District (Minimum lot size of 1 acre)             house
R-A-20,000     Single Family Residential - Limited Agricultural
               District (Minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet) Single family residences, one dwelling unit per lot, guest
                                                                 house
R-A-15,000     Single Family Residential - Limited Agricultural
               District (Minimum lot sirs of 15,000 square feet)
                                                                 Single family residences, one dwelling unit per lot, guest
R-A-10,000     Single Family Residential - Limited Agricultural  house
               District (Minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet
   RPD         Residential Planned Development (Maximum          Single family residences, one dwelling unit per lot, guest
               density at twice the General Plan designation)    house
    A          Agriculture
                                                                 Single family residences, one dwelling unit per lot, guest
                                                                 house
                                                                 Single family residences, one dwelling unit per lot, guest
                                                                 house, patios and recreation areas, farms or ranches, land
                                                                 reclamation, facilities for the recovery of gases from previous
                                                                 landfills, golf course, temporary stockpiles of sand and gravel
                                                           2-44
                                                     TABLE 2-5
                                                 ZONING DISTRICT
 ZONE         DISTRICT                                         LAND USE
   I          Institutional                                    Public land Lisa including schools, churches, and the Civic
                                                               Center.
  C-R         Commercial Recreational
                                                               Stables, country dubs, archery ranges, fishing ponds, picnic
                                                               grounds,
  C-0         Commercial Office                                playground, restaurants, pool, tennis, golf courses.
  C-L         Restricted Commercial (Commercial Limited)       Business and professional offices
                                                               Business and professional offices, retail stores, services,
  C-G         Commercial General                               public or
                                                               private dubs
                                                               Business and professional offices, retail stores, services, sale
S-R & D       Scientific Research and Development              or service of products, hotel, storage, parting structure,
                                                               nurseries/garden, restaurants and delis
   Q          Quarry                                           Scientific research, limited prototype fabrication and assembly
                                                               of products, limited processing of chemicals and products
                                                               Quarrying, excavation of rock., sand and gravel, rock
                                                               crushing, batching plants, processing of aggregate, landfill,
                                                               land reclamation, mining, block and tile plants
   In addition to these zoning districts, several overlay districts (Horse Overlay and Landmark Overlay) exist
   for the additional regulation of such uses within designated areas.
   RPD's and Specific Plans
   Several areas in the City have been developed as residential planned developments. These areas are in the
   southwestern portion of the City and include Highridge, The Ranch, The Terraces, Cresta Verdes, and
   other condominium/townhouse projects.
   DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS
   Physical suitability is a major consideration in the designation of land uses throughout the City. There are
   areas that cannot successfully accommodate certain types of development due to inherent physical
   characteristics. These include geotechnical, seismic and flood hazard areas, irregular parcel size and shape,
   adjacent sensitive land uses, former land uses, and other features which constrain development. These
   constraints are found in some areas of the City and should be considered in future land use plans.
   Development constraints identified in the planning area are described in the following sections. The
   constraints related to public safety are also discussed in greater detail in Section 8.
                                                       2-45
Steep Terrain
The Palos Verdes Peninsula is situated on a series of uplifted marine terraces. The elevation of the City of
Rolling Hills Estates ranges from 300 to 1,200 feet above sea level. The area is characterized by rough
rolling terrain, canyons and gullies. Canyons that remain undeveloped include the Agua Negra, George F.
Canyon, Ranchview, and Amarga canyons. Portions within individual lots have also been left undeveloped
due to the need for extensive grading and other measures that would otherwise be needed to make the land
suitable for development.
Areas with steep slopes and loose soils are subject to the damaging effects of erosion due to storm and
urban water run-off. The revegetation of steep slopes has helped to control erosion of the hillsides.
Landslide Hazards
Associated with steep slopes is the propensity for unstable ground conditions and landslides. This geologic
hazard exists in all steep slope areas in the City. Landslides are believed to result from the combined
influence of water-saturated soils and grading activities associated with development. Water saturation
might result from rainfall, over-irrigation, and sewage effluent discharge.
High rainfall could loosen soil cohesion or trigger substantial soil erosion and result in hillside slope failure.
Also, grading activities could result in uncompacted soils and the disruption of water drainage courses.
Construction and development may place excessive loads on weak soils. Active and potentially active
landslides in the planning area are discussed in greater detail in the Public Safety Element Background
Report.
Seismic Hazards
The Palos Verdes Peninsula is crossed by two earthquake faults: the Newport-Inglewood Fault and the
Palos Verdes Fault. Groundshaking and surface rupture hazards are associated with earthquakes along
these faults. Other nearby faults also represent seismic risk to the City. They include the Cabrillo, the
Whittier, the Torrance-Wilmington, the Malibu Coast, and the Santa Monica-San Fernando Faults.
Steep slopes in the area are susceptible to earthquake-induced slope instability. The associated hazards
of earthquake events are also discussed in greater detail in the Public Safety Element Background Report.
                                                    2-46
Flood Hazards
Flood hazards are not generally a problem in higher elevations such as those occupied by most of the City.
There are a number of canyons and gullies which carry stormwaters north and northeast toward the flatter
land areas. Flash floods on the canyon bottoms may be a hazard but these areas are generally not
developed.
The location of the Palos Verdes Reservoir exposes the area, east of the reservoir, to potential inundation
in case of dam failure. Exhibit 8-6, in the Public Safety Element Background Report, shows the inundation
area for the Palos Verdes reservoir.
Fire Hazards
Steep slopes, combustible plant materials, high temperatures, low humidity, strong winds, and an ignition
source would provide a dangerous combination for a devastating fire. The chaparral vegetation in the
canyons helps prevent soil erosion and should not be removed unless the areas are revegetated as soon
as possible. Fire prevention efforts must focus on the use of fire retardant construction materials, the
provision of adequate fire fighting equipment, the buffer of structures from fuel areas, and the use of fire
retardant landscaping.
Land Availability
Very little growth may be expected in the City because the area is relatively builtout. Future growth is
constrained by the lack of available vacant land suitable for development. The City is approximately 97.8
percent developed with vacant parcels limited to 49.4 acres.
The potential reuse of areas, such as the quarry, the closed Dapplegray School, and the former landfill site,
is limited by the physical and environmental features of the sites. The potential for future growth will, largely,
rest on the recycling or expansion of existing land uses.
Infrastructure Constraints
Manmade constraints to future development in the planning area include existing development, the presence
of designated utility easements, and zoning restrictions to development. Another factor that controls growth
is the adequacy of the existing infrastructure (water, sewer and gas lines, and streets) to handle additional
demands brought by development.
                                                     2-47
Water service is provided by the California Water Service Company which purchases the water from the
Municipal Water District. This water comes from the Colorado River and is stored at the Palos Verdes
Reservoir which is located at the southeast corner of Palos Verdes Drive North, and Palos Verdes Drive
East, in the City of Rolling Hills Estates.
Capacity of this facility is 1,108 acre feet which is equivalent to 361,097,200 gallons. One acre foot of
water is adequate to meet the needs of a family of five for one year. The reservoir's capacity thus has the
ability to serve the residential areas of the Peninsula for a period in excess of one month should incoming
supplies ever be cut off during emergencies. Major water lines are located in Palos Verdes Drive North,
East and West. This backbone system is augmented by an extensive system of distribution lines and water
storage tanks and is projected to serve a population of 120,000 for the Peninsula.
Electricity is furnished by the Southern California Edison Company. The majority of powerlines are
overhead although some lines in the newer developments are underground. According to Edison Company
service representatives, future electrical service to Rolling Hills Estates is assured to be adequate.
Gas service is provided by the Southern California Gas Company. No problems have been foreseen.
Energy sources on a national scale, however, could change this utility supply.
In 1970 approximately sixty-five percent of the City was served by sewers provided by the Los Angeles
County Sanitation District. At the time, septic tanks were utilized by approximately thirty-five percent of
the homes in Rolling Hills Estates. Today fifteen percent of the residential areas are not connected to the
sanitary sewer district and remain on septic tanks. This condition prevails primarily in the oldest subdivisions
which date prior to or just after World War II. Of interest is the fact that a fifteen-inch sewer line traverses
the unsewered residential area in the northern part of the City. Since most septic tank systems are about
twenty-five years old, they have deteriorated with age and usage, which could develop into environmental
and health problems. There have been cases of effluent seeping into canyon bottoms. Also, collapsing septic
tanks have been noted to cause soil erosion problems. The City requires that old septic tanks be replaced
with sewer connections if they cannot be repaired. The possibility of more occurrences of waste seepage
into canyons caused by such antiquated septic tanks increases with time, and the need for a sewer master
plan becomes more evident.
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is located within the jurisdictional boundaries of Los Angeles County
Sanitation District No. 5. The Sanitation Districts own, operate, and maintain the major sewage conveyance
network which services the Cities located within this District. An index map depicting
                                                     2-48
the locations of all Sanitation District No. 5 trunk sewers has been enclosed. A list of the conveyance
facilities located within the City of Rolling Hills Estates, which includes the pipe diameters and a description
of their locations, has also been enclosed. All facilities listed currently have available capacities to
accommodate additional flows ranging from 1.2 million gallons per day (mgd) to 3.7 mgd. Local collector
sewer lines, although tributary to the Districts trunk sewer network, are not maintained by the Sanitation
Districts.
Wastewater from the City of Rolling Hills Estates is processed at the Joint Water Pollution Control Plant
(JWPCP), located in the City of Carson. The JWPCP has a design capacity of 385 mgd and currently
provides tertiary treatment to average wastewater flow of 374 mgd with 200 mgd receiving secondary
treatment.
                                                       2-49
                                          SECTION 3.1
                                       INTRODUCTION
The Transportation Element of the Rolling Hills Estates General Plan evaluates the existing
roadway system and identifies measures so that the system will be able to accommodate
existing and future traffic in the City. The Transportation Element contains goals and policies
that emphasize the need for providing an efficient circulation system and a plan for
improving the existing roadway network to handle traffic increases due to both regional and
local growth.
California Government Code Section 65302(b) requires that the Transportation Element
identify the general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares,
transportation routes, terminals, and other public utilities and facilities. The Element includes
a circulation plan which provides for a comprehensive circulation system designed to
accommodate the projected transportation needs of the City at build-out of the land use plan.
Other circulation issues involving equestrian trails, bikeways, and mufti-use trails are
addressed in the Open Space and Recreation Element.
                                                3-1
THIS PAGE IS LEFT BLANK
           3-2
                                        SECTION 3.2
              TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
The Transportation Element focuses on the future circulation and transportation needs of the
community. The element contains goals and policies relating to the provision of an efficient
circulation system. A number of other transportation related issues are also addressed
including equestrian trails, bikeways, public transportation systems, pedestrian circulation,
parking, and scenic roadways.
Issue: Safe Driving Conditions
The value of safe driving conditions to the pedestrian and the driver cannot be
underestimated. The prevention of accidents and the threat to life and property is a major
concern in the City.
Goal 1:        Provide for safe driving conditions on all City streets.
Policy 1.1            Provide comprehensive and ongoing evaluation of potentially
                      dangerous streets and intersections within the City.
       1.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to cooperate with the efforts
       of the Sheriff's Department in collecting all accident-related data. Information will be
       included in an annual report prepared for the City Council and Traffic and Safety
       Committee for review.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.2            Encourage the involvement of the Traffic and Safety Committee in
                      assessing traffic safety concerns. Encourage the involvement and
                      interaction of Homeowners Associations with the Traffic Safety
                      Committee in an effort to augment its information base as it relates to
                      traffic safety concerns.
       1.2.1 Implementation Measure: The Traffic and Safety Committee will review all
       roadway improvement plans.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General Fund
                                              3-3
Policy 1.3             Discuss trends in traffic safety on an ongoing basis with the City's
                       Traffic and Safety Committee and the City Council. Support the efforts
                       of the Sheriffs Department in collecting all accident-related data
       1.3.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will incorporate
       trends in traffic safety in the update and an annual review of the Capital Improvement
       Program.
               Timing: Annual review
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding. General Fund
Policy 1.4             The widening of streets, installation of additional traffic signals,
                       removal of trees, and other roadway improvements should be
                       compatible with the rural character of the City.
       1.4.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department should be involved in the
       review of roadway improvement projects.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning and Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.5             Evaluate and if appropriate, pursue the realignment (as shown on the
                       Master Plan of Streets) of Palos Verdes Drive East at the Chandler
                       Quarry.
       1.5.1 Implementation Measure: If appropriate the City will identify this realignment
       project for funding for the next Capital Improvement Program (5 year budget)
       allocation and prepare a schedule for project implementation.
               Timing: Fiscal Year 1994
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: None required for CIP
Policy 1.6             Discourage additional access points on arterial streets such as Palos
                       Verdes Drive North, Hawthorne Boulevard, and Palos Verde Drive
                                               3-4

               East and reduce secondary access points on residential properties, where
               appropriate.
       1.6.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning and Public Works Departments will
       consider Policy 1.6 when reviewing future development proposals in areas adjacent
       to the above roadways.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department, Planning Department
               Funding. General fund
Policy 1.7           Restrict the access and travel of large trucks on Crenshaw Boulevard,
                     Palos Verdes Drive North and other weight-restricted roadways.
       1.7.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will work with the
       Sheriffs Department to post appropriate signage, develop appropriate ordinances, and
       undertake enforcement.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning and Public Works Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.8           Maintain and improve when feasible, the arrestor beds to current design
                     standards (subsurface roadway foundation) on Hawthorne Boulevard
                     to meet the current accepted traffic engineering standards and
                     encourage Los Angeles County to install arrestor beds on Crenshaw
                     Boulevard.
       1.8.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review Capital Improvement
       Programs for the next five years and identify this project's priority on the CIP.
               Timing. Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: None required for CIP
Policy 1.9           The City will review and where appropriate, designate those roadways
                     where larger trucks (6,000 pounds) are prohibited.
       1.9.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review Capital Improvement
       Programs for the next five years and identify this project as a priority. The Public
       Works and
                                            3-5

       Planning Departments will prepare a study indicating roads where trucks will be
       prohibited, signage, enforcement, and appropriate ordinances required for
       implementation.
              Timing: Fiscal Year 1994
              Agency: Public Works and Planning Department
              Funding. None required for CIP
Policy 1.10          Cooperate and participate with Los Angeles County and adjacent
                     jurisdictions in their efforts to reduce unsafe driving conditions and to
                     enforce traffic-related laws.
       1.10.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will meet with the
       Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department periodically to review problems in the City.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.11 Prohibit large trucks on collector and local streets in the City unless deliveries
              are being made to specific locations on those streets.
       1.11.1 Implementation Measure: The City Department of Public Works will review,
       and if necessary, prepare an appropriate ordinance for review by City Council and
       Traffic Safety Committee.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.12          Provide for additional safety mechanisms on the northbound (downhill)
                     side of Hawthorne Boulevard, to handle out-of-control vehicles,
                     especially trucks.
       1.12.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will review Capital
       Improvement Programs for the next five years and identify this project as a priority.
              Timing: Fiscal Year 1994
              Agency: Public Works Department
                                              3-6
                Funding. General Fund
Policy 1.13            Provide landscaping and widen the concrete sidewalk on the Rolling
                       Hills Estates side (southeast) of Silver Spur Road between Willow
                       Wood Road and Marloma Drive.
        1.13.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will review the
        City's Capital Improvement Program for the next five years and identify this project
        as a priority.
                Timing: Fiscal Year 1993
                Agency: Public Works Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 1.14            Encourage the continuation of a Peninsula-wide traffic committee to
                       address regional traffic and safety issues.
        1.14.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will initiate
        dialogue with surrounding jurisdictions concerning the feasibility of establishing a
        Peninsula-wide traffic committee.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Public Works Department
                Funding. General Fund
Issue: Efficient Traffic Flow
The main purpose of the circulation system is to provide the most efficient way for
individuals to travel between points of activity. In support of the community's needs, the City
is determined to keep traffic flows in the area efficient and non-disruptive.
Goal 2:         Promote efficient traffic flow on City streets without compromising the
                lower density character of Rolling Hills Estates.
Policy 2.1             Restrict the construction of additional travel lanes within the City so as
                       not to adversely affect the established rural residential character of the
                       area.
        :2.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement Land Use and Circulation
        Plan included in the Land Use Element and Transportation Element respectively.
                                               3-7
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning and Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.2            Discourage primary and secondary access on arterial streets for
                      properties without frontage along these roadways.
       2.2.1 Implementation Measure: Public Works and Planning will continue to review
       all development proposals.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning and Public Works Department
               Funding. General fund
Policy 2.3            Discourage secondary access on major arterials for properties having
                      frontage on these streets, except where alternatives are not available.
       2.3.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works and Planning will continue to
       review all development proposals.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.4            Strive to maintain a level of service of "D" or better at all commercial
                      intersections (refer to Table 3-3 in Section 33).
       2.4.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning and Public Works Department will
       monitor Levels of Service using the Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU) method
       on all major roadways. All new commercial developments will be required to prepare
       a traffic study indicating the level of impact.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.5            Discourage the installation of additional traffic signals except where it
                      is determined that such improvements are required for public safety
                      needs or to mitigate serious congestion or roadway hazards.
                                              3-8
       2.5.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will require
       installation of traffic signals where traffic signal warrants are indicated in traffic
       studies.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.6            Evaluate the use of crossing guards at appropriate school crossing
                      locations to promote pedestrian safety and efficient traffic flow.
       2.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will meet with the School Districts on an
       as needed basis to discuss issues related to pedestrian safety.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.7            Review major development in other Palos Verdes Peninsula cities,
                      evaluate the potential traffic impacts, and encourage appropriate
                      mitigation measures.
       2.7.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department will notify neighboring
       special districts, agencies, and cities that Rolling Hills Estates should be placed on a
       review list to receive notices concerning negative declarations and environmental
       impact reports. A staff person will be designated to undertake and to comment on the
       review.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.8            Discourage use of Palos Verdes Drive North as alternate route for
                      Pacific Coast Highway by out-of-town traffic.
       2.8.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will work with the
       Sheriffs Department to review appropriate procedures to follow in discouraging use
       of this roadway as a through-street
                                               3-9
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.9          Require new developments within the City and on the Palos Verdes
                    Peninsula which degrade traffic flow at an intersection below a bevel
                    of Service of C or D to mitigate the adverse traffic impacts associated
                    with their developments in accordance with City approval with
                    mitigation measures.
       2.9.1 Implementation Measure: New projects will be evaluated through the
       environmental review process and mitigation measures other than roadway widenings
       and major capital improvement projects will be emphasized.
              Timing. Immediate and Ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding. General fund
Policy 2.10         Growth should be limited to that which can be accommodated by
                    existing roadways.
       2.10.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land
       Use Policy.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 2.11         Restrict the expansion of roadway pavements into open space, roadway
                    buffer zones, and bicycle, pedestrian, equestrian trails.
       2.11.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land
       Use Policy.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
                                           3-10
Policy 2.1.2         Optimize street and intersection design to facilitate traffic flow while
                     ensuring such improvements are consistent with the rural character of
                     the City.
       2.12.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land
       Use Policy and Master Plan of Streets. The City will also evaluate mitigation
       measures from adjacent cities and promote those that do not involve the widening of
       roadways.
               Timing. Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.13          Encourage commuter (rush hour) traffic to utilize Hawthorne and
                     Crenshaw Boulevards to Pacific Coast Highway or Sepulveda
                     Boulevard instead of Palos Verdes Drive North.
       2.13.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will work with the
       Sheriffs Department to review appropriate procedures to follow in discouraging use
       of this roadway as a through-street.
       Timing: Immediate and ongoing
       Agency: Public Works Department
       Funding: General fund
Policy 2.14          Maintain institutional and recreational uses along major roadways to
                     reduce potential through traffic impacts in adjacent areas. At the same
                     time, promote the retention of neighborhood schools to reduce both the
                     number and length of vehicle trips.
       2.14.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement General Plan Land Use
       Policy. Work with the local school district to promote retention of existing
       neighborhood schools.
               Timing. Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding. General Fund
                                            3-11
Issue: Multi-Use Recreational Trails
Alternative ways of travel in the City are provided by equestrian trails, bicycle paths and
pedestrian walks. To reduce the dependence on vehicular travel, these means should be
promoted and made accessible.
Goal 3:        Provide safe and comprehensive trail systems for equestrian, bicycle, and
               pedestrian use and promote the development of connections between
               existing trail systems where feasible.
Policy 3.1            Any new development will be encouraged to provide connections
                      between trails, where appropriate.
       3.1.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services and Planning
       Departments will review future development proposals to identify potential
       connections to the trail system.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Community Services Department and Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 3.2            Encourage development of a Peninsula-wide loop trail as shown in the
                      1957 Los Angeles County Regional Recreational Plan.
       3.2.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services Department will initiate
       dialogue with neighboring jurisdictions to discuss feasibility of implementing a
       regional trails system.
               Timing: Begin in 1994
               Agency: Community Services Department
               Funding: None required
Policy 3.3            Minimize the interface of bridle trails and City streets where feasible.
       33.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services and Planning Departments
       will review future development proposals to identify potential connections to the trail
       system.
                                            3-12
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Community Services and Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 3.4            Restrict motorized vehicles/bicycles from using designated equestrian
                      trails except in case of emergency, trail maintenance, or to service the
                      property.
       3.4.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services Department will ensure
       that appropriate signage is posted and work with the Sheriffs Department for
       enforcement.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Community Services Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 3.5            Establish a program designed to educate residents in how to safely and
                      courteously use the trail network.
       3.5.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services Department will prepare
       a brochure that will be distributed Citywide informing residents about trail safety.
              Timing: 1993
              Agency: Community Services Department and City Manager
              Funding: General fund
Policy 3.6            Encourage new trails to be constructed with an irrevocable offer to
                      dedicate to the City and ensure that all trails are available for public
                      access.
       3.6.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services Department will initiate
       dialogue with neighboring jurisdictions to discuss feasibility of implementing a
       regional trails system.
              Timing: Begin in 1994
              Agency: Community Services Department
              Funding: General fund
                                              3-13
Policy 3.7            Encourage cooperation among Peninsula jurisdictions to establish
                      comprehensive multi-use trail network for equestrian, bicycle, and
                      pedestrian use and encourage development of additional on-street bike
                      paths to enable the development of a Peninsula-wide loop system.
       3.7.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services Department will initiate
       dialogue with neighboring jurisdictions to discuss feasibility of implementing a
       regional trails system.
              Timing: Begin in 1994
              Agency: Community Services Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 3.8            Encourage the expansion of pedestrian paths in residential and
                      commercial areas and incorporate pedestrian activity on all off-street
                      bike paths.
       3.8.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services and Planning
       Departments will review future development proposals to identify potential
       connections to the trail system.
              Timing. Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Community Services and Planning Department
              Funding. General fund
Policy 3.9            Evaluate the use of the equestrian trail network as an alternative
                      transportation system for use in the event of an emergency.
       39.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department, County of Los
       Angeles Fire Department, and City Manager will review the feasibility of using
       selected trails to provide emergency access.
              Timing Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 3.10           Continue to investigate possible funding sources for acquisition,
                      development and maintenance of trails and bicycle paths.
                                            3-14
       3.10.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services Department will
       investigate potential funding sources.
              Timing.- Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Community Services Department
              Funding: General fund
Issue: Transit and Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
Public transportation and TDM reduce traffic congestion and provide better utilization of
City streets. With increasing energy costs, congestion and pollution, it is prudent to
reconsider the expansion of public transportation in the area.
Goal 4:       Promote greater use of public transit as an alternative means of
              transportation.
Policy 4.1           Encourage and promote greater use of public transportation including
                     car pools, van pools, and bus services.
       4.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City Manager will initiate a program
       publicizing regional and local planning efforts to promote use of public transit
       through the City's newsletter.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 4.2           Encourage large employment centers to provide increased van pool
                     service to Peninsula residents.
       4.2.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department will cooperate with the
       South Coast Air Quality Management District to ensure that the City will adhere to
       Regulation XV.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 4.3           Pursue additional park and ride locations through cooperation with
                     other Peninsula communities and major employment centers.
                                            3-15
       4.3.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will initiate a
       program publicizing regional and local planning efforts to promote use of public
       transit.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Public Works Department and City Manager
                Funding. General fund
Policy 4.4            Promote the development of a comprehensive bus service system,
                      including fixed-route programs to various points of interest such as
                      commercial centers, schools, and recreation areas.
       4.4.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will initiate a
       program publicizing regional and local planning efforts to promote use of public
       transit.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Public Works Department and City Manager
                Funding. General fund
Policy 4.5            Participate in and encourage Peninsula-wide cooperation among the
                      various jurisdictions to provide comprehensive programs to address the
                      public transportation needs of the region.
       4.5.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will initiate a
       program publicizing regional and local planning efforts to promote use of public
       transit.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Public Works Department
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 4.6            Encourage the use of school buses for students attending schools within
                      the City and encourage parents to have their children utilize alternate
                      means of transportation to get to school.
       4.6.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will initiate a
       program publicizing regional and local planning efforts to promote use of public
       transit.
                                              3-16
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Public Works Department and City Manager
                Funding. General fund
Issue: Parking Areas
The provision of adequate parking areas facilitate the onset and completion of vehicular
travel Inadequate parking often leads to congestion and additional traffic delays.
Goal 5:         Promote efficient, safe and convenient parking facilities within the
                commercial areas of the City.
Policy 5.1             Require compliance with minimum standards for parking lot designs as
                       specified by the Municipal Code.
        5.1.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department will continue to review
        all parking lot designs to ensure they are in compliance with City standards.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding. General fund
Policy 5.2             Require parking lot designs to provide easy access to nearby retail
                       areas.
        5.2.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department will continue to review
        all parking lot designs to ensure they are in compliance with City standards.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 5.3             Eliminate on-street parking spaces to improve circulation along
                       commercial streets where appropriate.
        5.3.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will identify those
        roadways serving commercial areas where on-street parking is still permitted and
        establish a timetable to eliminate on-street parking where off-street parking is
        appropriate.
                                             3-17
               Timing: 1993
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 5.4            Require existing retail and commercial uses with substandard
                      circulation or parking conditions to upgrade their facilities to
                      established design standards.
       5.4.1 Implementation Measure: The Public Works Department will identify those
       roadways serving commercial areas where on-street parking is still permitted and
       establish a timetable to eliminate on-street parking where off-street parking is
       appropriate.
               Timing: 1993
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 5.5            Require adequate off-street parking for remodeled and future
                      developments.
       5.5.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department will continue to review
       all parking lot designs to ensure they are in compliance with City standards.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 5.6            Regulate overnight street parking and parking of recreational vehicles
                      on public streets.
       5.6.1 Implementation Measure: The Sheriffs Department will continue to enforce
       on-street parking requirements in the City.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Sheriffs Department
               Funding. General fund
Policy 5.7     Maintain institutional facilities along major roads and in areas where they are
               readily accessible.
                                              3-18
       5.7.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use
       Policy.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 5.8.          Maintain schools and school sites within residential areas to promote
                     short trips, less traffic, and student safety.
       5.8.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use
       Policy.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding. General fund
                                               3-19
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
            3-20
                                          SECTION 3.3
                                 TRANSPORTATION PLAN
ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION
This section of the Transportation Element establishes roadway classifications and standards
for the City. The roadway classification system for the Rolling Hills Estates General Plan
consist of four roadway categories: major arterials, secondary arterials, collector streets, and
local streets. Appropriate standards for each category are described below. Exhibit 3-1
illustrates the circulation system for the City of Rolling Hills Estates as provided in this
Transportation Element. Conceptual cross-sections of each roadway category are provided
in Exhibit 3-2.
Arterial Roadways
Arterial Roadways comprise the backbone transportation network for the City. They are the
important streets which connect major traffic generators (such as shopping centers,
employment activities, etc.) in addition to providing direct connections to freeways and other
major roadways. The traffic function of arterials is that of moving vehicles - particularly
regional traffic on long trips between distant points. Property access is a secondary function.
For this reason, driveways and intersections should be restricted and controlled. Access to
property abutting an arterial should be provided, if at all possible, by some other route.
Arterials are designated "Major" and "Secondary", according to their relative importance.
The City's general polity has been to minimize the number of access points on arterial streets.
Additional points of access along these arterials not only pose potential safety hazards for
vehicles making various turning movements, but also affects the flow of traffic on those
streets most heavily traveled. By consolidating the points of ingress and egress along these
streets, traffic flow is improved while minimizing potential points of conflict with residential
access and major arterials.
        #        Major Arterial streets are the most important roadways in this category and are
                 designed to carry through traffic on four or more moving lanes of traffic, with
                 controlled access to any area of development.
        #        Secondary Arterial streets are of less importance, but still designed to carry
                 through traffic. Their function is to transfer traffic from local streets to the
                 Major Arterials from local traffic generators, such as schools and shopping
                 centers. Streets in this category will generally be designed for two or four
                 moving lanes of traffic.
                                                3-21


Major Arterial Streets include the following roadways:
        #      Hawthorne Boulevard
        #      Crenshaw Boulevard
Secondary Arterial Streets include the following roadways:
        #      Palos Verdes Drive North
        #      Silver Spur Road
        #      Palos Verdes Drive East
        #      Indian Peak Road
        #      Rolling Hills Road
        #      Crest Road, between Hawthorne and Crenshaw Boulevards
        #      Silver Spur from Monte Malaga to Palos Verdes Drive North
Collector Streets
Collector Streets terminate at an Arterial Street so that traffic generated on the local streets
can have easy access to the primary street system consisting of the arterial roadways. This
Plan indicates those roadways classified as Collectors. Certain additional safety measures
should also be taken, such as signing all local streets that intersect with the Collector with
either "Yield" or "Stop" Signs to permit the Collector to better perform its job in the total
street system.
Collector Streets include the following roadways:
        #      Whitley Collies Road
        #      Willow Wood Road
        #      Kingspine Road
                                             3-22
Local Streets
Local Streets are designed to carry traffic to individual parcels and should be designed to
discourage through traffic. Their primary function is to provide access to the property which
abuts the street. They also act as open space and firebreaks. All of the remaining roadways
in the City are classified as Collector Streets.
TRANSPORTATION PLAN MAP
The Transportation Plan Map is provided in Exhibit 3-1. The Map shows all of the existing
streets that should be designated as Arterials, both major and secondary; the collector roads,
local roads, and suggested routes of proposed extensions or new streets in these categories.
It should be noted that where new streets are proposed, the map line does not indicate a
precise location, but rather a generalized location subject to either a proposed subdivision of
the area, or precise alignment by the adoption of a "Plan Line".
Table 3-1 summarizes the roadway classifications and the applicable standards.
                                                       TABLE 3-1
                                  ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION STANDARDS
 Roadway Classification                                  Standards                        Facilities
 Arterial (Major and Secondary)           2 to 4 travel lane                Palos Verdes Dr. North
                                          Divided roadway                   Hawthorne Blvd.
                                          Left-turn lands/pockets           Crenshaw Blvd.
                                          60-80 feet road width             Palos Verdes Dr. East
                                          80 to 100 feet right-of-way       Silver Spur Road
                                                                            Indian Peak Road
                                                                            Rolling Hills Road
                                                                            Crest Road
                                                                            Highridge Road
 Collector Streets                        2 to 4 travel lanes               Willow Wood Road
                                          Undivided road                    Whitney Collins Road
                                          32-to 52-foot road width          Kingspine Road
                                          60-foot right-of-way width
 Local Streets                            Two travel lanes                  All remaining streets in Rolling
                                          36- to 40-foot road width         Hills Estates not otherwise classified
                                          50- to 60-foot right-of-way width as collector or arterial roadways.
 Source: City of Rolling Hills Estates, 1991.
                                                           3-23
LAND USE PLAN
To assess the effect of the General Plan Land Use Policy on traffic, it was first necessary to
obtain the background traffic projects for each major area of the City. This information is
documented in the background section of this element. The next step was to determine the
projected traffic from the areas where the land use is proposed to be changed or modified.
Where areas are either vacant or underutilized, the traffic projections indicate the more
intense use. This approach is the most conservative approach from a traffic analysis point of
view.
Table 3-2 indicates the traffic generating factors used in projecting the traffic impacts
resulting from the implementation of land use policy. The generation factors should also be
used in evaluating traffic impacts from future development in the City.
                                               TABLE 3-2
                                           TRIP GENERATION
                              Land Use               Trip Rate      Per
                 Single-Family Housing                     10.0     Unit
                 Condominium                                5.9     Unit
                 Apartment                                   6.1    Unit
                 Regional Shopping Center                  48.3  1,000 SF
                 Community Shopping Center                 74.3  1,000 SF
                 Neighborhood Shopping Center              40.7  1,000 SF
                 Commercial Office                         22.7  1,000 SF
                 Government Office                         68.9  1,000 SF
                 Source: ITE, 4th Edition.
The following changes to traffic patterns are anticipated with the implementation of the land
use policy:
        #      New residential traffic from the Northrop and Chandler sites will follow
               current traffic distribution and the volumes are substantially less than that
               generated by the existing use.
        #      The majority of new traffic on arterials will be generated by development
               outside the City.
                                                 3-24
        #      The implementation of the land use plan will result in a stabilization of trip
               generation in most areas of the City and there will be a reduction in the number
               of trucks with the eventual termination of Chandler Quarry activities.
In summary, the land use plan will involve a long-term transition of land uses in some areas
of the City. This future development will not result in significant trip generation.
LEVELS OF SERVICE
A roadway's ability to handle current traffic loads can be described in terms of level of
service (LOS). The LOS is the ratio of a road's desirable service volume to the existing traffic
volumes. For example, a road with a design capacity of 24,000 vehicles per day (vpd)
carrying 20,000 vpd has an LOS ratio of 0.83. Ratio ranges can be used to describe actual
traffic operating conditions as outlined in Table 3-3 and is shown in Exhibit 3-3. For
example, a ratio of 0.83 corresponds to LOS D, which is characterized by unstable traffic
flows compared to a ratio of 0.70 which corresponds to an LOS B which represents a
condition of free flowing traffic.
The LOS can be calculated if the design capacity for average daily traffic (ADT) and the
existing traffic volumes (in ADT) are known. City standards call for a LOS of D on local
roadways.
                                               TABLE 3-3
                      INTERSECTION LEVEL OF SERVICE DEFINITIONS a
         LOS                                    Interpretation                        V/C Ratio b
         A, B           Uncongested operations; all vehicles clear in a single signal 0.00 - 0.70
                        cycle
           C            Light congestion; occasional backups on critical approaches   0.71 - 0.80
           D            Congestion on critical approaches, but intersection function. 0.81 - 0.90
                        Vehicles required to wait through more than one cycle during
                        short peaks. No long-standing lines formed.
           E            Severe congestion with some long-standing lines on critical    091 - 1.00
                        approaches. Blockage of intersection may occur if traffic
                        signal does not provide for protected turning movement.
           F            Severe congestion approaching gridlock.                          1.01+
   a
    Source: Highway Capacity Manual, 1965.
   b
     Volume/level of service E capacity.
                                                   3-25

THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK.
            3-26
                                        SECTION 3.4
                                 BACKGROUND REPORT
EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM
The Transportation Element Background Report provides a detailed analysis of
transportation and traffic-related issues in the City. This report discusses the existing
roadways and other transportation-related improvements, existing roadway levels of service,
and public transit.
Regional access to the City is provided by the Harbor Freeway (State Highway 110) and the
San Diego Freeway (I-405). The former is located approximately 2-1/2 miles to the east
while the latter is located approximately 4 miles to the north of the City.
A limited number of roadways serve as the backbone transportation system in the City. Major
east/west movement is provided by Palos Verdes Drive North, an arterial roadway, which
serves as the primary roadway in the City. A number of other arterial roadways, including
Hawthorne Boulevard, Crenshaw Boulevard, and Palos Verdes Drive East, carry large
volumes of through-traffic to other communities in the Peninsula. Four roadways, Highridge
Road, Silver Spur Road, Rolling Hills Road, and a portion of Palos Verdes Drive East, are
designated as secondary collectors and primarily serve communities and commercial districts
located within the City. The existing circulation system is shown in Exhibit 3-4.
Existing Traffic Conditions
This section of the Transportation Element Background Report evaluates the efficiency of
traffic flow on the City's street system. While most of the streets in the City are residential
cul-de-sacs, with no through-traffic impacts, a substantial increase in traffic has been
experienced on the major arterials of the City, most notably Palos Verdes Drive North.
Because major arterials such as Palos Verdes Drive North, Hawthorne Boulevard, and
Rolling Hills Road are primary commute routes for much of the South Bay area, the increase
in traffic congestion that has occurred in recent years has been the result of regional growth.
Future development in the Peninsula/South Bay region will result in additional traffic
congestion as these commute routes become even more significant.
To assist in the evaluation of traffic congestion issues, daily traffic volumes were provided
in a 1983 report prepared by Greer & Co. and in later environmental studies completed for
individual developments (Greer 1988, Frank 1990). In addition, the City's Traffic Engineer
has provided analysis of recent trends in traffic flow with particular emphasis on Palos
Verdes Drive North.
                                              3-27

Exhibit 3-5 and Table 3-4 indicate traffic volumes on various streets within the City. The
highest volumes are shown on Hawthorne Boulevard, Crenshaw Boulevard, and Palos
Verdes Drive North. While the amount of vehicles on all three streets is substantial,
Hawthorne and Crenshaw Boulevards have a minimum of four lanes helping to minimize
significant traffic congestion problems.
                                                  TABLE 3-4
                                          ROADWAY VOLUMES
                                    Roadway Segment                              ADT
                  Crenshaw Blvd. n/o Palos Verdes Dr. N.                          19,800*
                  Crenshaw Blvd. s/o Palos Verdes Dr. N.                          30,300*
                  Crenshaw Blvd. s/o Silver Spur Rd.                                16,430
                  Hawthorne Blvd. n/o Palos Verdes Dr. N.                         33,600*
                  Hawthorne Blvd. s/o Palos Verdes Dr. N.                         28,400*
                  Highridge Road                                                      6,910
                  Silver Spur Rd. n/o Willow Wood                                   14,280
                  Silver Spur Rd. s/o Willow Wood                                     8,380
                  Silver Spur Rd. se/o Hawthorns Blvd.                              15,150
                  Silver Spur Rd. w/o Crenshaw Blvd.                                13,870
                  Palos Verdes Dr. N. w/o Silver Spur Rd.                           14,980
                  Palos Verdes Dr. N. w/o Hawthorne Blvd.                           16,100
                  Palos Verdes Dr. N, w/o Crenshaw Blvd.                            12,100
                  Palos Verdes Dr. N. e/o Crenshaw Blvd.                          23,000*
                  Palos Verdes Dr. N. e/o Rolling Hills Rd.                       35,000*
                  Palos Verdes Dr. N. e/o Palos Verdes Dr. E.                       30,300
                  Palos Verdes Dr. E. n/o Palos Verdes Dr. N.                         7,620
                  Palos Verdes Dr. E. s/o Palos Verdes Dr. N.                       10,300
                  Rolling Hills Rd. n/o Palos Verdes Dr. N.                           8,780
                  Note:    Average daily traffic volumes are for 1983, City of Rolling
                           Hills Estates 1988.        n/o = north of, s/o = south of,
                                                      e/o = east of
                  Source: Greer and Company. 1983         *1988 est.
                                                     3-28

In contrast Palos Verdes Drive North has only two lanes for most of its length through the
City yet carries more traffic, in some areas, than any other street in the City. Therefore,
congestion has become a much more significant concern on this roadway.
In the City's consideration of traffic flow concerns, the most significant street is Palos Verdes
Drive North. This street is not only the main artery of Rolling Hills Estates, but one of the
primary commute routes for the Peninsula.
For years the majority of traffic has been oriented toward an eastbound commuter route in
the morning and westbound direction in the evening, providing access to and from the Harbor
Freeway. Recent data indicates that traffic has become much heavier for both westbound
morning and eastbound evening traffic. Much of this traffic can be attributed to the aerospace
industry locations in the El Segundo area. As a result, the congestion problems on Palos
Verdes Drive North, during peak commute hours, have become significant in both directions.
In fact, current traffic levels in each direction are almost evenly split. (See Table 3-5.)
There has also been a change in overall traffic volumes on Palos Verdes Drive North. The
roadway has experienced a 19% increase over the last five years, and 28% in the last ten
years. While these increases have further contributed to the peak hour congestion, it is also
important to note that the length of time in which heavy congestion occurs has increased. In
other words, the peak hour period has been extended in the morning and afternoon along
Palos Verdes Drive North.
While the eastern portion of Palos Verdes Drive North incorporates four travel lanes, the
majority of this street has two lanes. Currently, the most congested section is located between
the intersections of Crenshaw Boulevard and Palos Verdes Drive East.
In measuring the severity of traffic congestion on a street, a "Level of Service" (LOS)
ranging from "A" to "F" is assigned (See Exhibit 3-3). Level "A" represents optimal
conditions, while Level "F' indicates the most congested conditions. Two of the most
congested intersections have been assessed (Palos Verdes Drive North/Rolling Hills Road
and Palos Verdes Drive North/Dapplegray School Road) for the a.m. and p.m. peak hours.
For the Palos Verdes Drive North/Rolling Hills Road intersection, the LOS for the a.m. and
p.m. peak hours was LOS "D" and LOS "E", respectively. The LOS for the Palos Verdes
Drive North/Dapplegray School Road intersection was LOS "E" for both the a.m. and p.m.
peak hour. Even though these measurements were taken while Dapplegray School was still
in session, traffic volumes remain high since the closure of the school.
Certain recent improvements have occurred subsequent to these measurements which affect
Palos Verdes Drive North. Specifically, the signal at the intersection of Rolling Hills
                                               3-29
Road/Palos Verdes Drive North has been modified to provide a longer green time on Palos
Verdes Drive North. In addition, the repair work on Palos Verdes Drive North was recently
completed, providing an alternate route for many residents on the western portion of the
Peninsula. While Palos Verdes Drive North still experiences significant traffic levels, these
two factors have provided some degree of reduction in traffic congestion.
The two-way peak hour traffic volume on Palos Verdes Drive North has increased 11 percent
during the last 10 years, with 9 percent of this increase occurring during the last 5 years. On
Pacific Coast Highway there has been an increase in the two-way peak hour volume of 16
percent over the last 10 years, with a decrease of about 12 percent occurring over the last 5
years. During the same time, Rolling Hills Road increased nearly 20 percent in the two-way
peak traffic volume in the last 10 years, with about 16 percent of this increase occurring
during the last 5 years. The fact that Rolling Hills Road facilitates access to Pacific Coast
Highway is important in this analysis. This would tend to indicate that Rolling Hills Road has
become much more desirable as a connection between Palos Verdes Drive North and Pacific
Coast Highway than Crenshaw Boulevard. In comparison with Pacific Coast Highway, Palos
Verdes Drive North presently carries 80 percent of the peak hour volume that is carried by
Pacific Coast Highway.
To more accurately evaluate the existing impact of congestion, a comparison of travel times
on Pacific Coast Highway versus Palos Verdes Drive North has been provided in Table 3-5.
                                              TABLE 3-5
                                    TRAVEL TIME MEASUREMENTS
         Hawthorne Boulevard/Pacific Coast Highway to Western Avenue/Palos Verdes Drive North
                                                            Morning                 Afternoon
                                                          (Westbound)              (Eastbound)
 Pacific Coast Highway/Western Avenue Route                   9:55                    10:46
 (3.40 miles)                                                10:47                    13:52
                                                              8:33                    13:28
 Average Time                                                 9:45                    12:42
 Average Speed                                              21.5 mph                 16.5 mph
 Hawthorne Boulevard/Rolling Hills Road/Palos                 850                     12:13
 Verdes Dr. N. Route (4.24 miles)                            10:13                    12:41
                                                              8:23                    11:23
 Average Time                                                 9:09                    12:06
 Average Speed                                              27.8 mph                 21.0 mph
                                                3-30
While only three runs were made in each direction on each route, it can be concluded that it
takes slightly less time to travel through Rolling Hills Estates on Palos Verdes Drive North
than along Pacific Coast Highway. Further, even though the route through the City is 0.75
miles longer, it still takes a shorter travel time. For westbound morning traffic, it takes
approximately 30 seconds less out of a 10 minute trip to travel on Palos Verdes Drive
North/Rolling Hills Road/Hawthorne Boulevard than it does along Western Avenue/Pacific
Coast Highway between these two end points. Similarly for eastbound afternoon traffic it
takes approximately 30 seconds less out of a 12 minute trip to travel on Hawthorne
Boulevard/Rolling Hills Road/Palos Verdes Drive North than it does along Pacific Coast
Highway/Western Avenue between these two end points.
Travel times were also measured in straight runs between Hawthorne Boulevard and Western
Avenue on both Pacific Coast Highway and on Palos Verdes Drive North. These runs were
made in June of 1987. (Note: Miraleste High School was not in session in June 1987).
Afternoon runs on both roadways were made on Wednesday, June 24 between 3:30 and 6:00
p.m. Similar to the two other selected routes through the area, the first run was made at the
beginning of the peak hours, the second made during the middle of the peak hours and the
third run at the end of the peak hours. The results and averages are shown in Table 3-6.
                                               TABLE 3-6
                                      TRAVEL TIME MEASUREMENTS
                                  Hawthorne Boulevard to Western Avenue
                                                        Morning                Afternoon
                                               Eastbound     Westbound  Eastbound     Westbound
 Pacific Coast Highway Route (2.75 miles)         6:21          7:55      7:02           11:49
                                                  8.53          8:47      8:20           14:38
                                                  5:53          6:33     12:40           19:17
 Average Time                                     7:02          7:45      9:21           15:15
 Average Speed                                  23.5 mph      21.3 mph  17.6 mph       10.8 mph
 Palos Verdes Drive North (339 miles)             6:56          6:25      8:22           7:00
                                                  8:07          7:40      7:01            8:24
                                                  6:28          7:00       831           13:17
 Average Time                                     7:10          7:02      7:58            9:34
 Average Speed                                  28.4 mph      28.9 mph  25.5 mph       21.3 mph
Eastbound morning peak hour travel time between Hawthorne Boulevard and Western
Avenue is approximately the same on either route. In the westbound direction during the
                                                  3-31
morning peak hour, it takes approximately 45 seconds less using Palos Verdes Drive North
to travel between Western Avenue and Hawthorne Boulevard. Eastbound in the afternoon,
it takes 80 seconds less to travel across on Palos Verdes Drive North. Westbound in the
afternoon, it is nearly 6 minutes faster on Palos Verdes Drive North between Western
Avenue and Hawthorne Boulevard. However, it is interesting to note that the volume of
traffic on each street is fairly close, although Pacific Coast Highway has four lanes. This is
important in that Pacific Coast Highway is designated as a State Highway and developed as
a major commercial and commute route, whereas Palos Verdes Drive North is a residential
street. Nevertheless, over the past 5 years, peak hour traffic has decreased on Pacific Coast
Highway, while Palos Verdes Drive North has seen a 9% increase during that same period.
As schools have been consolidated throughout the Palos Verdes Peninsula additional traffic
has been added to the street of Rolling Hills Estates. Palos Verdes Drive North has been
directly impacted as students from the schools that closed travel this road.
Given these facts, it is apparent that many of the impacts associated with traffic congestion
on Palos Verdes Drive North involve regional issues. Cooperation between various
jurisdictions is also important to ensure that all cities provide assistance to resolve such
concerns. In that regard, several facts regarding Pacific Coast Highway have been noted by
the City Traffic Engineer. The following issues could play a significant role in minimizing
congestion on both Pacific Coast Highway and Palos Verdes Drive North.
        #      Pacific Coast Highway at Hawthorne Boulevard - The City of Torrance is
               planning to widen Pacific Coast Highway for about 1,000 feet on both sides
               of Hawthorne Boulevard. When completed, three through lanes in each
               direction will be on Pacific Coast Highway at and through Hawthorne
               Boulevard.
        #      Pacific Coast Highway at Crenshaw Bboulevard - The City of Torrance is
               considering widening Pacific Coast Highway on both sides of Crenshaw
               Boulevard to provide three through lanes in each direction. To accomplish
               these improvements the project may eliminate the existing dual eastbound and
               westbound left turn lanes from Pacific Coast Highway, providing only one left
               turn lane eastbound and westbound. While the project is not scheduled at this
               time, it may occur within the next three to eight years.
        #      Pacific Cost Highway Traffic Signals within the City of Lomita - The
               existing traffic signals on Pacific Coast Highway in the City of Lomita are all
               pre-timed, operating on a fixed cycle length without regard to actual demand.
               Pedestrian time to cross Pacific Coast Highway is provided every cycle,
                                               3-32
               whether or not there are any pedestrians waiting to cross. Because of this and
               the width of Pacific Coast Highway, about 30 percent of the available green
               time is now being given to the side streets. Considerable congestion occurs as
               a result of the existing traffic signal system. Plans are now being prepared to
               modernize and interconnect traffic signals on Pacific Coast Highway from the
               western City boundary of Lomita to the Harbor Freeway. It is estimated that
               the green time which is now provided for the side streets will be reduced in
               half upon completion of this project.
        #      Pacific Coast Highway at Western Avenue - As part of the traffic signal
               improvement project, the intersection of Pacific Coast Highway and Western
               Avenue will be improved to provide northbound to westbound dual left turn
               lanes. These improvements should reduce the present delays experienced by
               this movement.
The improvements described above will certainly improve the present operating conditions
on Pacific Coast Highway. The greatest single improvement will probably occur with the
new traffic signal system through Lomita. Present operating speeds in the afternoon peak
hour are about 10 miles per hour. These should improve to between 20 and 25 miles per hour
upon completion of this project. The dual left turn lanes from northbound Western Avenue
to Pacific Coast Highway will add needed capacity to this movement and reduce delays
which these turning motorists now experience. This may encourage some northbound traffic
on Western Avenue to continue north to Pacific Coast Highway rather than turn left on Palos
Verdes Drive North. Each of the improvements by the City of Torrance will also provide
additional capacity to Pacific Coast Highway.
In addition to the planned improvements described above, there are three other potential
projects which could improve east-west capacity, on a regional basis, through this area. First,
Pacific Coast Highway through Lomita is 72 feet wide between curbs. While it is understood
that the City does not plan to physically widen the roadway at this time, a possible option to
improve capacity involves the prohibition of curb parking during peak hours. While this
roadway travels through a business district, it may be possible to accommodate the present
curb parking on side streets or within off-street parking lots during peak traffic hours. If this
could be done, then a third through lane in each direction could be provided. A left-hand turn
signal at Pacific Coast Highway and Narbonne for northbound traffic on Palos Verdes Drive
East would help reduce traffic to Palos Verdes Drive North residential areas.
In considering traffic congestion on any street, the primary concern to motorists is the
resulting delay in time. Therefore, it is helpful to evaluate how much time can be saved if
                                               3-33
certain improvements were implemented. Table 3-3 indicates that between Hawthorne
Boulevard and Western Avenue on Palos Verdes Drive North, it takes a vehicle from
approximately 7 to 9-1/2 minutes to travel this distance during morning and peak-hour
periods. While there are no specific figures, it is estimated that if Palos Verdes Drive North
were widened to four lanes, the amount of time saved would be a few minutes. It is important
that the actual benefits achieved from adding lanes are weighed against the resulting impacts,
before any policy direction is determined. In the case of Palos Verdes Drive North, it would
appear that the benefits received from reducing travel time by a few minutes may not warrant
the potential impacts on the quality of life in Rolling Hills Estates.
While the City of Rolling Hills Estates has no control over those improvements on Pacific
Coast Highway being implemented, the data provided above indicates that future
improvements to the highway would likely have a greater long-term effect on traffic
congestion for both streets, as opposed to the improvements which could be realized by
widening Palos Verdes Drive North.
TRAFFIC CONTROL
An important consideration of traffic congestion issues is the involvement of traffic control
devices within the various street systems (See Exhibit 3-6). This issue has been of particular
concern in discussion of Palos Verdes Drive North. Over the past several years, various
improvements in the existing signals have been made to provide better traffic flow. Generally
speaking, these lights have been timed to provide longer green phases on Palos Verdes Drive
North. In addition, turning movements have been better coordinated to minimize the red
phase on Palos Verdes Drive North. In the opinion of the Traffic Engineer, there are no
traffic control device alternatives remaining which would enable any noticeable reduction
in congestion on this street. It has been questioned whether coordinate timing of the signals
along Palos Verdes Drive North would have any benefits; however, the Traffic Engineering
indicates the signals are too far apart to effectively coordinate.
While the majority of the primary intersections in Rolling Hills Estates are currently
signalized, additional signals may warrant consideration in the future, if safety standards are
adversely affected. While signalization of intersections can have many positive impacts on
traffic flow and safety, it can also have significant impacts on the character of a given area,
especially in residential neighborhoods. With the continuing population increase in
neighboring Peninsula cities, traffic volumes at most intersections will also increase over
time. Given the emphasis of maintaining a rural character in Rolling Hills Estates, it is
important that potential impacts of additional signals be evaluated carefully, with the
understanding that public safety concerns are of primary importance.
                                              3-34

When evaluating the need for signalization, the City reviews specific technical data
pertaining to traffic flow, accident rates, intersection design and other factors. If this data
indicates that a particular intersection exceeds acceptable standards or levels of service,
consideration is then to be given to the installation of signals. Since a primary goal of the
City is to preserve the rural community character, signalization of additional intersections
should be given priority when it is clear that a signal is needed for protection of public safety
and will provide a beneficial improvement to the community.
In some cases, the technical data may indicate that an intersection meets all safety standards,
however, it exceeds certain traffic efficiency levels. In these situations, the City must
carefully evaluate the potential impacts on the rural character of the City if additional signals
are added versus the benefits which could be gained in improved traffic flow.
TRAFFIC SAFETY
The study prepared by Greer and Co. in 1983, provided a comprehensive traffic safety
analysis of the City's street systems. While this report provided data to establish many City
policies regarding traffic and safety issues, additional data and analysis has been provided
to more accurately reflect current conditions and trends.
To assess the trends in traffic safety, average yearly accident rates were consulted for the
years 1985-1987. The purpose of this analysis, (summarized in Table 3-7) is to give a better
indication of the impacts of additional traffic volumes versus the benefits gained in various
street improvements occurring since the preparation of the Greer Report.
                                                  TABLE 3-7
                                             ACCIDENT SUMMARY
           Type of Accident                            Average Yearly Number of Accidents
                                                  1980 -1982                        1985 -1987
 Mid-block collisions                                 54                                58
 Intersection collisions                              50                                57
 Fixed object collisions                              23                                19
 Source: City of Rolling Hills Estates. 1989
The 1983 Greer study notes that the accident rate experienced in Rolling Hills Estates is well
below the average in Los Angeles County. Nevertheless, there were certain locations which
warranted in-depth review in the attempt to improve safety conditions for these areas.
                                                    3-35
The Hawthorne Boulevard/Palos Verdes Drive North intersection has experienced the
greatest number of accidents over the last several years with approximately 10 incidents
reported per year. Most of these have involved rear end collisions. The lack of early visibility
of traffic signals, as well as the awkward geometry of this intersection, appear to be the major
contributing factors to these problems.
Several recommendations were made in the Greer study, most of which involved means for
providing earlier warnings to motorists of the upcoming intersection They included the
following:
        1.      Install advance warning signs (W41) and yellow flashers on the southbound
                and eastbound approaches. Add the yellow flasher to the existing "signal
                ahead" (W41) sign on the northbound approach.
        2.      Install pavement grooving on the northbound and eastbound approaches to
                reduce skid potential.
        3.      Install raised reflectorized pavement markings on all four approaches. Due to
                climatic conditions, such as ground fog, raised reflectorized markings should
                be used throughout the City.
        4.      Provide painted channelization for the separate right-turn lanes eastbound and
                westbound.
        5.      Provide turning guidelines for left-turn movements on northbound and
                southbound approaches.
        6.      Implement a one-second all-red phase between directional through phases to
                eliminate potential right-angle conflicts.
        7.      Consider widening the eastbound approach to improve driver visibility on the
                intersection approach and to reduce the abrupt transition from one lane to four
                lanes on the approach.
Although Items 3, 4, 5, and 6 listed above have been implemented, the accident rate has
remained basically unchanged. In addition to these recommendations, the free right-turn lane
on eastbound Palos Verdes Drive North has been eliminated. This additional improvement
would address Item 7.
                                               3-36
Finally, new loop detectors and larger signal heads were installed in 1986. Following the
installation of these improvements, there was no noticeable change in the yearly accident
rate. While the accident rate at this intersection is not excessive, it is difficult to determine
whether any noticeable decrease in the accident rate can be accomplished with the
implementation of all the above-mentioned recommendations.
The City's Traffic Engineer has also reviewed and examined the arrestor beds on Hawthorne
Boulevard which were originally constructed under the State Department of Transportation
(CalTrans) design standards. Although CalTrans has revised their standards for the
construction of new arrestor beds, the Traffic Engineer concludes that the existing arrestor
beds are adequate; however, should any modifications be made in the future, consideration
for updating the design should be given at that time.
Palos Verdes Drive North/Crenshaw Boulevard: The accident rate at this intersection has
increased from approximately 3 per year to 8 per year. While there is no obvious accident
pattern, the majority of accidents seem to be a result of rear-end collisions.
While the Greer study did not identify any significant design problems with this intersection,
the most notable safety concern seems to be related to the steepness of northbound Crenshaw
Boulevard. This concern has been especially evident with respect to truck use in this
direction. The most severe accidents occurring at this intersection have been a result of trucks
losing control on the downhill grade. The City is limited in its abilities to implement
improvements in this area, as only the intersection is within the jurisdiction of the City. The
section of Crenshaw Boulevard between Palos Verdes Drive North and Silver Spur Road is
within the jurisdiction of Los Angeles County. Nevertheless, the City's recent adoption of
Ordinance No. 504, prohibits all trucks over 6,000 lbs. from traveling northbound through
the intersection of Silver Spur Road and Crenshaw Boulevard. Such trucks are required to
use Hawthorne Boulevard, where arrestor beds are available for emergency purposes. While
this Ordinance should help minimize the number of accidents on Crenshaw and Palos Verdes
Drive North, cooperation from Los Angeles County in improving safety on Crenshaw
Boulevard will also help improve traffic safety on this stretch of roadway.
Some concern has also been expressed with the portion of Crenshaw Boulevard north of
Palos Verdes Drive North. With the exception of the intersection at Palos Verdes Drive
North, Crenshaw Boulevard is within the jurisdiction of Los Angeles County. There are
several curb cuts which serve several properties within the City of Rolling Hills Estates.
These include the Methodist Church, Country Day School, City Stables, and City Hall. Given
the fairly high speeds of travel on Crenshaw Boulevard, some attention should be given to
maximizing safety for ingress and egress movements along this street. Specific
                                              3-37
improvements which could be considered by Los Angeles County include the provision of
deceleration and/or acceleration lanes to separate turning movements in and out of these
driveways from through traffic.
Palos Verdes Drive North/Palos Verdes Drive East: This intersection has undergone
improvement since 1983, when an average of 4 accidents per year occurred. While no
improvements to this intersection were recommended in the Greer Study, new loop detectors
have been installed for each direction of traffic. Following these improvements in 1985, only
one accident has occurred in the last two years.
Palos Verses Drive North/Rolling Hills Road: There has been a slight increase in the
number of accidents at this intersection from about 3 collisions per year (1980-1983) to
approximately 5 accidents per year (1985-1986). However, it should be noted that from 1982
to 1987, daily traffic volumes have increased from approximately 8,000 to 10,000 vehicles
(20%) It would appear that most of these accidents have been rear end collisions, resulting
from. the stop and go traffic during peak commute hours.
Palos Verses Drive North/Silver Spur Road: From 1980-1982, this intersection
experienced 4 accidents. In addition, traffic volumes measured 14,280 vehicles per day on
Silver Spur Road, south of the intersection, and 16,100 vehicles on Palos Verdes Drive
North. Based on this information, the Greer Report concluded that safety standards and
traffic flow were acceptable and therefore no modifications were recommended. From
1985-1987, only one (1) accident was recorded at this intersection. Recent traffic volumes
have increased to 16,870 vehicles (15% increase) per day on Silver Spur Road and 17,300
vehicles (7% increase) on Palos Verdes Drive North, warranting consideration for a signal
at this intersection. While some delays in traffic flow are experienced at peak hour periods,
traffic safety standards have been well maintained. Given the City's concern over the
potential impact of additional signals on its rural character and the existing level of safety
provided, current conditions do not appear to warrant signalization of this intersection.
Palos Verdes Drive East Realignment: At the northerly end of Palos Verdes Drive East,
the street follows the boundaries of the Chandler Quarry site, resulting in sharp curves at this
point. This section of street has posed safety concerns to the City, especially given the
number of trucks which must negotiate these curves. Under an agreement with Chandler and
the City, the Chandler Quarry recently dedicated a new right-of-way section across the quarry
property, enabling a straighter section of road to be constructed. Although this realigned road
will eliminate any dangerous curves, careful consideration must also be given to the resulting
speeds along Palos Verdes Drive East. Since the road will be straighter, vehicles could
increase their speed. While final design plans have not been approved, the
                                              3-38
Traffic Safety Committee, City Traffic Engineer, and Sheriff's Department will work closely
on the design to ensure safe conditions for all vehicles, including those accessing surrounding
residential access.
Secondary Access on Major Arterials: The City has expressed concern with the amount
of curb cuts and access points along arterials including Palos Verdes Drive North, Palos
Verdes Drive East, Crenshaw, and Hawthorne, and how curb cut access affects safety and
traffic efficiency needs of the City.
Many residences currently have primary access on arterial streets. This condition is
particularly notable on Palos Verdes Drive North, where a significant number of residences
have been developed fronting on this street. The City is primarily concerned about adding
new curb cuts for future developments with frontage on an arterial street. Consolidating these
curb cuts or pursuing alternative routes for new properties should be considered to help
mitigate these safety concerns.
The City has also identified several properties with primary access on a secondary or local
street, and additional frontage on arterials. While these secondary forms of access typically
serve equestrian areas in the rear yards, they are also used for vehicular access. Before any
new curb cuts are permitted on arterials, the City Council should review such proposals to
consider the potential safety impacts to vehicular, pedestrian, equestrian and bike traffic. In
this review, alternative access routes should also be considered if access onto these arterials
cannot be safely accomplished.
In many cases, a secondary point of access may be necessary to serve equestrian facilities
which would otherwise be inaccessible from the primary access point. Steep topography and
inadequate width between homes and property lines can significantly impact accessibility to
some equestrian areas. Therefore, it is recommended that the City Council review requests
for secondary access to assess the particular hardships of individual properties. Where these
conditions exist, secondary access may be considered.
The City's general policy has been to minimize the number of access points on arterial streets.
Additional points of access along these arterials not only pose potential safety hazards for
vehicles making various turning movements, but also affects the flow of traffic on those
streets most heavily traveled. By consolidating the points of ingress and egress along these
streets, traffic flow is improved while minimizing potential points of conflict with residential
access, and major arterials.
Bridle Trails: The most significant safety concerns related to the equestrian activity results
from the interaction between vehicles and horses. Such interaction most commonly occurs
                                               3-39
at points where bridle trails cross City streets. While existing traffic data indicates that
accidents involving equestrians and vehicles are extremely rare, the noise and traffic along
streets may occasionally pose a safety concern to horses and riders.
The design of bridle trails can have an impact on safety as well. For example, the width and
steepness of trails can affect the safety of equestrian users. Consideration for requiring the
incorporation of consistent design standards and other features for new trails could help
minimize safety hazards on future trails. Specific features that can be considered include the
use of bridges along trail areas that involve topographic constraints such as canyons and
ravines. Bridges can help avoid steep or impassable terrain. In addition, the use of tunnels
such as those in existence under Hawthorne Boulevard and Crenshaw Boulevard help
separate horses and vehicles.
To help promote equestrian activity in the area, the Peninsula Horsemens' Association was
established. One of the primary goals of the group is to promote the construction of a loop
trail system providing bridle trail access around the entire Peninsula. The provision of trail
linkages or extended trail systems is encouraged in undeveloped areas.
An important element of the trail system is the on-going maintenance of these paths. While
the majority of the trails are publicly maintained, many are maintained by homeowners'
associations. With the development of new residential areas, the City's policy has been to
require the developer to install new trail systems and to have the future homeowners'
associations maintain these paths for public access.
Bike Trails: There are three basic categories of bike trails within the City of Rolling Hills
Estates, as defined by CalTrans. Class 1 bike paths involve designs which are completely
separated from traffic lanes. The City's off-street paths that run parallel to Palos Verdes Drive
North are defined as Class 1 paths. Class 2 paths are on-street paths that are located along
the edge of a street with a striped lane denoting this bike path. Class 3 paths also are located
along a street edge, but are not striped. These paths are identified by street signs only.
While the City has developed a fairly comprehensive network of off-street paths, the most
apparent need would be the provision of additional Class 2 on-street paths. Upon observation
of bike use, it appears that these paths are heavily used by bike club members and other
serious riders. In addition, the provision of a Peninsula loop system would seem to be of
primary concern. Many bike riders choose to ride on the Peninsula to take advantage of the
rural surroundings, the many vistas, and the rolling terrain. While these riders use the existing
streets to ride around the Peninsula, many areas do not provide marked travel
                                              3-40
lanes to accommodate these riders. In addition, the Traffic and Safety Committee has
expressed concern with the small asphalt berms which separate traffic lanes from the bike
lane area, as they pose potential hazards to riders rather than providing safe separation from
vehicles. Some of these features have been eliminated along Palos Verdes Drive East;
however, there are intermittent areas on Palos Verdes Drive North still in existence.
Since these paths require approximately four feet of width, many existing streets can
accommodate these bike lanes without disruption to existing travel lanes. In addition, the cost
of providing these paths can be much less than off-street paths. Therefore, it would appear
that on-street paths would not only service the Peninsula-wide needs of bike riders, but would
be the most feasible alternative to implement as well.
Pedestrian Trails: There are two basic types of pedestrian traffic that should be considered
in Rolling Hills Estates. Within residential areas, the off-street bike paths also serve as
pedestrian paths. School children, joggers and others frequently use these paths as they
provide a safe and enjoyable way of accessing various points of interest.
The second form of pedestrian activity relates to the commercial areas, specifically the
Peninsula Center. With the concentration of retail centers in this area, there is opportunity
to encourage pedestrian activity among them. In 1978, the City adopted policy guidelines
regarding the development of Peninsula Center. With respect to pedestrian traffic, this
document encouraged the development of pedestrian paths which linked commercial centers
as well as open space/plaza areas.
The City has required the installation of various elements to enhance pedestrian activity.
Brick pavers have been provided on many sidewalks, along with various street furniture
items such as the 1890 style lights and benches (as recommended in the Peninsula Center
Design Standards). In addition, the incorporation of street trees and other landscaping have
helped provide a human scale to these paths. Such features should be encouraged as part of
any new commercial development with the Peninsula Center. The continued use of these
design elements in new development can encourage additional pedestrian traffic throughout
the Peninsula Center.
Pedestrian Crossings: Most of the City's intersections incorporate designated crossing areas,
many of which are controlled by signals. In addition, several areas in the City serve as school
crossings. At some locations, such as Rolling Hills High School, pedestrians are aided by
signals. At other locations such as Rancho Vista School pedestrians cross at unsignalized
intersections. In these situations, the use of school crossing guards is important to ensure
pedestrian safety, especially on arterial streets such as Palos Verdes Drive North.
                                              3-41
While signalized intersections provide a high degree of safety at pedestrian crossings,
additional safety measures, such as signage, pavement striping, and crossing guards, should
be considered at remaining school crossing sites. The use of crossing guards not only
provides safer conditions for students, but enables more organized and efficient traffic flow.
PENINSULA CENTER COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Several shopping centers, as well as a variety of retail stores and offices make up the majority
of the commercial area known as the Peninsula Center. This area is bounded by Crenshaw
Boulevard and Hawthorne Boulevard to the south and north, respectively, with Indian Peak
and Silver Spur Roads providing the western and eastern boundaries, respectively.
With the concentration of commercial activity, the primary concern is the ability to
accommodate shoppers and other patrons as efficiently and as safely as possible. While the
traffic volumes shown on Table 3-1 indicate that traffic flow has been operating at acceptable
levels, the provision of adequate parking facilities can have a significant affect on traffic
efficiency in commercial areas.
Not only is it important to provide an adequate number of off-street parking spaces for each
commercial use, but the design of these parking lots should incorporate appropriate sized
parking stalls, aisle widths and driveway entrances. By addressing these specific design
elements, a parking lot will become more accessible, convenient, and safer to use.
To increase traffic flow efficiency along the commercial streets within the Peninsula Center,
the City's Traffic Engineer has indicated that a reduction of on-street parking spaces can help.
The various movements associated with vehicles entering and exiting on-street parking
spaces have a direct impact on traffic flows as well as vehicular and pedestrian safety. If
adequate parking facilities are provided as described above, the demand for on-street spaces
can be minimized.
It is also important to consider that if off-street parking lots can maintain a high degree of
convenience, especially for the retail patron, these shops can be more attractive areas to visit
as they become more accessible, safe, and convenient for the shoppers. Therefore, such
objectives can provide benefits to the merchants of the City, while improving traffic
conditions in the Commercial District. To help achieve this objective, the City would
encourage existing shopping centers and retail areas to upgrade parking lots to current
standards. This includes the provision of proper circulation patterns.
                                               3-42
With a majority of the Peninsula Center currently developed, it is not anticipated that any
substantial growth in this commercial area will occur. However, as the surrounding Peninsula
population increases, it is likely that additional traffic will be added to the Peninsula Center
streets. Therefore, the provision of adequate off-street parking will still be important to future
traffic efficiency and possibly the economic vitality of this area.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
In discussing ways of mitigating traffic congestion on the City's street system, the use of
public transportation plays an important role. The Peninsula Transit Authority (PTA), which
includes the Seniors Dial-A-Ride program, along with the multi-jurisdictional PV Transit
System and the RTD bus service and Municipal Area Express (MAX) make up the public
transportation system in Rolling Hills Estates. MAX is a limited stop commuter express,
providing morning and afternoon service between the Palos Verdes Peninsula and the El
Segundo employment center. In addition, many larger employment centers, especially the
aerospace industries, operate van pool services, which also help to minimize the number of
passenger vehicles on City streets. Unquestionably, the encouragement of these alternative
transportation programs offer one means for reducing overall traffic congestion.
With a fairly high concentration of Peninsula residents employed at various aerospace
companies, the demand for van pool service would appear to be present. However, to ensure
sufficient usage, the accessibility of vans must be such that they minimize inconvenience to
the commuter. This means having various pick-up points throughout the Peninsula. However,
if riders must drive to these points, parking accommodations must be addressed. While many
riders currently park at shopping centers or other large parking lots, such practices can cause
conflicts with patrons using the parking lot. Therefore, it is important to consider park and
ride provisions for van pool commuters. While most existing parking lots have no surplus
spaces beyond what is required by Code for their own use, arrangements between the owners
of large parking facilities and the van pool operations could be explored to accommodate
long term parking provisions while minimizing conflict with the demand for spaces.
While the van pool program has been established to serve commuters, the PV Transit system
primarily serves the needs of Peninsula residents in getting to destinations within the
Peninsula. Both the PV Transit and the Dial-A-Ride program offer a means of transportation
to seniors, children, and the physically disabled. These systems provide access to all retail
and commercial centers, recreation areas, and other various points of interest on the
Peninsula. In addition, PV Transit offers connections to other transportation systems,
including RTD, which serves a wider regional area, including commute routes. Servicing
those areas in demand and providing timely service will help ensure that these systems are
                                               3-43
utilized. Likewise, accessibility and frequency of service will be critical factors in
encouraging and increasing use by commuters. If these alternative means of transportation
are competitive in getting the user to his/her destination in a timely and convenient manner,
then these forms of public transportation can become an effective tool for reducing traffic
congestion as well as offering an effective means of transportation for those with no other
alternatives.
                                             3-44
       CITY OF
ROLLING HILLS ESTATES
  HOUSING ELEMENT
      2013-2021
       January 2014
       Acknowledgements
             City Council
        Judith Mitchell, Mayor
  John Addleman, Mayor Pro Tem
     Britt Huff, Councilmember
Frank V. Zerunyan, Councilmember
Steven Zuckerman, Councilmember
        Planning Commission
        Velveth Schmitz, Chair
  Michael Conway, Commissioner
  Robert Medawar, Commissioner
  Robert Schachter, Commissioner
      Tim Scott, Commissioner
   Carl Southwell, Commissioner
    Victor J. Yoo, Commissioner
              City Staff
    Doug Prichard, City Manager
  David Wahba, Planning Director
Niki Wetzel, AICP, Principal Planner
        Consulting Assistance:
     J. H. Douglas & Associates
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element
                                                             Contents
I.    Introduction ............................................................................................................................ I-1
      A. Purpose of the Housing Element ......................................................................................... I-1
      B. Public Participation ............................................................................................................. I-2
      C. Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan ....................................................... I-2
II.   Housing Needs Assessment .................................................................................................. II-1
      A. Population Characteristics ................................................................................................. II-1
            1.    Population Growth Trends.............................................................................................. II-1
            2.    Age ................................................................................................................................. II-2
            3.    Race and Ethnicity .......................................................................................................... II-2
      B.    Household Characteristics ................................................................................................. II-3
            1.    Household Composition and Size................................................................................... II-3
            2.    Housing Tenure and Vacancy......................................................................................... II-4
            3.    Overcrowding ................................................................................................................. II-4
            4.    Household Income .......................................................................................................... II-5
            5.    Overpayment .................................................................................................................. II-5
      C.    Employment ...................................................................................................................... II-6
            1.    Current Employment ...................................................................................................... II-6
            2.    Projected Job Growth ..................................................................................................... II-7
            3.    Jobs-Housing Balance .................................................................................................... II-7
      D.    Housing Stock Characteristics .......................................................................................... II-9
            1.    Housing Type and Growth Trends ................................................................................. II-9
            2.    Housing Age and Conditions .......................................................................................... II-9
            3.    Housing Cost ................................................................................................................ II-10
      E.    Special Needs .................................................................................................................. II-11
            1.    Persons with Disabilities .............................................................................................. II-11
            2.    Elderly .......................................................................................................................... II-13
            3.    Large Households ......................................................................................................... II-14
            4.    Female-Headed Households ......................................................................................... II-14
            5.    Farm Workers ............................................................................................................... II-15
            6.    Homeless Persons ......................................................................................................... II-15
      F.    Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion ......................................................................... II-16
      G.    Future Growth Needs ...................................................................................................... II-16
            1.    Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment................................................ II-16
            2.    2014-2021 Rolling Hills Estates Growth Needs ........................................................... II-17
III.  Resources and Opportunities .............................................................................................. III-1
      A. Land Resources ................................................................................................................ III-1
            1.    Inventory of Sites for Housing Development ............................................................... III-1
            2.    Infrastructure Capacity ................................................................................................. III-5
      B.    Financial and Administrative Resources .......................................................................... III-5
            1.    State and Federal Resources ......................................................................................... III-5
            2.    Local Resources............................................................................................................ III-6
      C.    Energy Conservation Opportunities ................................................................................. III-6
IV. Constraints .......................................................................................................................... IV-1
      A. Governmental Constraints ................................................................................................ IV-1
            1.    Land Use Plans and Regulations .................................................................................. IV-1
                                                                       i                                                                 January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element
            2.    Development Processing Procedures ........................................................................... IV-8
            3.    Development Fees and Improvement Requirements.................................................... IV-9
      B.    Non-Governmental Constraints ..................................................................................... IV-11
            1.    Environmental Constraints ......................................................................................... IV-11
            2.    Infrastructure Constraints ........................................................................................... IV-12
            3.    Land Costs.................................................................................................................. IV-13
            4.    Construction Costs ..................................................................................................... IV-13
            5.    Cost and Availability of Financing ............................................................................ IV-13
      C.    Fair Housing .................................................................................................................. IV-13
V.    Housing Plan ........................................................................................................................ V-1
      A. Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs .................................................................. V-1
      B. Quantified Objectives ........................................................................................................ V-9
Appendix A - Evaluation of the Prior Housing Element
Appendix B - Greenhouse Gas Reduction
Appendix C - Public Participation Summary
                                                                  ii                                                                January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element
                                                    List of Tables
Table II-1    Population Trends, 1990-2012  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County .................. II-1
Table II-2    Age Distribution  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County ....................................... II-2
Table II-3    Race/Ethnicity  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County........................................... II-3
Table II-4    Household Composition  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County ........................... II-3
Table II-5    Household Tenure and Vacancy Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County ................ II-4
Table II-6    Overcrowding  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County ........................................... II-4
Table II-7    Median Household Income  Rolling Hills Estates and Los Angeles County...................... II-5
Table II-8    Overpayment by Income Category ....................................................................................... II-5
Table II-9    Labor Force  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County ............................................... II-6
Table II-10   Employment by Occupation.................................................................................................. II-7
Table II-11   2010-2020 Industry Employment Projections  Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale
              Metropolitan Statistical Area ................................................................................................ II-8
Table II-12   Job Location for Rolling Hills Estates Residents .................................................................. II-8
Table II-13   Housing by Type  Rolling Hills Estates and Los Angeles County ..................................... II-9
Table II-14   Age of Housing Stock by Tenure  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County............ II-10
Table II-15   Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs  Los Angeles County ........................ II-11
Table II-16   Persons with Disabilities by Age ........................................................................................ II-12
Table II-17   Elderly Households by Tenure ............................................................................................ II-14
Table II-18   Household Size by Tenure .................................................................................................. II-14
Table II-19   Household Type by Tenure ................................................................................................. II-15
Table II-20   Regional Housing Growth Needs........................................................................................ II-17
Table III-1   Land Inventory Summary ................................................................................................... III-1
Table III-2   Residential Land Inventory ................................................................................................. III-3
Table IV-1    Residential Land Use Categories  Rolling Hills Estates General Plan.............................. IV-1
Table IV-2    Residential Zones ................................................................................................................ IV-2
Table IV-3    Mixed-Use Development Standards ................................................................................... IV-3
Table IV-4    Permitted Residential Development by Zone...................................................................... IV-3
Table IV-5    Residential Parking Requirements ...................................................................................... IV-6
Table IV-6    Mixed-Use Parking Requirements ...................................................................................... IV-7
Table IV-7    Multi-Family Development Fee Summary ....................................................................... IV-10
Table IV-8    Road Improvement Standards ........................................................................................... IV-10
Table V-1     Quantified Objectives (2013-2021)...................................................................................... V-9
                                                    List of Figures
Figure II-1   Population Growth ................................................................................................................ II-1
Figure III-1  Vacant and Underutilized Residential Sites ........................................................................ III-4
Figure III-2  Approved Commercial District Mixed-Use Projects .......................................................... III-4
                                                                 iii                                                                January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element
This page intentionally left blank.
                                                 iv     January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                   I. Introduction
I.       INTRODUCTION
State law requires the preparation of a Housing Element as part of a jurisdiction's General Plan
(Government Code 65302(c)). The Element is to consist of an identification and analysis of existing
and projected housing needs, and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives and scheduled
programs for the preservation, improvement and development of housing. It is also required to identify
adequate sites for housing and to make adequate provision for the existing and projected needs of all
economic segments of the community (65583).
Guidelines adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) are also to be
considered in the preparation of the Element (65585). Periodic review of the Element is required to
evaluate (1) the appropriateness of its goals, objectives and policies in contributing to the attainment of
the state housing goals, (2) its effectiveness in attaining the City's housing goals and objectives and
(3) the progress of its implementation (65588).
A.       Purpose of the Housing Element
State law recognizes the vital role local governments play in the supply and affordability of housing.
Each local government in California is required to adopt a comprehensive, long-term General Plan for
the physical development of the city or county. The Housing Element is one of the seven mandated
elements of the General Plan. Housing Element law, first enacted in 1969, mandates that local
governments plan to meet the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the
community. The law recognizes that, in order for the private market to adequately address housing
needs, local governments must adopt land use plans and regulatory systems that provide opportunities
for, and do not unduly constrain, housing development. As a result, housing policy in California rests
largely upon the effective implementation of local General Plans and, in particular, local Housing
Elements. Housing Element law also requires the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) to review local housing elements for compliance with state law and to report its
written findings to the local government.
As mandated by state law, the planning period for this Housing Element extends from 2013 to 2021 1.
This Element identifies strategies and programs that focus on: 1) providing diversity in housing
opportunities and 2) maintenance and preservation of the housing stock.
The Housing Element consists of the following major components:
             An analysis of the Citys demographic and housing characteristics and trends (Chapter II);
             An evaluation of land, financial, and administrative resources available to address the
              Citys housing goals (Chapter III);
             A review of potential constraints, both governmental and non-governmental, to meeting
              the Citys housing needs (Chapter IV); and
             A Housing Action Plan for the 2013-2021 planning period, including housing goals,
              policies and programs (Chapter V).
1
   The projection timeframe for the Regional Housing Needs Assessment process is 7.8 years from January 2014 through October
   2021.
                                                            I-1                                                January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                  I. Introduction
            A review of the Citys accomplishments and progress in implementing the previous
             Housing Element (Appendix A).
B.       Public Participation
Section 65583(c)(5) of the Government Code states that The local government shall make diligent
effort to achieve public participation of all the economic segments of the community in the develop-
ment of the housing element, and the program shall describe this effort. Public participation played an
important role in the formulation and refinement of the Citys housing goals and policies and in the
development of a Land Use Plan which determines the extent and density of future residential
development in the community.
City residents had several opportunities to recommend strategies, review, and comment on the
Housing Element. A public study session was held jointly by the Planning Commission and City
Council on October 8, 2013. Following review by HCD, public hearings were held by the Planning
Commission and City Council on January 21, 2014 and January 28, 2014, respectively. All meeting
notices were posted on the Citys website, and notification was published in the local newspaper in
advance of the meetings. Copies of the draft Element were made available for review at City Hall and
were posted on the City website. These service providers included organizations that represent the
housing interest groups.
Additional information regarding the public involvement process are discussed in Appendix C.
C.       Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan
The Citys General Plan sets forth broad policy guidance in the areas of land use, housing,
transportation, conservation, open space and recreation, noise and public safety. The various General
Plan elements provide a consistent set of policies and programs intended to preserve and enhance the
quality of life, while accommodating growth and change in a proactive manner. For example,
residential development capacities established in the Land Use Element and constraints to
development identified in the Conservation, Public Safety, and Noise Elements are reflected in the
Housing Element. This Housing Element builds upon the other General Plan elements and is consistent
with the policies and proposals set forth by the Plan. As the General Plan is amended from time to
time, the City will review the Housing Element for internal consistency, and make any necessary
revisions.
Senate Bill (SB) 1087 of 2005 requires cities to provide a copy of their Housing Elements to local
water and sewer providers, and also requires that these agencies provide priority hookups for
developments with lower-income housing. The Housing Element will be provided to these agencies
immediately upon adoption.
                                                    I-2                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                       II. Housing Needs Assessment
II.     HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This chapter examines general population and household characteristics and trends, such as age, race
and ethnicity, employment, household composition and size, household income, and special needs.
Characteristics of the existing housing stock (e.g., number of units and type, tenure, age and condition,
costs) are also addressed. Finally, the citys projected housing growth needs based on the 2014-2021
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) are examined.
The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes the most recent data from the U.S. Census, California
Department of Finance (DOF), California Employment Development Department (EDD), Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG), and other relevant data sources.
A.      Population Characteristics
        1.        Population Growth Trends
The City of Rolling Hills Estates lost population during the 1990s but has grown moderately since
2000, more than making up for the population loss during the previous decade (Table II-1 and Figure
II-1). This contrasts dramatically with Los Angeles County, which grew by 7.4% between 1990 and
2000, and 3.8% between 2000 and 2012. As an essentially built-out city, there have been few
opportunities for substantial growth during the last 30 years, except through redevelopment and infill.
                                                                Table II-1
                                                Population Trends, 1990-2012 
                                      Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                                                             Growth          Growth
                                               1990               2000             2012     1990-2000       2000-2012
            Rolling Hills Estates             7,789              7,676            8,097       -1.5%           5.5%
            Los Angeles County              8,863,164          9,519,330        9,884,632      7.4%           3.8%
            Source: U.S. Census, California Dept. of Finance Table E-5 (2012)
                                                               Figure II-1
                                                         Population Growth
                   8%                       7.4%
                   7%
                   6%                                              5.5%
                   5%
                                                                             3.8%
                   4%
                   3%                                                                      Rolling Hills Estates
                   2%                                                                      Los Angeles County
                   1%
                   0%
                  -1%
                  -2%           -1.5%
                                  1990-2000                         2000-2012
                      Sources: US Census, California Department of Finance Table E-1(2013)
                                                                      II-1                                            January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                             II. Housing Needs Assessment
        2.       Age
Housing needs are influenced by the age characteristics of the population. Different age groups have
different housing needs based on lifestyles, family types, income levels, and housing preference. Table
II-2 provides a comparison of the citys and countys population by age group in 2010. This table
shows that the age distribution of the citys population is significantly older than Los Angeles County
as a whole. It is especially noteworthy that approximately 22% of the citys population is over age 65,
whereas only 11% of Los Angeles countys population is over age 65. An aging population has
implications regarding the type and size of future housing needs, as well as accessibility.
                                                        Table II-2
                                                    Age Distribution 
                                  Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                      Rolling Hills Estates Los Angeles County
                             Age Group                Persons          %     Persons       %
                        Under 5 years                     293          4%     645,793     7%
                        5 to 9 years                      541          7%     633,690     6%
                        10 to 14 years                    638          8%     678,845     7%
                        15 to 19 years                    576          7%     753,630     8%
                        20 to 24 years                    259          3%     752,788     8%
                        25 to 29 years                    176          2%     759,602     8%
                        30 to 34 years                    175          2%     716,129     7%
                        35 to 39 years                    319          4%     715,635     7%
                        40 to 44 years                    541          7%     714,691     7%
                        45 to 49 years                    748          9%     706,742     7%
                        50 to 54 years                    756          9%     662,205     7%
                        55 to 59 years                    591          7%     560,920     6%
                        60 to 64 years                    585          7%     452,236     5%
                        65 to 69 years                    488          6%     323,287     3%
                        70 to 74 years                    440          5%     245,183     2%
                        75 to 79 years                    355          4%     192,881     2%
                        80 to 84 years                    326          4%     152,722     2%
                        85 years and over                 260          3%     151,626     2%
                      Total                             8,067        100%   9,818,605    100%
                      Median age                         48.5                    34.8
                      Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
        3.       Race and Ethnicity
The racial and ethnic composition of the city differs from the county in that a much lower proportion
of city residents are Hispanic/Latino or other racial minorities. Approximately 64% of city residents
are non-Hispanic white, contrasted with 28% for the county as a whole. The percentage of Hispanics
residing in the city, at 6.2%, is significantly lower than the countys Hispanic population of almost
48%. Asians, at approximately 25%, represent the largest minority group (Table II-3).
                                                              II-2                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                        II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                            Table II-3
                                                          Race/Ethnicity 
                                        Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                             Rolling Hills Estates         Los Angeles County
                               Racial/Ethnic Group          Persons            %          Persons           %
                     Not Hispanic or Latino                    7,568        93.8%          5,130,716     52.3%
                       -White                                  5,134        63.6%          2,728,321     27.8%
                       -Black or African American                107         1.3%            815,086      8.3%
                       -American Indian/Alaska Native             12         0.1%             18,886      0.2%
                       -Asian                                  1,995        24.7%          1,325,671     13.5%
                        -Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander          8         0.1%             22,464      0.2%
                        -Other races or 2+ races                 312         3.9%            220,288      2.2%
                     Hispanic or Latino (any race)               499         6.2%          4,687,889     47.7%
                     Total                                     8,067       100.0%          9,818,605    100.0%
                     Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
B.       Household Characteristics
         1.         Household Composition and Size
Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size of housing needed in a city. The
Census defines a household as all persons occupying a housing unit, which may include single
persons living alone, families related through marriage or blood, or unrelated persons sharing a single
unit. Persons in group quarters such as dormitories, retirement or convalescent homes, or other group
living situations are included in population totals, but are not considered households.
Rolling Hills Estates had 2,965 households as reported in the 2010 Census. Table II-4 provides a
comparison of households by type for the city and Los Angeles County as a whole. Family households
in 2010 comprised approximately 80% of all households in the City, 12% higher than the county.
Although non-family households are a small proportion of the citys households, the citys average
household size is still somewhat lower than Los Angeles County as a whole (2.72 persons per
household city vs. 2.98 persons per household county).
                                                            Table II-4
                                                     Household Composition 
                                        Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                                     Rolling Hills Estates                LA County
                              Household Type                      Households             %         Households          %
         Family households:                                               2,375        80%           2,194,080       68%
            Husband-wife family                                           2,100        71%           1,480,665       46%
              With own children under 18 years                               861       29%             721,804       22%
            Male householder, no wife present                                 83        3%             216,368        7%
              With own children under 18 years                                25        1%              92,161        3%
            Female householder, no husband present                           192        6%             497,047       15%
              With own children under 18 years                                79        3%             239,012        7%
         Non-family households:                                              590       20%           1,047,124       32%
              Householder living alone                                       512       17%             784,928       24%
         Households with individuals under 18 years                       1,023        35%           1,220,021       38%
         Households with individuals 65 years and over                    1,269        43%             790,386       24%
         Total households                                                 2,965       100%           3,241,204      100%
         Average household size                                             2.72                           2.98
         Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
                                                                II-3                                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                          II. Housing Needs Assessment
        2.        Housing Tenure and Vacancy
Housing tenure (owner vs. renter) is an important indicator of the housing market. Communities need
an adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in order to accommodate a range of
households with varying incomes, family sizes and composition, and lifestyles. Table II-5 provides a
comparison of the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units in the city in 2010 as
compared to the county as a whole. It reveals a higher level of homeownership in the city, almost
double the countys proportion of homeownership.
                                                             Table II-5
                                             Household Tenure and Vacancy
                                     Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                                         Rolling Hills Estates             LA County
                                Housing Type                               Units            %          Units          %
           Occupied housing units                                            2,965       95.6%        3,241,204    94.1%
              Owner-occupied housing units                                   2,714       87.5%        1,544,749    44.8%
              Average household size of owner-occupied units                   2.69                         3.16
              Renter-occupied housing units                                     251       8.1%        1,696,455    49.2%
              Average household size of renter-occupied units                  3.05                         2.81
           Vacant housing units                                                 135       4.4%          203,872     5.9%
              For rent                                                            13      0.4%          104,960     3.0%
              Rented, not occupied                                                 1      0.0%            4,994     0.1%
              For sale only                                                       50      1.6%           26,808     0.8%
              Sold, not occupied                                                  10      0.3%            6,726     0.2%
              For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use                       13      0.4%           19,099     0.6%
              All other vacants                                                   48      1.5%           41,285     1.2%
           Homeowner vacancy rate (%)                                            1.8                         1.7
           Rental vacancy rate (%)                                               4.9                         5.8
           Total housing units                                               3,100       100%         3,445,076     100%
           Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
        3.        Overcrowding
Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing. The U.S. Census
Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more than one person per room,
excluding bathrooms and kitchens, with severe overcrowding when there are more than 1.5 residents
per room. Overcrowded households are usually a reflection of the lack of affordable housing. Table
II-6 summarizes overcrowding for Rolling Hills Estates based on recent Census data.
                                                             Table II-6
                                                         Overcrowding 
                                     Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                                Rolling Hills Estates             LA County
                              Occupants per Room                Units            %           Units          %
                      Owner occupied units                       2,664        100%         1,552,091      100%
                        1.01 to 1.50                                 45        1.7%           71,920      4.6%
                        1.51 to 2.00                                 11        0.4%           17,241      1.1%
                        2.01 or more                                  0        0.0%            4,877      0.3%
                      Renter occupied units                        262        100%         1,665,798      100%
                        1.01 to 1.50                                  0        0.0%          163,166      9.8%
                        1.51 to 2.00                                  0        0.0%           86,760      5.2%
                        2.01 or more                                  0        0.0%           43,489      2.6%
                      Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25014
                                                                  II-4                                                   January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                        II. Housing Needs Assessment
Based on U.S. Census standards, Rolling Hills Estates residents live in significantly less crowded
housing conditions than the rest of Los Angeles County. According to recent Census data, less than
2% of all occupied units in the city were considered overcrowded. There were no overcrowded renter-
occupied units in the city, and only 56 owner-occupied units (2.1%) are experiencing overcrowding
conditions. This compares to 17.6% of renter-occupied units and 6% of owner-occupied units in Los
Angeles County considered overcrowded.
        4.      Household Income
Household income is a primary factor affecting housing needs in a community  the ability of
residents to afford housing is directly related to household income. According to recent Census data,
the median household income in Rolling Hills Estates was $151,757, over 2 times the median
income for Los Angeles County as a whole (Table II-7).
                                                      Table II-7
                                            Median Household Income 
                               Rolling Hills Estates and Los Angeles County
                                                                         % of County
                                  Jurisdiction            Median Income Median Income
                         Rolling Hills Estates                $151,757      274%
                         Los Angeles County                   $55,476       100%
                         Source: U.S. Census, 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP-3
        5.      Overpayment
According to State housing policy, overpaying occurs when housing costs exceed 30% of gross
household income. Table II-8 displays recent Census estimates for overpayment for renter and owner
households in Rolling Hills Estates. Approximately 37% of both renters and owners reported
overpayment.
Although homeowners enjoy income and property tax deductions and other benefits that help to
compensate for high housing costs, lower-income homeowners may need to defer maintenance or
repairs due to limited funds, which can lead to deterioration. For lower-income renters, severe cost
burden can require families to double up resulting in overcrowding and related problems.
                                                      Table II-8
                                       Overpayment by Income Category
                           % of Income Paid for               Renter        Owner
                            Housing Expenses              Households      Households
                       Less than 10%                             0           20.5%
                       10  14.9%                              6.4%          10.6%
                       15  19.9%                             20.4%           9.7%
                       20  24.9%                             21.7%          13.1%
                       25  29.9%                              3.8%           9.5%
                       30  34.9%                             17.4%           6.9%
                       35  39.9%                              9.8%           4.3%
                       40  49.9%                                0            7.8%
                       50% or more                            11.1%          17.6%
                       Not computed                            9.4%             0
                       Source: SCAG, 2012
                                                           II-5                                  January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                             II. Housing Needs Assessment
Extremely Low Income Households
State law requires quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of extremely-
low-income (ELI) households. Extremely-low-income is defined as households with income less than
30% of area median income. The 2013 area median income for Los Angeles County was $64,800 (see
Table II-15). For extremely-low-income households, this results in an income of $25,600 or less for a
four-person household. Households with extremely-low-income have a variety of housing situations
and needs, such as overpayment and overcrowding.
Recent Census estimates published by SCAG reported approximately 147 extremely-low-income
households resided in Rolling Hills Estates, representing 4.1% of all households.
The projected housing need for extremely-low-income households is assumed to be 50% of the very-
low-income regional housing need of 1 unit. As a result, the City has a projected need for 1 extremely-
low-income unit in this planning period (see Table II-20). The resources and programs to address this
need are the same as for low-income housing in general and are discussed throughout the Housing
Element, and particularly Chapter V, Housing Action Plan. The needs of extremely-low-income
households overlap extensively with other special needs groups, and further analysis and discussion of
resources and programs for extremely-low-income households can also be found in Chapter IV,
Constraints, Section A.1.c. Special Needs Housing.
C.      Employment
Employment is an important factor affecting housing needs within a community. The jobs available in
each employment sector and the wages for these jobs affect the type and size of housing residents can
afford.
        1.      Current Employment
Current employment and projected job growth have a significant influence on housing needs during
this planning period. Table II-9 shows that the city had a workforce of 3,551 persons, or 57% of the
working-age population, according to recent Census data. By contrast, Los Angeles County had over
65% of its working-age population in the labor force.
                                                         Table II-9
                                                       Labor Force 
                                    Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                          Rolling Hills Estates       LA County
                           Labor Force Status            Persons            %   Persons          %
                 Population 16 years and over                6,267       100%   7,602,252     100%
                  In labor force                             3,551       56.7%  4,959,167     65.2%
                     Civilian labor force                    3,551       56.7%  4,953,791     65.2%
                       Employed                              3,404       54.3%  4,522,917     59.5%
                       Unemployed                              147        2.3%    430,874      5.7%
                     Armed Forces                                0        0.0%      5,376      0.1%
                  Not in labor force                         2,716       43.3%  2,643,085     34.8%
                 Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP3
Approximately 65% of the citys working residents were employed in management and professional
occupations, while 24% were in sales or related fields (Table II-10). A low percentage of workers
(under 6%) were employed in service related occupations such as waiters, waitresses, and beauticians.
                                                             II-6                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                       II. Housing Needs Assessment
Blue collar occupations such as machine operators, assemblers, farming, transportation, handlers and
laborers constituted about 6% of the workforce.
                                                           Table II-10
                                               Employment by Occupation
                                                                               Rolling Hills Estates
                                              Occupation                      Persons            %
              Civilian employed population 16 years and over                   3,404          100%
                 Management, business, science, and arts occupations           2,200          64.6%
                 Service occupations                                            197            5.8%
                 Sales and office occupations                                   804           23.6%
                 Natural resources, construction, and maintenance occupations   133            3.9%
                 Production, transportation, and material moving occupations     70            2.1%
              Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP3
        2.       Projected Job Growth
Table II-11 shows projected job growth by industry for the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale MSA
for the period 2010-2020. The greatest number of new jobs projected to be produced in Los Angeles
County over the next few years will be among the lower-wage occupations. Because a high proportion
of new jobs created will be low-wage jobs, there will be a growing demand for units affordable to low-
income persons, typically far below the average home price of the area.
        3.       Jobs-Housing Balance
A regional balance of jobs to housing helps to ensure that the demand for housing is reasonably related
to supply. When the number of jobs significantly exceeds the housing supply, the rental and for-sale
housing markets may become overheated, requiring households to pay a larger percentage of their
income for housing. In addition, a tight housing market can result in overcrowding and longer
commute times as workers seek more affordable housing in outlying areas. Conversely, a lack of jobs
can also result in longer commutes, particularly for low-wage service workers. The current jobs-
housing objective within the SCAG region is one new housing unit for every 1.5 jobs. 2
According to recent Census data, about 92% of employed Rolling Hills Estates residents worked in
Los Angeles County, but only 14.7% of all workers were employed within the city limits (Table II-12).
2
   SCAG Regional Comprehensive Plan, Land Use & Housing Chapter
                                                                 II-7                                January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                         II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                                        Table II-11
                                             2010-2020 Industry Employment Projections 
                               Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale Metropolitan Statistical Area
                                                                                              Annual Average Employment                Employment Change
NAICS Code                                       Industry Title                                   2010                 2020              Jobs          Percent
                     Total Employment                                                             4,246,700           4,904,300          657,600             15.5
                     Self-Employment (A)                                                            337,500              366,900           29,400             8.7
                     Unpaid Family Workers (B)                                                          3,300              3,400              100             3.0
                     Private Household Workers (C)                                                  126,600              163,300           36,700            29.0
                     Total Farm                                                                         6,200              5,800             -400            -6.5
                     Total Nonfarm                                                                3,773,100           4,364,900          591,800             15.7
1133,21               Mining and Logging                                                                4,100              4,500              400             9.8
23                    Construction                                                                  104,500              129,600           25,100            24.0
31-33                 Manufacturing                                                                 373,200              362,500          -10,700            -2.9
22,42-49              Trade, Transportation, and Utilities                                          739,800              887,700         147,900             20.0
51                    Information                                                                   191,500              211,700           20,200            10.5
52-53                 Financial Activities                                                          209,500              231,300           21,800            10.4
54-56                 Professional and Business Services                                            527,500              640,600         113,100             21.4
61-62                 Educational Services, Health Care and Social Assistance                       522,000              660,000         138,000             26.4
71-72                 Leisure and Hospitality                                                       384,800              480,000           95,200            24.7
81                    Other Services (excludes 814-Private Household Workers)                       136,700              150,700           14,000            10.2
                      Government                                                                    579,600              606,300           26,700             4.6
                       Federal Government (D)                                                         51,600              43,900           -7,700           -14.9
                       State and Local Government                                                   528,000              562,400           34,400             6.5
                        State Government                                                              80,700              88,100            7,400             9.2
                        Local Government                                                            447,300              474,300           27,000             6.0
Data sources: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' Current Employment Statistics (CES) March 2011 benchmark and Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
(QCEW) industry employment.
Industry detail may not add up to totals due to independent rounding.
Notes: (A) Self-Employed persons work for profit or fees in their own business, profession, trade, or farm. Only the unincorporated self-employed are included in
               this category. The estimated and projected employment numbers include all workers who are primarily self-employed and wage and salary workers
               who hold a secondary job as a self-employed worker.
          (B) Unpaid family workers are those persons who work without pay for 15 or more hours per week on a farm or in a business operated by a member of
               the household to whom they are related by birth or marriage.
          (C) Private household workers are employed as domestic workers whose primary activities are to maintain the household. Industry employment is based
               on QCEW.
          (D) Temporary U.S. Census workers are included in the base and projected year employment numbers.
                                                                        Table II-12
                                            Job Location for Rolling Hills Estates Residents
                                                             Workplace Location                               %
                                               Worked in state of residence                                   98.7%
                                                   Worked in county of residence                              92.0%
                                                   Worked in place of residence                               14.7%
                                                   Worked outside county of residence                           6.7%
                                               Worked outside state of residence                                1.3%
                                             Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table S0801
                                                                               II-8                                                            January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                 II. Housing Needs Assessment
D.       Housing Stock Characteristics
This section reviews the characteristics of the communitys housing stock and helps in identifying and
prioritizing needs. The factors evaluated include the number and type of housing units, recent growth
trends, age and condition, tenure, vacancy, housing costs, affordability, and assisted affordable units
at-risk of loss due to conversion to market-rate. A housing unit is defined as a house, apartment,
mobile home, or group of rooms, occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters.
         1.     Housing Type and Growth Trends
The housing stock in Rolling Hills Estates is comprised mostly of single-family homes, which make
up 97% of all units. Multi-family and mobile homes comprise the remaining 3%. Table II-13 provides
a breakdown of the housing stock by type along with growth trends for the city compared to the county
as a whole for the period 2000-2012. Between 2000 and 2012, there have been 220 housing units
added to the citys housing stock, the majority (75%) being single-family homes.
                                                              Table II-13
                                                          Housing by Type 
                                      Rolling Hills Estates and Los Angeles County
                                                        2000                  2012              Growth
                  Structure Type
                                                   Units        %        Units      %      Units         %
              Rolling Hills Estates
              Single-family                            2,828   98%          2,992  97%      164        74.5%
              Multi-family                                48    2%             72   2%      24         10.9%
              Mobile homes                                 4   0.1%            36  1.2%     32         14.5%
              Total units                              2,880   100%         3,100  100%     220        100%
              Los Angeles County
              Single-family                       1,835,024    56%      1,947,820  56%   112,796       61.6%
              Multi-family                        1,379,277    42%      1,447,958  42%    68,681       37.5%
              Mobile homes                           56,605     2%         58,314   2%     1,709       0.9%
              Total units                         3,270,906    100%     3,454,092  100%  183,186       100%
              Source: Cal. Dept. of Finance, Tables E-5 & E-8
         2.     Housing Age and Conditions
Housing age is often an important indicator of housing condition. Housing units built prior to 1978
before stringent limits on the amount of lead in paint were imposed, may have interior or exterior
building components coated with lead-based paint. Housing units built before 1970 are the most likely
to need rehabilitation and to have lead-based paint in deteriorated condition. Lead-based paint becomes
hazardous to children under age six and to pregnant women when it peels off walls or is pulverized by
windows and doors opening and closing.
Table II-14 shows the age distribution of the housing stock in Rolling Hills Estates compared to Los
Angeles County as a whole as reported in recent Census data.
                                                                   II-9                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                              II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                          Table II-14
                                          Age of Housing Stock by Tenure 
                                   Rolling Hills Estates vs. Los Angeles County
                                                           Rolling Hills Estates      LA County
                               Year Built                  Units           %      Units         %
                   Built 2005 or later                            0        0%       54,241      2%
                   Built 2000 to 2004                            61        2%      109,255      3%
                   Built 1990 to 1999                          149         5%      208,791      6%
                   Built 1980 to 1989                          225         8%      403,248     12%
                   Built 1970 to 1979                          793        27%      496,376     14%
                   Built 1960 to 1969                          746        25%      518,500     15%
                   Built 1950 to 1959                          844        29%      722,473     21%
                   Built 1940 to 1949                          123         4%      396,035     12%
                   Built 1939 or earlier                          9        0%      516,817     15%
                  Total units                                2,950        100%   3,425,736    100%
                  Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP-4
This table shows that 58% of the housing units in Rolling Hills Estates were constructed prior to 1970.
Statistics indicating that a significant portion of the housing stock is more than 30 years old would
often indicate a growing need for maintenance and rehabilitation. However, the high household
incomes in Rolling Hills Estates results in few properties actually falling into disrepair, and therefore
the need for public assistance with maintenance and rehabilitation is considered to be very low.
         3.      Housing Cost
a.       Housing Affordability Criteria
State law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on the area (i.e.,
county) median income (AMI): extremely-low (30% or less of AMI), very-low (31-50% of AMI),
low (51-80% of AMI), moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above moderate (over 120% of AMI).
Housing affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing expenses.
According to HUD and the California Department of Housing and Community Development, housing
is considered affordable if the monthly payment is no more than 30% of a households gross income.
In some areas, these income limits may be increased to adjust for high housing costs.
Table II-15 shows affordable rent levels and estimated affordable purchase prices for housing in Los
Angeles County by income category. Based on state-adopted standards, the maximum affordable
monthly rent for extremely-low-income households is $640, while the maximum affordable rent for
very-low-income households is $1,068. The maximum affordable rent for low-income households is
$1,708, while the maximum for moderate-income households is $1,944.
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest rates
and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association fees,
property insurance rates, etc. With this caveat, the maximum home purchase prices by income
category shown in Table II-15 have been estimated based on typical conditions.
                                                              II-10                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                      II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                                Table II-15
                                     Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs 
                                                           Los Angeles County
         2013 County Median Income = $64,800                  Income Limits       Affordable Rent    Affordable Price (est.)
         Extremely Low (<30%)                                    $25,600                $640                   --
         Very Low (31-50%)                                       $42,700               $1,068              $140,000
         Low (51-80%)                                            $68,300               $1,708              $235,000
         Moderate (81-120%)                                      $77,750               $1,944              $280,000
         Above moderate (120%+)                                  $77,750+             $1,944+              $280,000+
         Assumptions:
         -Based on a family of 4
         -30% of gross income for rent or PITI
         -10% down payment, 4.5% interest, 1.25% taxes & insurance, $200 HOA dues
         Source: Cal. HCD; J.H. Douglas & Associates
b.          For-Sale Housing
Housing sales price statistics for the calendar year 2012 reported by DataQuick 3 showed a median
single-family home price of $1.36 million and a median condo price of $550,000. Due to the small
number of sales in each city, these data are for the entire Palos Verdes peninsula, which includes
Rolling Hills Estates. Clearly there is a large gap between market prices and what low- and moderate-
income families can afford.
c.          Rental Housing
As noted previously (Table II-13, page II-9), there are only 72 attached units in Rolling Hills Estates,
all of which are built as condominiums. Very few units are vacant and for rent at any given time. An
internet search for vacant units found only a few units advertised with rents ranging from $1,450 for a
1-bedroom/1-bath unit to $3,400 for a 3 bedroom/3-bath unit. When these rents are compared to the
amounts low-income households can afford to pay (Table II-15), it is clear that lower- and moderate-
income households have a difficult time finding housing without overpaying.
E.          Special Needs
Certain groups have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing due to special circum-
stances. Such circumstances may be related to ones employment and income, family characteristics,
disability, or other conditions. As a result, some Rolling Hills Estates residents may experience a
higher prevalence of overpayment, overcrowding, or other housing problems.
State Housing Element law defines special needs groups to include persons with disabilities, the
elderly, large households, female-headed households with children, homeless people, and farm
workers. This section contains a discussion of the housing needs facing each of these groups.
            1.         Persons with Disabilities
The most recent data regarding persons with disabilities was reported in the 2000 Census. In 2000,
approximately 268 people between 16 and 64 years of age, or 6% of the working age population,
reported a work-related disability (see Table II-16). Of those aged 65 and over, 1,082 disabilities were
3
  http://www.dqnews.com/Charts/Annual-Charts/LA-Times-Charts/ZIPLAT12.aspx
                                                                      II-11                                        January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                         II. Housing Needs Assessment
reported. Included within these are persons whose disability hinders their ability to go outside the
home (3.5% of the working age population and 3.9% of the senior population). Housing opportunities
for the handicapped can be maximized through housing assistance programs and providing universal
design features such as widened doorways, ramps, lowered countertops, single-level units and ground
floor units.
                                                       Table II-16
                                          Persons with Disabilities by Age
                                      Disability by Age                   Persons             Percent
                           Age 5 to 15 - total persons                     1,230
                            Sensory disability                               39                 3.2%
                            Physical disability                               7                 0.6%
                            Mental disability                                11                 0.9%
                            Self-care disability                             21                 1.7%
                           Age 16 to 64 - total persons                    4,681
                            Sensory disability                               67                 1.4%
                            Physical disability                              81                 1.7%
                            Mental disability                                78                 1.7%
                            Self-care disability                              3                 0.1%
                            Go-outside-the-home disability                  163                 3.5%
                            Employment disability                           268                 5.7%
                           Age 65 and over* - total persons                1,321
                            Sensory disability                              606                 45.9%
                            Physical disability                              58                 4.4%
                            Mental disability                               283                 21.4%
                            Self-care disability                             81                 6.1%
                            Go-outside-the-home disability                   52                 3.9%
                           Source: 2000 Census, SF3 Tables P8 and P41
                           Note: Totals may exceed 100% due to multiple disabilities per person
Persons with Developmental Disabilities
As defined by federal law, developmental disability means a severe, chronic disability of an
individual that:
            Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical
             impairments;
            Is manifested before the individual attains age 22;
            Is likely to continue indefinitely;
            Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of
             major life activity: a) self-care; b) receptive and expressive language; c) learning; d)
             mobility; e) self-direction; f) capacity for independent living; or g) economic self-
             sufficiency;
            Reflects the individuals need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary,
             or generic services, individualized supports, or other forms of assistance that are of
             lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated.
Examples of developmental disabilities include cerebral palsey, epilepsy and autism. The Census does
not record developmental disabilities as a separate category of disability. According to the U.S.
                                                             II-12                                                January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                   II. Housing Needs Assessment
Administration on Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the
population that can be defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. Many developmentally
disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional housing environment. More
severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where supervision is provided. The
most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical attention
and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first
issue in supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the persons living
situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The California Department of Developmental Services (DDS) provides community-based services to
approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide
system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. The
Harbor Regional Center (http://www.harborrc.org/), with offices in Torrance and Long Beach,
provides services for people with developmental disabilities on the Palos Verdes Peninsula, including
Rolling Hills Estates. The HRC is a private, non-profit community agency that contracts with local
businesses to offer a wide range of services to individuals with developmental disabilities and their
families.
There is no charge for diagnosis and assessment for eligibility. Once eligibility is determined, most
services are free regardless of age or income. There is a requirement for parents to share the cost of 24-
hour out-of-home placements for children under age 18. This share depends on the parents' ability to
pay. There may also be a co-payment requirement for other services.
Regional centers are required by law to provide services in the most cost-effective way possible. They
must use all other resources, including generic resources, before using any regional center funds. A
generic resource is a service provided by an agency that has a legal responsibility to provide services
to the general public and receives public funds for providing those services. Some generic agencies
may include the local school district, county social services department, Medi-Cal, Social Security
Administration, Department of Rehabilitation and others. Other resources may include natural
supports, which refers to help that disabled persons may get from family, friends or others at little or
no cost.
According to its latest Fact Sheet 4 the Harbor Regional Center provides services to more than 11,000
people with developmental disabilities and their families. About 15% are between birth and 2 years of
age and are served under the early intervention program. About 37% are between the age of 3 and 18
years of age, and 48% are adults over 18 years of age. Most of HRCs clients (about 83%) live at home
with families. An additional 10% live in some type of licensed home in the community, and about 7%
live on their own with supports.
          2.       Elderly
According to recent Census data, there were 1,074 households in Rolling Hills Estates where the
householder was reported to be age 65 or older (Table II-17). Some elderly homeowners may be
physically unable to maintain their homes or cope with living alone. In areas where elderly persons are
living in poverty, housing needs can be addressed through smaller units, second units on lots with
existing homes, shared living arrangements, congregate housing and housing assistance programs.
4
  http://www.harborrc.org/files/uploads/aboutclientsfam_r0313_(2).pdf
                                                             II-13                           January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                           II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                        Table II-17
                                            Elderly Households by Tenure
                                                             Owner                Renter
                      Householder Age             Households          %   Households      %
                     Under 65 years                       1,590      60%         205     78%
                     65 to 74 years                         462      17%           23     9%
                     75 to 84 years                         421      16%           12     5%
                     85 years and over                      191       7%           22     8%
                   Total Households                       2,664      100%        262     100%
                   Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25007
         3.     Large Households
Household size is an indicator of need for large units. Large households are defined as those with five
or more members. Among owners, 58% of all households have only one or two members, while 63%
of renter households had one or two members. About 7% of owner households had five or more
members, while only 4% of renters were large households (Table II-18). This distribution suggests that
the need for large units with four or more bedrooms is expected to be significantly less than for smaller
units.
                                                        Table II-18
                                               Household Size by Tenure
                                                             Owner                Renter
                      Householder Age             Households          %   Households      %
                   1 person                                 460      17%         100     38%
                   2 persons                              1,104      41%           66    25%
                   3 persons                                346      13%           27    10%
                   4 persons                                560      21%           58    22%
                   5 persons                                129       5%           11     4%
                   6 persons                                 28       1%            0     0%
                   7 persons or more                         37       1%            0     0%
                   Total Households                       2,664      100%        262     100%
                   Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25009
         4.     Female-Headed Households
Recent Census estimates reported that 8% of owner households and 6% of renter households were
headed by a female (Table II-19). While female-headed households represent a small portion of
households in Rolling Hills Estates, in many cities they make up a significant portion of households
that are below the poverty level.
                                                               II-14                                January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                             II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                             Table II-19
                                                    Household Type by Tenure
                                                                         Owner               Renter
                             Household Type                    Households       %    Households       %
             Married couple family                                    1,841    69%           146     56%
             Male householder, no wife present                           86     3%             0      0%
             Female householder, no husband present                     214     8%            16      6%
             Non-family households                                      523    20%           100     38%
             Total Households                                         2,664    100%          262     100%
             Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B11012
          5.         Farm Workers
Farm worker households are considered a special needs group due to their transient nature and the
lower incomes typically earned by these households. Migrant workers, and their places of residence,
are generally located in close proximity to agricultural areas providing employment. No significant
agricultural activities are found in Rolling Hills Estates or in the surrounding communities. 5 In
addition, Census data published by SCAG did not identify any farm workers residing in Rolling Hills
Estates.
          6.         Homeless Persons
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) defines the term homeless as the
state of a person who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate night-time residence, or a person who has a
primary night time residency that is:
              A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living
               accommodations;
              An institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be
               institutionalized; or
              A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping
               accommodation for human beings. 6
Although there are myriad causes of homelessness, among the most common are:
              Substance abuse and alcohol
              Domestic violence
              Mental illness
According to the 2013 Homeless Count Report 7 by the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority
(LAHSA), it is estimated that 53,798 persons were homeless at the time of the survey. Of this
population, 24% were in shelter facilities, 42% were unsheltered and 34% were estimated to be
hidden homeless. Rolling Hills Estates is located within LAHSAs Service Planning Area (SPA) 8 
South Bay. The homeless count for SPA 8 found 5,245 single adults, 551 family members, and 15
unaccompanied youth. The estimated total number of homeless persons in SPA 8 was approximately
5
   2005 Crop and Livestock Report, Los Angeles County Agricultural Commissioner
6
   Stewart B. McKinney Act, 42 U.S.C. 11301, et seq. (1994)
7
   http://documents.lahsa.org/planning/homelesscount/2013/HC13-Results-by-SPA-and-SD.pdf (8/27/2013)
                                                                II-15                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                          II. Housing Needs Assessment
14% lower than the previous survey in 2011. LAHSAs survey did not count the homeless population
for each jurisdiction, therefore 2010 Census data is the most recent available source. As reported by
SCAG, the Census Bureau reported no homeless persons in Rolling Hills Estates.
Senate Bill (SB) 2 of 2007 requires that jurisdictions quantify the need for emergency shelters and
determine whether existing facilities are adequate to serve the need. If adequate existing facilities are
not available, the law requires jurisdictions to identify areas where new facilities are permitted by-
right (i.e., without requiring discretionary approval such as a use permit), or enter into a multi-party
agreement with up to two other jurisdictions to accommodate the need.
Although Rolling Hills Estates has no identified homeless population, an amendment to the Zoning
Code will be processed to allow emergency shelters by-right in the Commercial-General zone.
Homelessness is a regional problem best dealt with at a regional or countywide scale. Los Angeles
Countys focus is to provide funding for access to mainstream resources such as income supports,
health care, mental health care, substance abuse treatment programs, child care, and job training
placement. 8 These resources serve the existing homeless population, and also work toward the
prevention of homelessness.
F.       Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion
State law requires that the Housing Element report assisted affordable units that are at risk of
conversion to market rate housing during the next ten years. According to SCAG and the California
Housing Partnership Corporation, there are no assisted units in Rolling Hills Estates.
G.       Future Growth Needs
         1.      Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for
anticipated growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing within each jurisdiction for
the 5th cycle planning period from January 2014 to October 2021. Communities then determine how
they will address this need through the process of updating the Housing Elements of their General
Plans.
The current RHNA was adopted by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) in
October 2012. The future need for housing is determined primarily by the forecasted growth in
households in a community. Each new household, created by a child moving out of a parent's home, by
a family moving to a community for employment, and so forth, creates the need for a housing unit.
The housing need for new households is then adjusted to maintain a desirable level of vacancy to
promote housing choice and mobility. An adjustment is also made to account for units expected to be
lost due to demolition, natural disaster, or conversion to non-housing uses. The sum of these factors 
household growth, vacancy need, and replacement need  determines the construction need for a
community. Total housing need is then distributed among four income categories on the basis of the
countys income distribution, with adjustments to avoid an over-concentration of lower-income
households in any community.
8
   Los Angeles County Housing and Community Development Consolidated Plan, page 5-21
                                                     II-16                                         January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                            II. Housing Needs Assessment
        2.        2014-2021 Rolling Hills Estates Growth Needs
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) determined the RHNA growth needs
for each city within the SCAG region, plus the unincorporated areas. The total housing growth need
for the City of Rolling Hills Estates during the 2006-2014 planning period is 5 units. This total is
distributed by income category as shown in Table II-20.
                                                              Table II-20
                                               Regional Housing Growth Needs
                Very Low*                    Low                  Moderate           Above Moderate               Total
                     1                        1                        1                      2                     5
           Source: SCAG 2012
           *50% of the very-low need is assigned to the extremely-low-income category pursuant to Government Code 65583(a)(1)
           Note: The RHNA projection period is 1/1/2014  10/31/2021
It should be noted that SCAG did not identify growth needs for the extremely-low-income category in
the adopted RHNA. As provided in Assembly Bill (AB) 2634 of 2006, jurisdictions may determine
their extremely-low-income need as one-half the need in the very-low category.
A discussion of the Citys land resources to accommodate this growth need is provided in Chapter III.
                                                                    II-17                                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element II. Housing Needs Assessment
This page intentionally left blank.
                                                II-18                     January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                   III. Resources and Opportunities
III. RESOURCES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A.       Land Resources
         1.      Inventory of Sites for Housing Development
Section 65583(a)(3) of the Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an inventory of
land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for
redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to these
sites. A detailed analysis of vacant land and potential redevelopment opportunities has been prepared
(see Table III-2, page III-3) and the results of this analysis are summarized in Table III-1 below. The
locations of sites comprising the land inventory are shown in Figures III-1 and III-2. This analysis
demonstrates that the Citys inventory of vacant and underutilized sites exceeds the RHNA in all
income categories.
                                                               Table III-1
                                                    Land Inventory Summary
                                                                                   Income Category
                                                                             VL/L       Mod        Above
                   Units approved/not completed                                0          3         160
                   Vacant land                                                 0          0          5
                   Underutilized sites                                         3          0         145
                   Subtotal                                                    3          3         310
                   RHNA (2014-2021)                                            2          1          2
                   Adequate Sites?                                            Yes       Yes         Yes
                   Source: City of Rolling Hills Estates Planning Department, 2013
Mixed-Use Development  In 1997 the City Council adopted the Mixed Use Overlay for the
Commercial-General (C-G) and Commercial-Limited (C-L) districts. This overlay created
opportunities for higher-density residential development. The Mixed-Use Overlay District is intended
to provide a broad range of housing opportunities to meet the needs of different age groups and
household incomes in the community. The overlay district permits up to 22 dwelling units per acre
within the 98 acres zoned C-G or C-L, under specified conditions. Since the Overlay Zone was
established, seven projects have either been approved or are in various stages of review. Examples of
approved projects are described below.
         627 Deep Valley Drive  this 58-unit condo project was approved at a density of 40 du/acre
         and also includes 5,800 square feet of commercial space. The site was formerly occupied by a
         car wash.
         827 Deep Valley Drive  this 16-unit condo project was approved on the rear portion of a
         parcel developed with an office building. The density of 13 units/acre was lower than the
         allowed 22 units/acre since the owner chose to retain the office building rather than redevelop
         the entire site. A variance for reduced parking was granted.
         901 Deep Valley Drive  this 41-unit condo project was approved at a density of 20 units/acre
         with a variance for reduced parking standards. The project also includes approximately 1,500
         square feet of commercial space. The site was formerly used as a parking lot.
                                                                    III-1                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                 III. Resources and Opportunities
        927 Deep Valley Drive  this 75-unit condo project was approved at a density of 22 units/acre
        with a requirement that 3 units be deed-restricted at the moderate-income level. The project
        also includes approximately 2,000 square feet of commercial space. The site is currently
        occupied by a medical office building to be removed.
        981 Silver Spur Road  this 18-unit condo project was approved at a density of 22 units/acre
        with a variance for increased height and compact parking spaces. Three of the units are
        designed as live/work. The site was previously occupied by a fast-food restaurant.
Realistic Capacity  Three of the projects approved in the Mixed-Use Overlay had densities of 20 -
22 units/acre, which is consistent with the maximum density of 22 units/acre. One project had a yield
of only 13 units/acre because the developer chose to retain the existing office building on-site and
build on the vacant portion of the property. A fifth project (627 Deep Valley Drive) was approved at
40 units/acre. Based on this history, 22 units/acre is considered to be the realistic capacity for projects
within the Mixed-Use Overlay District. This track record demonstrates that development standards and
market conditions are highly favorable for high-density residential development in the Mixed Use
Overlay zone.
The City has conducted a comprehensive environmental evaluation of traffic and circulation issues
related to the development of residential uses in the commercial district. This led to the creation of a
per unit traffic impact fee that will fund Citywide improvements to alleviate traffic issues generated by
the creation of residential uses in the commercial district. This proactive step by the City will help to
eliminate concerns regarding traffic impacts as a constraint to residential development.
Underutilized Sites  As noted in Table III-3, one site (Brickwalk) has potential for lower-income
housing. An application has been filed for redevelopment of this existing office complex with a new
commercial/residential mixed-use project. Although a maximum of 228 units could be developed
under the Mixed Use Overlay, the applicant is proposing 148 units. While the site has geotechnical
conditions that must be remediated, this is not expected to preclude development during the planning
period.
Affordability Assumptions  In 2004 state Housing Element law was amended9 to clarify the
requirements for the land inventory analysis, and established a default density for each jurisdiction.
The default density is the density that is assumed to be sufficient to facilitate the production of lower-
income housing. If a jurisdiction allows development at the default density, then no further analysis is
necessary to demonstrate that those sites are suitable for lower-income housing development. The
default density for Rolling Hills Estates is 20 units/acre. Since the City allows residential development
within the Mixed-Use overlay zone at a density of 22 units/acre, those sites are considered to be
suitable for lower-income housing. However, it must be recognized that affordable housing requires
two things: 1) a suitable site with appropriate land use regulations, and 2) a willing developer with
access to public subsidies to make the project financially feasible. The lack of recent affordable
housing development in Rolling Hills Estates is primarily attributable to high land costs and a shortage
of public subsidies. The City has no redevelopment agency and receives only minimal housing funds.
9
   HCD memo of June 9, 2005 on AB 2348
                                                    III-2                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                         III. Resources and Opportunities
                                                                        Table III-2
                                                                Residential Land Inventory
                                                                                                          Units by Income Category
                                                                  General Plan/
                            Site (Address/APN)                       Zoning         Acreage  Density   VL/L          Mod        Upper     Total
 Approved projects/not completed
 627 Deep Valley Drive/7589-004-017                              CG/MU Overlay       1.45 ac 40 du/ac                             58        58
 827 Deep Valley Drive/7589-003-009                              CG/MU Overlay        1.2 ac 13 du/ac                             16        16
 927 Deep Valley Drive/ 7589-003-017                             CG/MU Overlay        3.4 ac 22 du/ac                 3           72        75
 Chandler Ranch (Palos Verdes Dr. East at northern City limits)       Varies           226   0.5 du/ac                           114       114
 NE of Tanglewood Lane and Rolling Hills Road                      LDR/RA-20         1.84 ac  2 du/ac                              2         2
 NE of Palos Verdes Drive N and Palos Verdes Drive E               LDR/RA-20         7.55 ac  2 du/ac                             11        11
 Moccasin Lane                                                     LDR/RA-20                    1du                                1         1
 Subtotal  approved projects                                                                           0             3          274       277
 Vacant sites
 Club View Lane                                                    LDR/RA-20                   1 du                                1         1
 Sunnyfield Drive                                                  LDR/RA-20                   1 du                                1         1
 Subtotal  vacant sites                                                                                0             0            2        2
 Underutilized sites with redevelopment potential
 655-683 Deep Valley Drive/924-950 Indian Peak Road              CG/MU Overlay
                                                                                       10.4  22 du/ac   3                        145       148
 APN 7589-003-010/012-015 (Brickwalk)
 Subtotal  underutilized sites                                                                         3             0          145       148
 TOTALS                                                                                                 3             3          421       427
                                                                             III-3                                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element          III. Resources and Opportunities
                                          Figure III-1
                              Vacant and Underutilized Residential Sites
                                          Figure III-2
                         Approved Commercial District Mixed-Use Projects
                                                III-4                                January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                III. Resources and Opportunities
         2.      Infrastructure Capacity
a.       Water Supply
The City is serviced by the California Water Service Companys (CalWater) Rancho Dominquez
District. Water is purchased from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD).
CalWater has indicated that it has sufficient water supplies available to serve Rolling Hills Estates
from existing entitlements and resources for the next 20 years. Supplies would be adequate for normal,
dry year and multiple dry year conditions.
b.       Wastewater Treatment
The Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County maintain and operate the sewer system for the City.
Sewer lines are maintained by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works (DPW), with
sewage conveyed through sewer mains into the Joint Water Pollution Control Plan (JWPCP) in the
City of Carson. The JWPCP has a design capacity of 385 million gallons per day (mgd), with a current
excess capacity of approximately 60.8 mgd. Existing wastewater treatment capacity is designed to
accommodate the General Plans of each city serviced by the treatment plant.
c.       Storm Water Drainage
The city is served by the Los Angeles County DPW, which operates and maintains storm drains
citywide. There is currently adequate capacity for storm drains for housing projects, typically infill and
redevelopment projects. If it is determined in the future, through project review, that improvements are
necessary to the storm drain system, the developer will be required to pay their fair share for such
improvements.
d.       Other Utilities
Gas, electricity and telephone services are provided by Southern California Gas Company, Southern
California Edison, SBC and Verizon Communications, including DSL internet service, respectively.
Cable television and internet services are provided by Cox Communications. All systems are adequate
and are upgraded as demand increases. Supplies of natural resources, such as water and gas, are
expected to be adequate to serve the citys needs during the planning period.
B.       Financial and Administrative Resources
         1.      State and Federal Resources
Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG)  Historically, Rolling Hills Estates has
received nominal CDBG funding (less than $30,000 per year). The City has explored utilizing CDBG
funding for City projects in the past, but has experienced difficulty in identifying small-scale projects
that would qualify. Therefore, since 2006, Rolling Hills Estates has sold its funding to qualifying cities
for their use in projects/programs, although no funding was received in FY 2013-14.
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program - The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program was
created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 to provide an alternate method of funding low-and moderate-
income housing. Each state receives a tax credit, based upon population, toward funding housing that
meets program guidelines. The tax credits are then used to leverage private capital into new
construction or acquisition and rehabilitation of affordable housing. Limitations on projects funded
                                                   III-5                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                  III. Resources and Opportunities
under the Tax Credit programs include minimum requirements that a certain percentage of units
remain rent-restricted, based upon median income.
Mortgage Credit Certificates (MCC)  This program provides a federal tax credit for income-
qualified homebuyers equivalent to 15% of the annual mortgage interest. Generally, the tax savings are
calculated as income to help buyers qualify to purchase a home. Using an MCC, first-time buyers can
save between $700 and $2,500 a year on their annual federal tax bill. The program is initiated by the
homebuyer applying through a participating lender, who then submits an application to the Los
Angeles County Community Development Commission 10. The City is not involved in administering
this process or approving loans.
           2.      Local Resources
The City does not have a housing department or local source of funding for housing.
C.         Energy Conservation Opportunities
State law (Government Code 65583(a)(7)) requires all new construction to comply with "energy
budget" standards that establish maximum allowable energy use from depletable sources (Title 24 of
the California Administrative Code). These requirements apply to such design components as
structural insulation, air infiltration and leakage control, setback features on thermostats, water heating
system insulation (tanks and pipes) and swimming pool covers if a pool is equipped with a fossil fuel
or electric heater. State law also requires that a tentative tract map provide for future passive or natural
heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision, including designing the lot sizes and configurations
to permit orienting structures to take advantage of a southern exposure, shade or prevailing breezes.
Southern California Edison (SCE) and the Southern California Gas Company offer energy conserva-
tion programs to residents of Rolling Hills Estates including audits of home energy use to reduce
electricity consumption, refrigerator rebates, appliance repair and weatherization assistance to
qualified low income households, buyers guides for appliances and incentives, by the Gas Company,
to switch from electric to gas appliances. Direct assistance to low-income households is provided by
the Gas Company through the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program and by SCE
through its Energy Management Assistance Program.
Both companies have programs to encourage energy conservation in new construction. SCEs energy
rebate program applies to residential developers as well as individual customers. SCE also offers an
Energy STAR new home program, and Sustainable Communities Program offering design assistance
and financial incentives for sustainable housing development projects. The Gas Companys Energy
Advanced Home Program is offered to residential developers who install energy-efficient gas
appliances that exceed California energy standards by at least 15%.
Some of the most readily available measures for conserving energy in new residential development, as
well as in other homes, are described below.
10
    http://www.lacdc.org/CDCWebsite/HDP/linkit.aspx?id=81
                                                          III-6                                January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                  III. Resources and Opportunities
Insulation and Weatherproofing
More than one-third of the homes in Rolling Hills Estates were built prior to 1960, when there was
little concern for the use of electricity, oil and natural gas for heating purposes. To conserve the heat
generated by older heating units and minimize the heat loss ratio, these homes can be insulated in the
attic space and exterior walls. Windows and exterior doors can be fitted with airtight devices, caulking
or other means to maximize heating and cooling efforts.
Solar Energy and Natural Lighting
Daytime interior lighting costs can be significantly reduced or eliminated with the use of properly
designed and located skylights. Skylights can be easily installed at reasonable expense in existing
houses, thereby substantially reducing electricity costs and energy consumption.
Solar energy is a practical, cost effective, and environmentally sound way to heat and cool a home. In
California, with its plentiful year-round sunshine, the potential uses of solar energy are numerous.
With proper building designs, this resource provides for cooling in the summer and heating in the
winter; it can also heat water for domestic use and swimming pools and can generate electricity.
Unlike oil or natural gas, solar energy is an unlimited resource, which will always be available. Once a
solar energy system is installed, the only additional costs are for the maintenance or replacement of the
system itself. The user is not subject to unpredictable fuel price increases. Moreover, solar energy can
be utilized without any serious safety or environmental concerns.
Solar heating and cooling systems are of three general types: passive, active, or a combination of both.
In passive solar systems, the building structure itself is designed to collect the sun's energy, then store
and circulate the resulting heat, similar to a green house. Passive buildings are typically designed with
a southerly orientation to maximize solar exposure, and constructed with dense materials such as
concrete or adobe to better absorb the heat. Properly placed windows and overhanging eaves also
contribute to keeping a house cool.
Active systems collect and store solar energy in panels attached to the exterior of a house. This type of
system utilizes mechanical fans or pumps to circulate the warm/cool air, while heated water can flow
directly into a home's hot water system.
Although passive systems maximize use of the sun's energy and are less costly to install, active
systems have greater potential for both cooling and heating a home and providing hot water. This may
mean lower energy costs for residents presently dependent on conventional fuels. The City encourages
the use of passive solar systems in new residential construction to improve the energy efficiency of
housing units.
In order to encourage energy conservation and reduce in greenhouse gas emissions, the City Council
has authorized a list of standard conditions of approval for multi-family mixed-use projects (see
Appendix B). Further, the Council has adopted the Build-It-Green New Home Construction Green
Building Guidelines as a reference document for new home construction in the City
(http://www.stopwaste.org/home/index.asp?page=487). In addition, the Council adopted the
Ahwahnee Principles for Resource-Efficient Communities, which describe housing and community
design techniques to maximize efficient use of resources (http://www.lgc.org/ahwahnee/
principles.html).
                                                    III-7                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                       III. Resources and Opportunities
The City has also reduced permit fees and simplified the approval process for energy conservation
retrofits such as solar collectors by allowing such plans to be approved over the counter.
South Bay Energy Saving Center
In addition to state-mandated Title 24 requirements, Rolling Hills Estates is participating in a coalition
to collaboratively tackle the issue of energy conservation. 11 The South Bay Energy Saving Center
(SBESC 12) is educating residents, business owners, and public agencies about the energy conservation
programs and incentives available in the community and how to incorporate more energy-saving
practices into everyday life. Established through funding from the California Public Utilities
Commission, the SBESC includes the 15 cities that comprise the South Bay Cities Council of
Governments (SBCCOG), and is associated with Southern California Edison and Southern California
Gas Company. Member cities include Carson, El Segundo, Gardena, Hawthorne, Hermosa Beach,
Inglewood, Lawndale, Lomita, Manhattan Beach, Palos Verdes Estates, Rancho Palos Verdes,
Redondo Beach, Rolling Hills, Rolling Hills Estates, Torrance, and the Harbor City and San Pedro
communities of Los Angeles.
The distribution of water brooms to business owners is one of the Centers most successful projects to
date. Targeted mainly to restaurant owners, the water brooms can be used instead of a hose and nozzle
or a power washer. Using a combination of air and water pressure, the brooms are water efficient and
clean dust, dirt, food spills, leaves, litter, sawdust, and bird droppings from concrete, asphalt, or any
other hard surface. So far, the Center has distributed over 400 water brooms. SBESC estimates that
each broom can save 50,000 gallons of water annually.
The Center also hosted a community lamp exchange in which about 2,000 residents exchanged their
traditional lamps for compact fluorescent light bulbs, free of charge. Edison donated the fluorescent
lamps and residents were invited to exchange up to 10 household lamps apiece.
Water Conservation
Simple water conservation techniques can save a family thousands of gallons of water per year, plus
many dollars in water and associated energy consumption costs. It is now possible to obtain plumbing
products that reduce water waste by restricting the volume of water flow from faucets, showerheads,
and toilets. The use of plant materials, in residential landscaping, that are well adapted to the climate in
the Palos Verdes Peninsula can also measurably contribute to water conservation by reducing the need
for irrigation.
A household can save water by fixing dripping faucets and using water more conservatively. In
addition, such conservation practices save on gas and electricity needed to heat water and the sewage
system facilities needed to treat it. By encouraging residents to conserve water and install water saving
devices, the City can greatly reduce its water consumption needs and expenses.
The City also passed a Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (Ord. 658) in 2010. This ordinance
requires stringent water efficiency standards for landscaping installations of over 2,500 square feet for
non-residential projects and over 5,000 square feet for residential installations.
11  http://www.imakenews.com/priorityfocus/e_article001104271.cfm?x=bcHNgMg,b7M8B89t
12  www.sbesc.com
                                                           III-8                                  January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                 IV. Constraints
IV. CONSTRAINTS
A.        Governmental Constraints
          1.           Land Use Plans and Regulations
a.        General Plan
Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General Plan to guide its
future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic land uses and density of
development within the various areas of the city. Under state law, the General Plan elements must be
internally consistent and the citys zoning must be consistent with the General Plan. Thus, the land use
plan must provide suitable locations and densities to implement the policies of the Housing Element.
The City of Rolling Hills Estates General Plan Land Use Element provides for four residential land use
designations, as shown in Table IV-1. The Table does not address the mixed uses permitted within the
Citys Peninsula Center Commercial District. The General Plans Mixed-Use Overlay and
accompanying ordinance permits up to 22 dwelling units per acre within the Peninsula Center in
association with retail uses.
                                                                  Table IV-1
                                                   Residential Land Use Categories 
                                                    Rolling Hills Estates General Plan
                                Maximum
     Designation                 Density1                                        Description                                    Acreage2
 Estate Density                  1 du/5 ac      Single-family detached homes on large lots (formerly designated Agricultural)      26
 Very Low Density                 1 du/ac       Single-family detached (3-4 persons per acre)                                      84
 Low Density                      2 du/ac       Single-family detached (3-6 persons per acre)                                      822
 Medium Density                   4 du/ac       Single-family residential on smaller lots (6-12 persons per acre)                  183
 Total                                                                                                                            1,115
 Source: City of Rolling Hills Estates General Plan
 1 Density expressed in dwelling units per gross acre
 2 Total acreage including developed and vacant land
The City of Rolling Hills Estates General Plan Land Use Element is consistent with the goals and
policies of the Housing Element and the Citys zoning is consistent with the General Plan. Adequate
sites with appropriate densities have been identified to permit development commensurate with the
Citys share of regional growth need adopted by SCAG in the RHNA.
b.        Zoning Designations and Development Standards
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development through the
Municipal Code. Zoning regulations serve to implement the General Plan and are designed to protect
and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents. The Municipal Code also helps to
preserve the character and integrity of existing neighborhoods. The Municipal Code sets forth residential
development standards for each zone district.
                                                                        IV-1                                                  January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                IV. Constraints
The zones that allow residential subdivisions or attached units as a permitted use are as follows:
           A                                  Agricultural
                                              (one unit per 5 acres)
           R-A-E                              Single-family Residential-Limited Agricultural
                                              (one-acre minimum lot area)
           R-A-20,000                         Single-family Residential-Limited Agricultural
                                              (20,000 square feet minimum lot area)
           R-A-15,000                         Single-family Residential-Limited Agricultural
                                              (15,000 square feet minimum lot area)
           R-A-10,000                         Single-family Residential-Limited Agricultural
                                              (10,000 square feet minimum lot area)
           R-P-D                              Residential Planned Development
                                              (10,000 square feet minimum lot area)
A summary of the development standards for the five major zones permitting residential development
is provided in Table IV-2. For single-family homes, the smallest allowable lot size is 10,000 square
feet. While this is relatively large by current urban standards in Southern California, it should be
recognized that the topography of Rolling Hills Estates is primarily slopes that preclude smaller lot
sizes. Further, the city was mostly developed more than 30 years ago when land costs were much
lower and the pressures for higher density did not exist. Smaller lot sizes in single-family areas would
require more extensive grading, resulting in higher development costs and geotechnical risks.
The R-P-D district allows cluster-type development, either detached or attached, at a density of up to
eight units/acre. This district helps to reduce the constraint of topography by allowing housing to be
clustered on the most developable portion of a site while leaving other areas with steep slopes or other
environmentally sensitive resources as open space. As a result, the Citys development standards
continue to be viewed as necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and maintain the
quality of life, and are not considered to be unreasonable constraints on the development of housing.
                                                            Table IV-2
                                                         Residential Zones
                                                                           Zoning Designations
                                                               R-A           R-A          R-A
Development Standard                             R-A-E        20,000       15,000       10,000    R-P-D           A
Maximum Density (DU)                             1 du/ac   1 du/ 20,000 1 du/ 15,000 1 du/ 10,000 8 du/ac     1 du/5 ac
                                                               sq.ft.       sq.ft.       sq.ft.
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)                          25%          30%          30%          35%       30%          25%
Minimum Area for Main Bldg. (sq. ft.)             2,000       1,600         1,600        1,200      n/a         1,200
Maximum Building Height (ft.)                      27           27           27            27       35           n/a
Source: Rolling Hills Estates Zoning Ordinance
Zoning for Multi-Family Housing  Densities within the residential zoning districts range from a
maximum of one dwelling unit per acre in the R-A-E zone to eight units per acre in the R-P-D zone,
depending on the underlying residential land use category (Table IV-4).Opportunities for higher
densities, up to 22 units per acre excluding density bonus, are provided within the Citys Mixed-Use
Overlay District. The Mixed-Use Overlay District is intended to provide a broad range of housing
opportunities to meet the range of needs of the age distribution and household incomes of the
                                                                  IV-2                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                   IV. Constraints
community. The overlay district permits up to 22 dwelling units per acre within the 98 acres zoned
Commercial General (C-G) or Commercial-Limited (C-L), under specified conditions. The develop-
ment standards in the Mixed-Use Overlay are summarized in Table IV-3. A CUP is required for
mixed-use developments, as described in Section IV.A.2.a.
                                                                  Table IV-3
                                                Mixed-Use Development Standards
                Minimum lot area                                      1 acre
                Minimum width                                         None
                Minimum depth                                         None
                Residential density                                   22 DU/acre
                Minimum yard requirements
                   - Front                                            15 ft. average (no less than 5 ft.)
                   - Front (residential ground floor)                 n/a
                   - Side  abutting residential                      20 ft.
                   - Rear  abutting residential                      20 ft.
                Open space                                            300 sf per unit
                Lot coverage (maximum)                                35% (45% if not adjacent to parking lot/structure)
                Building height                                       44 ft. or three stories
                Fences hedges and walls                               - 5'0" masonry wall along common property line
                                                                      - 42" max. height within 25' of street right-of-way
                Access                                                Street, service road or alley
                Minimum building area                                 1,400 sq. ft. minimum
                Landscaping                                           Minimum 20% of lot area (10% in parking area)
                Parking: (see Table IV-5)
                   Surface parking lot                                </= 25% of lot area
The overall intent of the Citys residential zoning standards is to preserve the communitys rural
residential character by creating and maintaining residential open space. However, the City has been
proactive in providing a broader range of housing opportunities within its commercial zones through
application of the Mixed Use Overlay District.
                                                                   Table IV-4
                                          Permitted Residential Development by Zone
                                                                                                                                 MU
             Housing Type Permitted                        A         RAE          RA-20       RA-15       RA-10       RPD      Overlay
     SF Detached                                           P           P            P           P           P          C          C
     Single-Family Attached                                                                                            C          C
     Multi-Family                                                                                                      C          C
     High-Density                                                                                                                 C
     Manufactured Housing/Mobile Home                      P           P            P           P           P
     Second Units                                          P           P            P           P           P
     Caretaker Units2
     1 Caretaker units are permitted in the Open Space Recreation, Commercial Recreation, Scientific Research and Development & Quarry
        zones and conditionally permitted in the Institutional zone
     Source: Rolling Hills Estates Zoning Ordinance
     P = Permitted        C = Conditional Use Permit
                                                                        IV-3                                                   January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                   IV. Constraints
c.       Special Needs Housing
Persons with special needs include those in residential care facilities, persons with disabilities, farm
workers, persons needing emergency shelter or transitional living arrangements, and single room
occupancy units. Many of these groups also fall under the category of extremely-low-income
households. The Citys provisions for these housing types are discussed below.
Extremely Low-Income Households
Many of the persons and households discussed in this section under the topic of special needs fall
within the extremely-low-income category, which is defined as 30% or less of area median income, or
up to $25,600 per year for a 4-person household in Los Angeles County (2013).
A variety of City policies and programs described in Chapter V address the needs of extremely-low-
income households, including those in need of residential care facilities, and persons with disabilities.
However, it must be recognized than the development of new housing for the lowest income groups
typically requires large public subsidies, and the level of need is greater than can be met due to funding
limitations, especially during these times of declining public revenues.
Residential Care Facilities
Residential care facilities refer to any family home, group home, or rehabilitation facility that provide
non-medical care to persons in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance,
or training essential for daily living. State-licensed residential care facilities that serve six or fewer
persons are permitted by-right in all residential zones pursuant to state law. Larger care facilities
serving more than six persons are conditionally permitted in the C-G zone. These regulations are
consistent with state law and do not pose a constraint on the establishment of such facilities.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose an
affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. modifications or
exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The Building
Codes adopted by the City of Rolling Hills Estates incorporate accessibility standards contained in
Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. For example, apartment complexes of three or more
units and condominium complexes of four or more units must be designed to accessibility standards.
            Definition of family. According to Municipal Code Section 17.02.220 Family means
             a group of two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in any
             dwelling unit, who share expenses equally or do not pay a fixed periodic fee to the
             principal residents. This definition is consistent with state law and does not pose an
             unreasonable constraint to housing for persons with special needs.
            Separation requirements. There are no City separation requirements between group homes
             or care facilities.
            Site planning requirements. The site planning requirements for care facilities are no
             different than for other residential uses in the same zone.
                                                     IV-4                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                     IV. Constraints
              Parking standards. Reduced parking requirements may be approved in a similar manner as
               for other residential uses.
In addition, a Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance was adopted in 2010 to establish procedures to
streamline the approval process for adjustments to regulations and standards where necessary to
improve accessibility for persons with disabilities.
Compliance with accessibility standards contained in the building code may increase the cost of
housing production and can also impact the viability of rehabilitation of older properties required to be
brought up to current code standards. However, these regulations provide minimum standards that
must be complied with in order to ensure the development of safe and accessible housing.
Farm Worker Housing and Caretaker Units
As indicated in Table IV-4, housing specifically designated as farm worker housing is not permitted
within the City. However, caretaker units are permitted within the following zoning districts:
          (CR) COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL: Section 1841 (h) of the Zoning Code allows
          caretaker quarters not to exceed 1,200 square feet in area in this zone district.
          (I) INSTITUTIONAL: Section 1837.2 (h) 3 of the Zoning Code allows for rectories, manses,
          caretaker units and other similar ancillary residential uses.
          (RA) RESIDENTIAL (within the horse overlay designation*): Section 1821 (b) of the Zoning
          Code allows for guest houses in addition to primary dwelling units. A guest house is not
          intended as a rental, but may be used for domestic housing.
          * A Horse Overlay designation indicates the areas where keeping of horses may be permitted
          and area for horse-keeping quarters are required to be preserved. This designation is applied to
          a substantial portion of the City's residential areas.
          (Q) QUARRY: Section 1867 (a) of the Zoning Code allows a caretaker dwelling unit not to
          exceed 1,200 square feet in area.
Pursuant to the state Employee Housing Act 13, Program 2.3.5 proposes an amendment to the Municipal
Code to allow farmworker housing with up to 12 units or 36 beds as a permitted use in any zone where
agriculture is a permitted use, and housing providing accommodations for up to six employees as a
single-family residential use.
Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing
Program 2.3.2 in the Housing Plan (Chapter V) describes the Citys actions to accommodate
emergency shelters. As discussed in Chapter II, no homeless persons have been observed recently in
Rolling Hills Estates, and there is not likely to be demand for a shelter in the city since homeless
persons can find supportive services in the more urbanized areas of the Los Angeles Basin. However,
in order to respond to the requirements of SB 2, the Zone Code will be amended to permit by-right a
small emergency shelter with up to 15 beds in the Commercial-General Mixed-Use Overlay Zone.
This zone encompasses approximately 98 acres with 100 parcels ranging in size from 0.25 acre to 10
13
   Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5 and 17021.6
                                                      IV-5                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                          IV. Constraints
acres and contains potential vacant sites and buildings that can accommodate at least one emergency
shelter.
Transitional housing means a multi-family residential facility that does not restrict occupancy to six
months or less and that provides temporary accommodations to low- and moderate-income persons
and families for periods of up to 24 months, and which also may provide meals, counseling, and other
services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. Supportive housing means housing
with no limit on the length of stay and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the resident
in maximizing the residents ability to live and work in the community. The Municipal Code was
amended in 2013 to add definitions for transitional and supportive housing so that they are permitted
or conditionally permitted in the same manner as other residential dwellings of the same type in the
same zone in accordance with the requirements of SB 2.
Single Room Occupancy
Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities are small studio-type units, typically reserved for lower-
income residents or senior citizens. In 2013 the Municipal Code was amended to include an explicit
definition and development standards for SROs in the Municipal Code. These types of units are
conditionally permitted within the Commercial-General Mixed-Use Overlay Zone. SRO projects
would qualify for a density bonus or other incentives if affordability requirements were met. There is
no minimum unit number requirement that would preclude SRO development.
d.       Off-Street Parking Requirements
The Citys parking requirements for residential zones are based on suburban development (Table IV-
5). However, variations from suburban standards are provided within the Mixed Use Overlay District
(see Table IV-3, page IV-3). Within the Overlay District, senior housing is required to provide only
one space per unit and three parking spaces for every four units for guest and employee parking.
Senior housing parking requirements may be adjusted for individual projects based on an approved
parking study.
                                                            Table IV-5
                                                Residential Parking Requirements
                       Type of Unit                                      Minimum Parking Space Required
       Single Family Residence                        2 spaces in a garage
       2-Family or Multiple Family                    2 spaces in a garage
       Mixed Use Overlay District                     1 space per 1-bedroom unit
                                                      2 spaces per 2+ bedrooms
                                                      1 guest space per 3 units (may be shared with commercial parking)
       Source: Rolling Hills Estates Zoning Ordinance
                                                                  IV-6                                                  January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                        IV. Constraints
                                                      Table IV-6
                                          Mixed-Use Parking Requirements
                 Residential Type                                        Parking Spaces Required
      One bedroom                             1
      Two/three bedrooms                      2
      Guest                                   1 space per 3 units
      Senior housing                          1 space per unit, plus 3 spaces for every 4 units for guests and employees
      Commercial or office with mixed-use     1 space per 200 square feet of gross leasable area
The reduced parking standards and flexibility provided in the Mixed-Use Overlay District will help to
moderate the cost of housing in the commercial zones.
e.       Second Units
The Citys second unit ordinance was updated in 2010 consistent with state law. The maximum unit
size is 750 square feet or 30% of the main unit size, whichever is less. The second unit may be
attached to the main building or detached. Either the main unit or the second unit must be owner-
occupied. Second units serve to augment resources for senior housing, or other segments of the
population.
f.       Density Bonus
Under State law (SB 1818 of 2004), cities and counties must provide a density increase up to 35% over
the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the Municipal Code and the Land Use
Element of the General Plan (or bonuses of equivalent financial value) when builders agree to
construct housing developments with units affordable to low- or moderate-income households. In 2013
Chapter 17.76 of the Municipal Code was amended consistent with current state density bonus law.
g.       Mobile Homes/Manufactured Housing
There is often an economy of scale in manufacturing homes in a plant rather than on site, thereby
reducing cost. State law precludes local governments from prohibiting the installation of mobile homes
on permanent foundations on single-family lots. It also declares a mobile home park to be a permitted
land use on any land planned and zoned for residential use, and prohibits requiring the average density
in a new mobile home park to be less than that permitted by the Municipal Code.
The Citys Zoning Code allows manufactured/mobile homes on permanent foundations in all
residential zones. There is virtually no demand for manufactured housing in the city due to prohibitive
land costs, however.
h.       Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance
The City's Neighborhood Compatibility Determination procedures are set forth in Section 17.62 of the
Rolling Hills Estates Zoning Code. The Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance assures that proposed
projects within the City respect the existing pattern of development, as well as the privacy and the rural
character of the neighborhood and City.
                                                            IV-7                                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                   IV. Constraints
The primary purpose of the ordinance is to stave off mansionization and to maintain the modest rural
character of the City. The resulting beneficial effect of the ordinance is to decrease the cost of homes
as the size decreases.
i.       Building Codes
State law prohibits the imposition of building standards that are not necessitated by local geographic,
climatic or topographic conditions. Further, state law requires that local governments making changes
or modifications in building standards must report such charges to the Department of Housing and
Community Development and file an expressed finding that the change is needed.
The City's building codes are based upon the 2010 California Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fire
and Electrical Codes. These are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect the public's health,
safety and welfare. No additional regulations have been imposed by the City that would unnecessarily
add to housing costs.
         2.      Development Processing Procedures
a.       Residential Permit Processing
State Planning and Zoning Law provides permit processing requirements for residential development.
Within the framework of state requirements, the City has structured its development review process in
order to minimize the time required to obtain permits while ensuring that projects receive careful
review.
Individual homes on single-family lots are permitted by-right in all residential zones except RPD and
the Mixed-Use Overlay. A CUP is required for single-family, multi-family and mixed-use
development in the RPD and Mixed-Use Overlay zones. The City bundles project entitlements and
considers the CUP in conjunction with the project Precise Plan of Design, also required for a mixed-
use development in the Mixed-Use Overlay zone, which considers design-related issues. Pursuant to
Section 17.68.010 of the Municipal Code, the CUP is required to ensure that the proposed uses are
necessary to the development of the community, and which uses are in no way detrimental to existing
uses or to those permitted in the district. Pursuant to Section 17.68.040 of the Municipal Code,
conditions of approval for a CUP are set forth as necessary to preserve the integrity and character of
the district, the utility and value of adjacent property, and to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the district. The CUP process requires a public hearing with notification of property owners
within a 500 radius, posting of notices, and publishing a hearing notice in the newspaper. These
requirements and procedures are consistent with most other jurisdictions in the area, are necessary to
ensure compatible land use, and do not pose an unreasonable constraint to housing. Since the adoption
of the Mixed-Use Overlay in 2004, the City has approved seven mixed-use projects. No projects have
been denied. This track record demonstrates that the Citys processing procedures do not pose an
unreasonable constraint to residential development in the Mixed-Use Overlay.
While facilitating additional residential development commensurate with the Citys RHNA is both
necessary and appropriate, it is also essential that the integrity and viability of the commercial district
be preserved, both for the provision of goods and services for the community and to ensure the fiscal
health of the City. Given the predominantly residential nature of Rolling Hills Estates and surrounding
cities, this commercial district is one of only a few commercial areas serving the 67,000+ people living
on the Palos Verdes Peninsula. Further, this is the Citys only commercial district, and sales tax is a
                                                    IV-8                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                  IV. Constraints
critical revenue source for the City. The CUP process, described in 17.68.010 of the Municipal Code,
allows the City to maintain a healthy balance between residential and commercial development in the
Mixed Use Overlay and ensures that new developments will not adversely affect existing businesses
that are necessary for the continued functioning of the commercial district. The City has actively
promoted development of multi-family projects in the commercial district as evidenced by the seven
previously approved projects, and will continue to do so while ensuring the long-term viability of this
district.
Rolling Hills Estates provides for expedited permit processing though its Planning Fee Schedule.
Expedited processing is available for the cost of a contractor plus 21% administrative overhead. In
addition, the Planning Department encourages applicants to discuss their development proposals with
Department staff prior to submitting an application. There is no charge for this service. A formal pre-
application process is available for a fee of $800, which is applied toward the application fee.
These procedures help to ensure that the development review process meets all legal requirements
without causing a significant unwarranted constraint to housing development.
b.        Environmental Review
Environmental review is required for all development projects under the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA). Most residential projects in Rolling Hills Estates are either Categorically Exempt
or require an Initial Study and a Mitigated Negative Declaration. Developments that have the potential
of creating significant impacts that cannot be mitigated require the preparation of an Environmental
Impact Report. Once deemed complete, most residential projects that require a Mitigated Negative
Declaration take two to three months to complete, inclusive of mandatory public review periods.
Categorically Exempt developments such as second residential units require a minimal amount of
time. As a result, state-mandated environmental review does not pose a significant constraint to
housing development.
          3.      Development Fees and Improvement Requirements
State law limits fees charged for development permit processing to the reasonable cost of providing the
service for which the fee is charged. Various fees and assessments are charged by the City and other
public agencies to cover the costs of processing permit applications and providing services and
facilities such as schools, parks and infrastructure. Almost all of these fees are assessed through a pro
rata share system, based on the magnitude of the project's impact or on the extent of the benefit that
will be derived. The City is currently examining the establishment of developer impact fees for library,
traffic, streetscape, and General Plan purposes. Also under consideration is an increased fee for park
purposes, as compared to existing Municipal Code provisions. These fees have not been approved at
this time and, therefore, are not considered in the analysis of development fees below.
Table IV-7 shows the development fees associated with an 18-unit condominium project.
Development fees are estimated at approximately $34,500 per unit for a project of this type.
The City periodically evaluates the actual cost of processing the development permits when revising
its fee schedule.
                                                    IV-9                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                              IV. Constraints
                                                                Table IV-7
                                         Multi-Family Development Fee Summary
            Number of Units                                                                                      18
            Square Footage (average 1,200 s.f. per unit)                                                       21,600
            School Fees (Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District)                                      $69,120
                                                                                                             ($3.20/sf)
            Grading Permit Fee (21 cubic yards+)                                                               $1,100
            NPDES Review & Compliance                                                                             1
            New Construction Fee ($500 per unit)                                                               $9,000
            Precise Plan of Design                                                                             $6,900
            Environmental Review/Initial Study                                                                    2
            Subdivision                                                                                           3
            Conditional Use Permit                                                                             $1,600
            Radius Maps and Address Labels                                                                      $300
            Building Permit Fees                                                                             $230,957
            General Plan fee ($0.60/sf)                                                                       $12,960
            Library fee ($2,752/SF unit & $1,835/MF unit)                                                     $33,030
            Park fee ($17,826/SF unit & $11,885/MF unit)                                                     $213,930
            Traffic Impact fee  MU Overlay zone ($3,233/SF unit & $2,343/MF unit)                            $42,174
            Total Fees                                                                                       $621,071
            Cost Per Square Foot                                                                               $28.75
            Cost Per Unit                                                                                     $34,504
            Est. % of Total Cost4                                                                                5%
            1 Subcontractor actual cost + 21% administrative overhead
            2 Actual consultant cost + 21% administrative overhead
            3 L.A. County fees + 21%
            4. Assumes total value of $750,000
            Fees do not include possible cost for an environmental impact report or related consultant fees.
            Sources: City of Rolling Hills Estates Planning Department and Public Works Department
City road standards vary by roadway designation as provided in Table IV-8.
                                                                Table IV-8
                                                  Road Improvement Standards
                               Roadway Designation                                          Standards
                    Arterial (Major and Secondary)                      2  4 travel lanes
                                                                        Divided roadway
                                                                        Left-turn lands/pockets
                                                                        60  80 ft road width
                                                                        80  100 ft ROW
                    Collector Street                                    2  4 travel lanes
                                                                        Undivided roadway
                                                                        32  52 ft road width
                                                                        60 ft ROW
                    Local Street                                        2 travel lanes
                                                                        36  40 ft road width
                                                                        50  60 ft ROW
                    Source: City of Rolling Hills Estates, 1991
                                                                   IV-10                                                 January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                   IV. Constraints
A local residential street requires a 50- to 60-foot right-of-way, with a road width of 36 to 40 feet. The
Citys road standards are typical for cities in Los Angeles County and do not act as an unreasonable
constraint to housing development.
After the passage of Proposition 13 and its limitation on local governments property tax revenues,
cities and counties have faced increasing difficulty in providing public services and facilities to serve
their residents. One of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has been the shift in funding of new
infrastructure from general tax revenues to development impact fees and improvement requirements on
land developers. The City requires developers to provide on-site and off-site improvements necessary
to serve their projects. Such improvements may include water, sewer and other utility extensions,
street construction and traffic control device installation that are reasonably related to the project.
Dedication of land or in-lieu fees may also be required of a project for rights-of-way, transit facilities,
recreational facilities and school sites, consistent with the Subdivision Map Act.
The Citys Capital Improvement Program (CIP) contains a schedule of public improvements including
streets, bridges, overpasses and other public works projects to facilitate the continued build-out of the
Citys General Plan. The CIP helps to ensure that construction of public improvements is coordinated
with private development.
Although development fees and improvement requirements increase the cost of housing, cities have
little choice in establishing such requirements due to the limitations on property taxes and other
revenue sources needed to fund public improvements and maintain community standards.
B.       Non-Governmental Constraints
         1.      Environmental Constraints
Environmental constraints include physical features such as steep slopes, fault zones, floodplains,
sensitive biological habitat, agricultural lands, and areas located within very high fire hazard zones. In
many cases, development of these areas is constrained by state and federal laws (e.g., FEMA
floodplain regulations, the Clean Water Act and the Endangered Species Act, the state Fish and Game
Code, and the Alquist-Priolo Act).
Effective January 1, 2008, the City adopted the Los Angeles County Building and Fire Codes, which
designate the entire City of Rolling Hills Estates in a Very High Fire Hazard Zone. All development is
now subject to review and approval by the Los Angeles County Fire Department.
Significant environmental constraints are also imposed by active earthquake fault zones within the
City, including the Palos Verdes Fault, Cabrillo Fault and the Newport-Inglewood Fault. Seismic risks
are addressed by Public Safety Element policies, and by development standards in the Hazards
Management Overlay District.
The Citys land use plans have been designed to protect sensitive areas from development, and protect
public safety by avoiding development in hazardous areas. While these policies constrain residential
development to some extent, they are necessary to support other public policies and promote public
safety.
                                                     IV-11                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                   IV. Constraints
        2.       Infrastructure Constraints
The Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County maintain and operate the sewer system for the City.
Sewer lines are maintained by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works (DPW), with
sewage conveyed through sewer mains into the Joint Water Pollution Control Plan (JWPCP) in the
City of Carson. The JWPCP has a design capacity of 385 million gallons per day (mgd), with a current
excess capacity of approximately 60.8 mgd. Existing wastewater treatment capacity is designed to
accommodate the General Plans of each city serviced by the treatment plant, including the City of
Rolling Hills Estates.
Water for City residents is supplied by the California Water Service Companys (CalWater) Rancho
Dominquez District. Water is purchased from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
(MWD). CalWater has indicated that it has sufficient water supplies available to serve Rolling Hills
Estates from existing entitlements and resources for the next 20 years. Supplies would be adequate for
normal, dry year and multiple dry year conditions.
Gas, electricity and telephone services are provided by Southern California Gas Company, Southern
California Edison and Verizon Communications and SBC, including DSL internet service,
respectively. Cable television and internet services are provided by Cox Communications. All systems
are adequate and are upgraded as demand increases. Supplies of natural resources, such as water and
gas, are expected to be adequate to serve the citys needs during the planning period.
Storm water runoff is handled by a flood control system owned and/or operated by Los Angeles
County Flood Control District and the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works. The City is
also required to implement a Storm Water Management Program consistent with the federal National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit program. This includes measures to address
stormwater runoff from construction activities and post-construction runoff from all types of
development including residential projects. The City is a co-permittee of NPDES Permit No.
CAS004001 and has codified NPDES permit requirements in the Storm Water and Urban Runoff
Pollution Control Ordinance (Chapter 8.38 of the Municipal Code).
The school district (Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District) charges school fees to help pay
for buildings and facilities. Public parks, parkways, flood control facilities and equestrian stables/trails
are developed and maintained by the Community Services Department using fees or land dedication
required by the Citys Park and Recreational Facilities Code. The code requires five acres of parkland
for every 1,000 residents, or payment of an in-lieu fee based on the number of units permitted in a
development. The City currently has a parkland ratio of 8.6 acres per 1,000 population, well in excess
of the Code requirements.
To the extent possible, the City requires developers to provide roads and bridges or pay development
fees to defray the costs. Other funding sources are also required to support large capital improvements.
The city requires dedication of land and improvement of internal streets and bordering streets as part of
the subdivision process.
The City has a Capital Improvement Program to schedule public improvements including streets,
bridges, overpasses and other public works projects to allow for the continued build-out of the citys
General Plan. This helps to ensure the progression of improvements to be timely with private
development. Competing state and federal mandates require the implementation of congestion
management improvements.
                                                  IV-12                                       January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                   IV. Constraints
          3.        Land Costs
Land represents one of the most significant components of the cost of new housing. Land values
fluctuate with market conditions. The housing market recession that began in 2008 negatively affected
land values, although prices have begun to recover. Changes in land prices reflect the cyclical nature of
the residential real estate market.
In Rolling Hills Estates and throughout the Palos Verdes Peninsula, land costs represent a relatively
high proportion of total housing costs. As the remaining developable land has becomes scarcer in the
Los Angeles metropolitan area, and on the Peninsula in particular, the price of land in the City has
risen. In addition, the land which has not yet been developed tends to have more environmental
constraints, such as topographical features that require extensive grading, and is thus more costly to
develop. Typical land cost is approximately $4 million per acre in the commercial districts and over $1
million for a half-acre parcel in the residential zones. 14
Per-unit land cost is directly affected by density  higher density allows the cost to be spread across
more units, reducing the total price. The Citys mixed-use zone allows a density of 22 units/acre,
which reduces per-unit land cost.
          4.        Construction Costs
Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor, development standards and general
market conditions. The City has no influence over materials and labor costs, and the building codes
and development standards in Rolling Hills Estates are not substantially different than most other cities
in Los Angeles County and the state of California.
          5.        Cost and Availability of Financing
Rolling Hills Estates is similar to most other suburban communities in southern California with regard
to private sector home financing programs. The recent crisis in the mortgage industry has affected the
availability of real estate loans, although the long-term effects are unpredictable. For buyers with good
credit histories, mortgages can be obtained at very favorable interest rates.
Under state law, it is illegal for real estate lending institutions to discriminate against entire
neighborhoods in lending practices because of the physical or economic conditions in the area
(redlining). In monitoring new construction sales, re-sales of existing homes, and permits for
remodeling, it would not appear that redlining is practiced in any area of the city.
C.        Fair Housing
State law prohibits discrimination in the development process or in real property transactions, and it is
the Citys policy to uphold the law in this regard. Fair housing issues are addressed in Rolling Hills
Estates through the Fair Housing Foundation, a nonprofit corporation formed to promote the
enforcement of fair housing laws and to encourage an atmosphere of open housing. The Planning
Department distributes information at City Hall and makes referrals to the Fair Housing Foundation as
needed.
14
    City of Rolling Hills Estates Planning Department, April 2008
                                                              IV-13                           January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element IV. Constraints
This page intentionally left blank.
                                               IV-14        January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                               V. Housing Plan
V.      HOUSING PLAN
The primary focus of the Housing Element is to meet existing and anticipated housing needs and to
protect existing residential neighborhoods in Rolling Hills Estates. The policies and implementation
measures of the Housing Element are aimed at preserving the quality of the living environment,
protecting the lower density character of the area, conserving the existing housing stock, addressing
local and regional housing needs, providing for the City's share of housing for all economic groups,
providing housing assistance to residents, and ensuring fair housing practices. The Citys quantified
objectives for the planning period are summarized in Table V-1 at the end of this chapter.
A.      Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs
Goal 1:     Preserve the Citys Housing Stock, Quality of Life and Rural Character
The Citys residents are proud of their community and the fact that it is a very desirable place to live.
As a result, the maintenance of neighborhoods has been part of the City's housing program for several
decades and will continue to be emphasized. Despite development pressures, Rolling Hills Estates
remains predominantly a lower-density community with larger lots, unlike urban areas. The majority
of the City's housing stock is over 30 years old, and ongoing maintenance and rehabilitation is needed
to keep the environment attractive.
      Policy 1.1    Ensure that new housing is compatible in character and style with existing
                     development, and consistent with established architectural, landscape and
                     development conformity standards established by the City.
                     Implementation Measure
                    1.1.1   Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance
                            Continue to implement the Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance in the
                            review of proposed residential development and assure that all develop-
                            ment is consistent with the development standards included in the Land
                            Use Element while providing a broad range of housing types to meet the
                            present and future needs of the community.
                            Responsible Agency:     Planning Department
                            Timeframe:              Ongoing
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Ensure that new housing is compatible with
                                                    established development and conformity standards
                                                    established by the City.
      Policy 1.2    Restrict the development of gated private developments in the City.
                     Implementation Measure
                    1.2.1   Discourage Gated Neighborhoods
                            Gates or other structures which restrict access on public or private streets,
                            alleys or easements will generally not be permitted. Gates will be
                            considered in neighborhood conformity review of future development in
                            order to discourage gated communities.
                                                   V-1                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                   V. Housing Plan
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
                            Timeframe:               Ongoing
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Discourage the development of gated private
                                                     developments in the City.
      Policy 1.3    Encourage the conservation and rehabilitation of existing units in compliance
                    with existing zoning and environmental standards.
                    Implementation Measure
                    1.3.1   Continue Code Enforcement Activities
                            Staff will continue code enforcement and nuisance abatement efforts to
                            identify properties that are out of compliance with zoning and building
                            code standards. To increase awareness of property maintenance require-
                            ments, information on common code violations will be provided at the
                            public counter, over the telephone, and periodically in the City newsletter.
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
                            Timeframe:               Ongoing
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Encourage the conservation and maintenance of
                                                     existing units in compliance with zoning and
                                                     environmental standards.
      Policy 1.4    Explore public and private financing which could contribute to the rehabilitation
                    and improvement of existing housing.
                    Implementation Measure
                    1.4.1   Identify Housing Assistance Program Resources
                            City staff will continue to review current housing assistance programs
                            (both Federal and State) to determine availability and relevance for use in
                            providing assistance for rehabilitation of existing housing in the City. The
                            focus of this effort will be directed towards identifying assistance programs
                            which owner-builders can utilize in order to receive technical assistance to
                            maintain their current housing status while upgrading the unit to current
                            standards. The City will apply for these programs once it is determined the
                            financing is available.
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department/Finance Department
                            Timeframe:               Ongoing
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Explore public and private financing which could
                                                     contribute to the rehabilitation and improvement of
                                                     existing housing. If funding is available, assist the
                                                     rehabilitation of 2 to 4 units per year.
                                                    V-2                                       January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                              V. Housing Plan
      Policy 1.5     Promote water and energy conservation.
                     Implementation Measure
                     1.5.1  Promote Water and Energy Conservation
                            The City will coordinate with the Metropolitan Water Department and the
                            Southern California Water Service to assure that water conservation efforts
                            are adhered to by the City's residents. The City will make available at the
                            public counter a brochure to inform the City's residents of energy- and
                            water-conserving fixtures and measures which can be adapted into existing
                            housing to conserve non-renewable fuels and save money. The City will
                            continue to encourage residents to utilize the Build it Green New Home
                            Construction Green Building Guidelines, and will ensure new multi-family
                            developments utilize greenhouse gas emission reduction strategies. The
                            City will continue to provide energy and water conservation information on
                            the Citys website.
                            Responsible Agency: City Manager
                            Timeframe:              Continue to make brochures available throughout
                                                    the planning period
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Encourage property maintenance to prevent
                                                    deterioration, improve residential aesthetics and
                                                    public safety, and to promote water conservation
                                                    and energy conservation.
Goal 2:      Promote New Housing Opportunities to Meet the Needs of Existing and Future
             Residents While Preserving the Citys Rural Character
Rolling Hills Estates lies within the context of the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, and the
region continues to experience strong growth pressures. The City's fair share of regional housing
growth need is 5 new units over the 2014-2021 planning period. Of these, 3 new units are needed for
low- or moderate-income households. In Rolling Hills Estates, service sector employees and a growing
number of elderly persons, especially those with fixed retirement incomes, need lower-priced housing.
As noted in Chapter II, the Citys population is significantly older than Los Angeles County as a
whole, and over the next 40 years the countys senior population is projected to grow by 174%
compared to just 30% for the countys total population.
Although the City has little vacant land remaining for development, some land exists for the
development of single-family detached homes, and higher-density apartments and condominiums may
be developed in the Peninsula Center mixed-use overlay. Second units also provide opportunities for
small, relatively inexpensive housing.
                                                   V-3                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                               V. Housing Plan
      Policy 2.1    Encourage sound and logical residential growth while providing for the Citys
                    fair share of the regions need for affordable housing.
                    Implementation Measure
                    2.1.1   Provide for a Range of Residential Development Opportunities
                            Consistent with the Citys RHNA Allocation
                            The City will continue to provide additional opportunities for a variety of
                            residential development types through the designation of adequate sites to
                            accommodate the Citys RHNA allocation. The Mixed Use Overlay Zone
                            includes a required finding that a proposed project assists the City in
                            meeting its RHNA allocation, specifically its lower-income housing
                            requirements. If feasible, units for extremely-low-income households will
                            be encouraged. However, it is recognized that affordable housing at the
                            lowest income levels requires deep subsidies and the City has limited
                            financial resources. The City will solicit interest and recommendations
                            from non-profit housing developers regarding the potential for lower-
                            income and senior housing in the Mixed Use Overlay and incorporate
                            findings into the regulations as appropriate. The City will assist interested
                            non-profit developers by facilitating site identification, modifying
                            development standards for qualifying affordable projects, and expediting
                            permit processing.
                            The City will monitor the conditional use permit (CUP) process to ensure it
                            does not constrain residential development including multi-family and
                            housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households, particularly
                            in the Mixed Use Overlay. The Planning Department will evaluate
                            application processing and analyze processing times and the impact of
                            conditions of approval to determine whether the CUP process acts as a
                            constraint on residential development. If the CUP is found to constrain
                            development, the City will take action to amend the CUP process or
                            establish guidelines and other mechanisms to promote application certainty.
                            This review will be conducted as part of the Citys Housing Element
                            Annual Report submitted to the state.
                            Progress toward implementing adopted Housing Element programs and
                            meeting the Citys quantified objectives will be reported to the City
                            Council and state Department of Housing and Community Development
                            annually. As noted in Chapter II, seniors are a rapidly growing segment of
                            the population. Smaller apartments and condos located near medical offices
                            and commercial facilities in the Peninsula Center are well-suited to this
                            market segment.
                            Responsible Agency: Planning Department/City Manager
                            Timeframe:              Consult with non-profit developers annually; annual
                                                    progress reports.
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Encourage sound and logical residential
                                                    development for all economic segments of the
                                                   V-4                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                 V. Housing Plan
                                                     community consistent with the RHNA allocation;
                                                     continue to promote lower-income and senior
                                                     housing, including extremely-low-income units
                                                     where feasible; prepare annual progress reports.
                    2.1.2   Implement the Density Bonus Ordinance Consistent with State Law
                            Chapter 17.76 of the Municipal Code incorporates the density bonus
                            provisions of Government Code 65915. A density increase of up to 35%
                            over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density is available to
                            developers who agree to construct housing developments with units
                            affordable to low- or moderate-income households. A senior housing
                            development is eligible for a 20% density bonus if it includes at least 35
                            dwelling units.
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
                            Timeframe:               Throughout the planning period
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Continue to facilitate lower-income and senior
                                                     housing, including extremely-low-income units
                                                     where feasible, through provision of a density
                                                     bonus for qualifying projects.
      Policy 2.2    Ensure that new development is sensitive to the natural terrain, and that the
                    environmental impacts of new growth are mitigated to the greatest extent
                    feasible.
                    Implementation Measure
                    2.2.1   Protect Environmental Quality
                            Require that the environmental review process for new development
                            contains a thorough analysis of landform alteration and potential traffic
                            impacts, pollution, and water use, and require all feasible mitigation
                            measures to minimize impacts.
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
                            Timeframe:               Ongoing
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Ensure that new development occurs in an environ-
                                                     mentally sensitive manner and that potential
                                                     adverse impacts are mitigated to the greatest extent
                                                     feasible.
      Policy 2.3    Remove governmental constraints to the development of housing for lower-
                    income households and persons with special needs.
                    Implementation Measures
                    2.3.1   Residential Care Facilities for 7+ Persons
                            Residential care facilities serving 6 or fewer persons are allowed by-right in
                            all residential zones, and larger residential care facilities for 7 or more
                                                    V-5                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                    V. Housing Plan
                            persons are conditionally permitted in the C-G zone. The City will continue
                            to encourage and facilitate the provision of residential care facilities
                            consistent with state law.
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
                            Timeframe:               Throughout the planning period
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Continue to facilitate the provision of residential
                                                     care facilities consistent with state law.
                    2.3.2   Emergency Shelters
                            Although there are few homeless persons in the city, SB 2 of 2007 requires
                            all jurisdictions with any unmet need to identify at least one zone where
                            emergency shelters may be established by-right, subject to specific
                            development standards. The City is amending the Zoning Code to permit
                            by-right a small emergency shelter facility with up to 15 beds in the
                            Commercial-General Mixed-Use Overlay Zone in compliance with SB 2.
                            As part of the Code amendment, appropriate findings and development
                            standards will be adopted in conformance with SB 2 to encourage and
                            facilitate emergency shelters while ensuring community compatibility.
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
                            Timeframe:               Code amendment by April 2014
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Encourage and facilitate the provision of emergency
                                                     shelters in conformance with SB 2.
                    2.3.3   Transitional and Supportive Housing
                            SB 2 of 2007 requires that transitional and supportive housing be
                            considered a residential use subject to the same requirements and
                            procedures that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same
                            district. In 2013 the City amended the Zoning Code in conformance with
                            state law. The City will continue to encourage and facilitate the provision
                            of transitional and supportive housing.
                            Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
                            Timeframe:               Throughout the planning period
                            Funding source:          General fund
                            Program objective:       Encourage and facilitate the provision of
                                                     transitional and supportive housing in compliance
                                                     with SB 2.
                    2.3.4   Single Room Occupancy
                            Single room occupancy facilities are small studio-type units, typically
                            reserved for lower-income persons or senior citizens. In 2013 the
                            Municipal Code was amended to conditionally permit SROs in the C-G
                            zone. The City will continue to encourage the provision of SROs consistent
                            with current regulations.
                                                    V-6                                         January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                V. Housing Plan
                            Responsible Agency:     Planning Department
                            Timeframe:              Throughout the planning period
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Encourage the development of SRO units.
                    2.3.5   Farmworker Housing
                            The state Employee Housing Act provides that farmworker housing with
                            up to 12 units or 36 beds is a permitted use in any zone where agriculture is
                            a permitted use, and housing providing accommodations for up to six
                            employees shall be considered a single-family residential use. The City will
                            amend the Municipal Code related to employee housing consistent with
                            state law.
                            Responsible Agency:     Planning Department
                            Timeframe:              Code amendment by April 2014
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Amend the Municipal Code in conformance with
                                                    the Employee Housing Act.
Goal 3:     Promote Housing Assistance and Fair Housing for those with Limited Incomes or
            Special Needs
The Citys housing programs should be receptive to the needs of special household groups in the City.
These special needs groups include the elderly, low- and moderate-income households, minorities,
female-headed households, and persons with disabilities.
      Policy 3.1    Pursue all appropriate public and private sources of financial support to provide
                    housing assistance for lower-income households, the elderly, and others with
                    special needs.
                    Implementation Measure
                    3.1.1   Housing Assistance Programs
                            City staff will continue to review available housing assistance programs
                            (both Federal and State) to determine their appropriateness for use in
                            providing low-cost senior housing in the City. The focus of this effort will
                            be directed towards identifying public and private financial support which
                            individual elderly property owners can utilize. Potential opportunities for
                            new senior housing development are found in those areas designated for
                            mixed use development. Staff will provide administrative support to non-
                            profit agencies in preparing and submitting grant applications whenever
                            possible, with an objective of submitting at least 2 to 3 applications during
                            the planning period, depending on the availability of resources.
                            Responsible Agency: Planning Department
                            Timeframe:              Ongoing; 2 to 3 applications during the planning
                                                    period; annual progress reports
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Minimize difference between affordable and market
                                                    rate units.
                                                   V-7                                       January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                V. Housing Plan
      Policy 3.2    Inform the Citys residents of housing resources and opportunities available to
                    lower-income households and senior citizens.
                    Implementation Measures
                    3.2.1   Increase Public Awareness of Reverse Mortgages
                            The City will continue to inform the senior population at the public
                            counter, over the telephone and in the City newsletter about the availability
                            of reverse mortgages.
                            Responsible Agency:     City Manager
                            Timeframe:              Ongoing
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Inform the senior citizen population about the
                                                    availability of reverse mortgages through the City's
                                                    newsletter.
                    3.2.2   Promote Second Units
                            The City will continue to promote opportunities for second units by making
                            a brochure available at the public counter, on the City website, and in the
                            City newsletter. Second units can be particularly helpful in addressing the
                            needs of extremely-low-income households.
                            Responsible Agency:     Planning Department/City Manager
                            Timeframe:              Throughout the planning period
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Publicize the provisions of the Second Unit housing
                                                    ordinance in order to increase the availability of
                                                    lower-cost housing. Approve 3 second units per
                                                    year.
      Policy 3.3    Enforce fair housing laws and provide fair housing counseling services to
                    residents.
                    Implementation Measure
                    3.3.1   Support the Fair Housing Foundation
                            The City will continue to make referrals to the Fair Housing Foundation.
                            The City will distribute fair housing information to the community through
                            brochures at City Hall, the library, community center, City newsletter, and
                            on the Citys website.
                            Responsible Agency:     Planning Department
                            Timeframe:              Ongoing
                            Funding source:         General fund
                            Program objective:      Enforce fair housing laws and provide fair housing
                                                    counseling services to residents; distribute
                                                    information regarding fair housing services.
                                                   V-8                                      January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                       V. Housing Plan
      Policy 3.4         Encourage accessible housing and reduce barriers for persons with disabilities,
                         and enforce state accessibility standards for new residential construction.
                         Implementation Measure
                         3.4.1       Encourage and Promote Accessible Housing
                                     The City will continue to enforce the current Zoning Code and the State
                                     provisions (Title 24) for handicapped access, and implement the reasonable
                                     accommodation ordinance to reduce barriers for persons with disabilities.
                                     Responsible Agency:                  Planning Department
                                     Timeframe:                           Throughout the planning period
                                     Funding source:                      General fund
                                     Program objective:                   Encourage and promote accessible housing for the
                                                                          disabled and the enforcement of the State accessi-
                                                                          bility standards for new residential construction.
B.      Quantified Objectives
The Citys quantified objectives for new construction, rehabilitation and conservation are presented in
Table V-1. Since the City has no redevelopment agency or other significant source of housing funds,
no rehabilitation or conservation objectives are established.
                                                                  Table V-1
                                              Quantified Objectives (2013-2021)
                                                                          Income Category
                                              Ex. Low           V. Low           Low           Mod  Upper     Totals
            New construction*                    1**                0              1            1     2          5
            Rehabilitation
            Conservation
            *Quantified objective for new construction is for the period 2014 - 2021 per the RHNA
            **EL units are expected to be provided as new second units
                                                                        V-9                                         January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element V. Housing Plan
This page intentionally left blank.
                                                V-10        January 2014
City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix A  Evaluation
                                             Appendix A
                          Evaluation of the Prior Housing Element
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the effectiveness of the
existing Housing Element, the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies, and the progress in
implementing programs for the previous planning period. This appendix contains a review of the
housing goals, policies, and programs of the previous Housing Element, and evaluates the degree to
which these programs have been implemented during the previous planning period, 2008 through
2013. This analysis also includes an assessment of the appropriateness of goals, objectives and
policies. The findings from this evaluation have been instrumental in determining the Citys 2013-
2021 Housing Implementation Program.
Table A-1 summarizes the programs contained in the previous Housing Element along with the source
of funding, program objectives, accomplishments, and implications for future policies and actions.
Table A-2 summarizes the goals and policies contained in the previous Housing Element along with an
assessment of their appropriateness for the new planning period.
Table A-3 summarizes residential development in the city during the previous RHNA period 2006-
2013.
Table A-4 presents the Citys progress in meeting the quantified objectives from the previous Housing
Element.
                                                  A-1                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                               Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                                                  Table A-1
                                                                 Housing Element Program Evaluation (2008-2013)
                                                                                            Responsible       Funding                                                       Accomplishments &
                                        Program                                                Agency          Source              Program Objectives                          Future Actions
Goal 1:            Preserving the Citys Housing Stock, Quality of Life and Rural Character
Policy 1.1            Ensure that new housing is compatible in character and style with existing development, and consistent with established architectural, landscape and
                      development conformity standards established by the City.
1.1.1        Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance                                       Planning Department General fund Ensure that new housing is compatible      Completed and ongoing.
Continue to implement the Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance in the review of                                          with established development and
proposed residential development and assure that all development is consistent                                           conformity standards established by the
with the development standards included in the Land Use Element while providing                                          City.
a broad range of housing types to meet the present and future needs of the
community.
Policy 1.2            Restrict the development of gated private developments in the City.
1.2.1        Discourage Gated Neighborhoods                                             Planning Department General fund Discourage the development of gated        No gated communities proposed or
Gates or other structures which restrict access on public or private streets, alleys                                     private developments in the City.          permitted during the planning period.
or easements will generally not be permitted. Gates will be considered in
neighborhood conformity review of future development in order to discourage
gated communities.
Policy 1.3            Encourage the conservation and rehabilitation of existing units in compliance with existing zoning and environmental standards.
1.3.1        Continue Code Enforcement Activities                                       Planning Department General fund Encourage the conservation and             Completed and ongoing.
Staff will continue code enforcement and nuisance abatement efforts to identify                                          maintenance of existing units in
properties that are out of compliance with zoning and building code standards. To                                        compliance with zoning and
increase awareness of property maintenance requirements, information on                                                  environmental standards.
common code violations will be provided at the public counter, over the telephone,
and periodically in the City newsletter.
Policy 1.4            Explore public and private financing which could contribute to the rehabilitation and improvement of existing housing.
1.4.1        Identify Housing Assistance Program Resources                              Planning Department General fund Explore public and private financing       Review of housing assistance
City staff will continue to review current housing assistance programs (both            & Finance                        which could contribute to the              programs was conducted and no
Federal and State) to determine availability and relevance for use in providing         Department                       rehabilitation and improvement of          programs were found to be relevant.
assistance for rehabilitation of existing housing in the City. The focus of this effort                                  existing housing. If funding is available,
will be directed towards identifying assistance programs which owner-builders can                                        assist the rehabilitation of 2 to 4 units
utilize in order to receive technical assistance to maintain their current housing                                       per year.
status while upgrading the unit to current standards. The City will apply for these
programs once it is determined the financing is available.
                                                                                                      A-2                                                                                  January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                                            Responsible        Funding                                                      Accomplishments &
                                         Program                                               Agency           Source             Program Objectives                          Future Actions
Policy 1.5            Promote water and energy conservation.
1.5.1        Promote Water and Energy Conservation                                      City Manager         General fund Encourage property maintenance to         Completed and ongoing. Website
The City will coordinate with the Metropolitan Water Department and the Southern                                          prevent deterioration, improve            information and counter brochures
California Water Service to assure that water conservation efforts are adhered to                                         residential aesthetics and public safety, provided in conjunction with the
by the City's residents. The City will make available at the public counter a                                             and to promote water conservation and     South Bay Environmental Services
brochure to inform the City's residents of energy- and water-conserving fixtures                                          energy conservation. Make brochures       Center.
and measures which can be adapted into existing housing to conserve non-                                                  available by January 1, 2009
renewable fuels and save money. The City will continue to encourage residents to
utilize the Build it Green New Home Construction Green Building Guidelines, and
will ensure new multi-family developments utilize greenhouse gas emission
reduction strategies. The City will continue to provide energy and water
conservation information on the Citys website.
Goal 2:            Promote New Housing Opportunities to Meet the Needs of Existing and Future Residents While Preserving the Citys Rural Character
Policy 2.1            Encourage sound and logical residential growth while providing for the Citys fair share of the regions need for affordable housing.
2.1.1        Provide for a Range of Residential Development Opportunities               Planning Department/ General fund Encourage sound and logical residential   Given lack of interest in the current
             Consistent with the Citys RHNA Allocation                                 City Manager                      development for all economic segments     economic climate by the development
The City will continue to provide additional opportunities for a variety of residential                                   of the community consistent with the      community, planning activity in the
development types through the designation of adequate sites to accommodate the                                            RHNA allocation; amend the Mixed Use      Mixed Use Overlay Zone has been
Citys RHNA allocation. The Mixed Use Overlay Zone has been amended (Ord.                                                 Overlay Zone to promote lower-income      minimal. Staff will continue
646) to include a required finding that a proposed project assists the City in                                            and senior housing, including extremely-  implementation of this program as the
meeting its RHNA allocation, specifically its lower-income housing requirements. If                                       low-income units where feasible; submit   housing market recovers.
feasible, units for extremely-low-income households will be encouraged. However,                                          annual progress reports. Consult with
it is recognized that affordable housing at the lowest income levels requires deep                                        non-profit developers and amend the
subsidies and the City has limited financial resources. The City will solicit interest                                    Mixed-Use Overlay by December 2009;
and recommendations from non-profit housing developers regarding the potential                                            bi-annual reviews; annual progress
for lower-income and senior housing in the Mixed Use Overlay and incorporate                                              reports.
findings into the regulations as appropriate. The City will assist interested non-
profit developers by facilitating site identification, modifying development
standards for qualifying affordable projects, and expediting permit processing.
The City will monitor the conditional use permit (CUP) process to ensure it does
not constrain residential development including multifamily and housing affordable
to low and moderate income households, particularly in the Mixed Overlay. The
planning department will complete a bi-annual review to evaluate application
processing and analyze processing times and the impact of conditions of approval
to determine whether the CUP process acts as a constraint on residential
development. If the CUP is found to constrain development, the City will take
action to amend the CUP or establish guidelines and other mechanisms to
                                                                                                      A-3                                                                                   January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                                           Responsible       Funding                                                          Accomplishments &
                                       Program                                                Agency          Source              Program Objectives                             Future Actions
promote application certainty. The review will be conducted as part of the Citys
Housing Element Annual Report submitted to the state.
Progress toward implementing adopted Housing Element programs and meeting
the Citys quantified objectives will be reported to the City Council and state
Department of Housing and Community Development annually. As noted in
Chapter II, seniors are expected to be the fastest growing segment of the
population. Smaller apartments and condos located near medical offices and
commercial facilities in the Peninsula Center are well-suited to this market
segment.
2.1.2         Amend the Density Bonus Ordinance Consistent with State Law              Planning Department General fund Amend the Municipal Code to facilitate      An updated Density Bonus Ordinance
Due to ongoing discussions in the state legislature, the Zoning Code has not yet                                        lower-income and senior housing,            has been adopted consistent with
been amended to incorporate the latest revisions to state density bonus law (SB                                         including extremely-low-income units        state law.
1818 of 2004). The City will amend the Municipal Code by June 2009 in                                                   where feasible, through provision of a
compliance with the density bonus provisions of Government Code 65915, et                                              density bonus for qualifying projects.
seq.). Under state law, a density increase of up to 35% over the otherwise                                              Amend the Municipal Code by June
maximum allowable residential density under the Municipal Code is available to                                          2009.
developers who agree to construct housing developments with units affordable to
low- or moderate-income households. A senior housing development is eligible for
a 20% density bonus if it includes at least 35 dwelling units, and the applicant
seeks a density bonus.
Policy 2.2             Ensure that new development is sensitive to the natural terrain, and that the environmental impacts of new growth are mitigated to the greatest extent feasible.
2.2.1         Protect Environmental Quality                                            Planning Department General fund Ensure that new development occurs in Completed and ongoing.
Require that the environmental review process for new development contains a                                            an environmentally sensitive manner
thorough analysis of landform alteration and potential traffic impacts, pollution, and                                  and that potential adverse impacts are
water use, and require all feasible mitigation measures to minimize impacts.                                            mitigated to the greatest extent feasible.
Policy 2.3             Remove governmental constraints to the development of housing for lower-income households and persons with special needs.
2.3.1         Manufactured Housing                                                     Planning Department General fund Amend the Code in conformance with          The Municipal Code was amended in
The Zoning Code currently restricts manufactured housing and mobile homes to                                            state law regarding mobile homes and        2012 to include standards and
the RA-10 district. State law requires that mobile or manufactured homes be                                             manufactured housing. Code                  procedures for mobile homes and
allowed on permanent foundations on single-family lots, therefore the City will                                         amendment by July 1, 2009.                  manufactured housing consistent with
amend the Code in conformance with state law to allow manufactured housing in                                                                                       state law.
all residential districts under the same standards that apply to traditional housing.
2.3.2         Residential Care Facilities for 7+ Persons                               Planning Department General fund Amend the Code to allow residential         The Zoning Code was amended to
Although residential care facilities serving 6 or fewer persons are allowed by-right                                    care facilities for 7+ persons subject to a conditionally permit residential care
in all residential zones, the Zoning Code currently prohibits residential care                                          conditional use permit. Code                facilities for 7+ persons in the C-G
facilities for 7 or more persons. The City will amend the Code to allow residential                                     amendment by July 1, 2009.                  zone.
care facilities for 7 or more persons with a conditional use permit.
                                                                                                     A-4                                                                                    January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                           Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                                          Responsible       Funding                                                   Accomplishments &
                                      Program                                                Agency          Source              Program Objectives                       Future Actions
2.3.3        Emergency Shelters                                                       Planning Department General fund Identify and adopt appropriate         Zoning Code amendment was
Although there are few homeless persons in the city, SB 2 of 2007 requires all                                         regulations to comply with the         adopted to allow small emergency
jurisdictions with any unmet need to identify at least one zone where emergency                                        emergency shelter provisions of SB 2   shelters in the C-G zone.
shelters may be established by-right, subject to specific development standards.                                       within one year of Housing Element
The City has conducted a preliminary review of the Institutional zone for its                                          adoption.
suitability to accommodate emergency shelters. This zone contains approximately
342 acres and could accommodate shelter facilities to meet the Citys needs. The
City Council will make the final determination regarding which zone(s) is most
appropriate for this purpose and will amend the Code within one year of Housing
Element adoption in compliance with SB 2. As part of the Code amendment,
appropriate findings and development standards will be adopted in conformance
with SB 2 to encourage and facilitate emergency shelters while ensuring
community compatibility.
2.3.4        Transitional and Supportive Housing                                      Planning Department General fund Clarify Code requirements regarding    A Zoning Code amendment was
SB 2 of 2007 requires that transitional and supportive housing be considered a                                         transitional and supportive housing in adopted consistent with state law.
residential use subject to the same requirements and procedures that apply to                                          compliance with the provisions of SB 2
other residential uses in the same district. The City will amend the Code within one                                   within one year of Housing Element
year of Housing Element adoption to clarify the Codes conformance with this                                           adoption.
requirement.
2.3.5        Single Room Occupancy                                                    Planning Department General fund Amend the Municipal Code to provide    A Zoning Code amendment was
Single room occupancy facilities are small studio-type units, typically reserved for                                   clear standards for SRO units by July  adopted to conditionally permit SROs
lower-income persons or senior citizens. These types of units are not currently                                        2009.                                  in the C-G zone.
listed as permitted uses within any of the Citys zoning districts, although they may
be considered under Mixed-Use Overlay subject to a Conditional Use Permit. The
City will amend the Municipal Code to add an explicit definition and regulations to
facilitate development of SRO units.
                                                                                                    A-5                                                                              January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                               Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                                         Responsible        Funding                                                        Accomplishments &
                                        Program                                             Agency           Source              Program Objectives                           Future Actions
Goal 3:             Housing Assistance and Fair Housing for those with Limited Incomes or Special Needs
Policy 3.1             Pursue all appropriate public and private sources of financial support to provide housing assistance for lower-income households, the elderly, and others with
                       special needs.
3.1.1        Housing Assistance Programs                                             Planning Department  General fund Minimize difference between affordable     Assistance programs were reviewed
City staff will continue to review available housing assistance programs (both                                         and market rate units; submit 2-3          but none were pursued due to lack of
Federal and State) to determine their appropriateness for use in providing low-cost                                    applications during the planning period;   interest from developers. City staff is
senior housing in the City. The focus of this effort will be directed towards                                          annual progress reports.                   currently in discussions with a
identifying public and private financial support which individual elderly property                                                                                developer regarding a senior assisted
owners can utilize. Potential opportunities for new senior housing development are                                                                                living project in the Mixed Use Overlay
found in those areas designated for mixed use development. Staff will provide                                                                                     zone.
administrative support to non-profit agencies in preparing and submitting grant
applications whenever possible, with an objective of submitting at least 2 to 3
applications during the planning period, depending on the availability of resources.
Policy 3.2             Inform the Citys residents of housing resources and opportunities available to lower-income households and senior citizens.
3.2.1        Increase Public Awareness of Reverse Mortgages                          City Manager         General fund Inform the senior citizen population       Completed and ongoing.
The City will continue to inform the senior population at the public counter, over                                     about the availability of reverse
the telephone and in the City newsletter about the availability of reverse                                             mortgages through the City's newsletter.
mortgages.
3.2.2        Promote Second Units                                                    Planning Department/ General fund Amend the Second Unit Ordinance and        The Municipal Code was amended in
The second unit ordinance will be amended in conformance with State law,             City Manager                      prepare a Second Unit Brochure by July     2010 to include standards and
including appropriate development standards and requirements to encourage the                                          1, 2009. Publicize the provisions of the   procedures for second units and a
creation of second units. Staff will continue to promote opportunities for second                                      Second Unit housing ordinance in order     brochure has been made available.
units by making a brochure available at the public counter, on the City website,                                       to increase the availability of lower-cost
and in the City newsletter. Second units can be particularly helpful in addressing                                     housing. Approve 3 second units per
the needs of extremely-low-income households.                                                                          year.
Policy 3.3             Enforce fair housing laws and provide fair housing counseling services to residents.
3.3.1        Support the Fair Housing Foundation                                     Planning Department  General fund Enforce fair housing laws and provide      Completed and ongoing.
The City will continue to make referrals to the Fair Housing Foundation. The City                                      fair housing counseling services to
will distribute fair housing information to the community through brochures at City                                    residents; distribute information
Hall, the library, community center, City newsletter, and on the Citys website.                                       regarding fair housing services.
                                                                                                   A-6                                                                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                      Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                                       Responsible       Funding                                                   Accomplishments &
                                      Program                                             Agency          Source             Program Objectives                       Future Actions
Policy 3.4           Encourage accessible housing and reduce barriers for persons with disabilities, and enforce state accessibility standards for new residential construction.
3.4.1        Encourage and Promote Accessible Housing                              Planning Department General fund Encourage and promote accessible       The Municipal Code was amended in
The City will continue to enforce the current Zoning Code and the State provisions                                  housing for the disabled and the       2010 to include Reasonable
(Title 24) for handicapped access. In addition, the City will adopt a reasonable                                    enforcement of the State accessibility Accommodation procedures
accommodation ordinance to reduce barriers for persons with disabilities.                                           standards for new residential          consistent with state law.
                                                                                                                    construction. Adopt a reasonable
                                                                                                                    accommodation ordinance by June
                                                                                                                    2009.
                                                                                                 A-7                                                                               January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                        Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                                   Table A-2
                                        Appropriateness of Housing Element Goals and Policies (2008-2013)
    Goal                                                       Policy                                                                 Appropriateness
 1.   Preserve the Citys Housing Stock, Quality of Life and Rural Character.                                     Appropriate, no change required.
              1.1 Ensure that new housing is compatible in character and style with existing development, and     Appropriate, no change required.
                   consistent with established architectural, landscape and development conformity standards
                   established by the City.
              1.2 Restrict the development of gated private developments in the City.                             Appropriate, no change required.
              1.3 Encourage the conservation and rehabilitation of existing units in compliance with existing     Appropriate, no change required.
                   zoning and environmental standards.
              1.4 Explore public and private financing which could contribute to the rehabilitation and           Appropriate, no change required.
                   improvement of existing housing.
              1.5 Promote water and energy conservation.                                                          Appropriate, no change required.
 2. Promote New Housing Opportunities to Meet the Needs of Existing and Future Residents While                    Appropriate, no change required.
     Preserving the Citys Rural Character.
              2.1 Encourage sound and logical residential growth while providing for the Citys fair share of the Appropriate, no change required.
                   regions need for affordable housing.
              2.2 Ensure that new development is sensitive to the natural terrain, and that the environmental     Appropriate, no change required.
                   impacts of new growth are mitigated to the greatest extent feasible.
              2.3 Remove governmental constraints to the development of housing for lower-income                  Appropriate, no change required.
                   households and persons with special needs.
 3. Promote Housing Assistance and Fair Housing for those with Limited Incomes or Special Needs.                  Appropriate, no change required.
              3.1 Pursue all appropriate public and private sources of financial support to provide housing       Appropriate, no change required.
                   assistance for lower-income households, the elderly, and others with special needs.
              3.2 Inform the Citys residents of housing resources and opportunities available to lower-income    Appropriate, no change required.
                   households and senior citizens.
              3.3 Enforce fair housing laws and provide fair housing counseling services to residents.            Appropriate, no change required.
              3.4 Encourage accessible housing and reduce barriers for persons with disabilities, and enforce     Appropriate, no change required.
                   state accessibility standards for new residential construction.
                                                                                     A-8                                                                   January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                               Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                                  Table A-3
                                         Residential Development by Income Category 2006-2013
                                   Project              Unit Type       Density  VL Low   Mod Upper Total
                      Misc. SFD & custom homes              SF                                  2     2
                      901 Deep Valley Drive            Senior Condo     20 du/ac               41    41
                      981 Silver Spur Road                Condo         22 du/ac               18    18
                      26405 Crenshaw Blvd.              Mfg. home                          1          1
                      Second Units                                                         5          5
                      Totals                                                               6   61    67
                                                                    A-9                                           January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                  Appendix A  Evaluation
                                                            Table A-4
                 Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives (2008-2013)
                                                                        Quantified
                              Program Category                         Objectives                 Progress
                    New Construction*
                      Extremely Low                                           4                        -
                      Very Low                                                3                        -
                      Low                                                     4                        -
                      Moderate                                                5                        6
                      Above Moderate                                         10                       61
                      Total                                                  26                       67
                    Rehabilitation
                      Very Low                                                -
                      Low                                                     -
                      Moderate                                                -
                      Above Moderate                                          -
                      Total                                                   -                        0
                    Conservation
                      Very Low                                                -
                      Low                                                     -
                      Moderate                                                -
                      Above Moderate                                          -
                      Total                                                   -                        0
                    *Quantified objective and progress for new construction covers the period 2006-2013 consistent
                    with the RHNA.
                                                                A-10                                                 January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                   Appendix B  Greenhouse Gas Reduction
                                                     Appendix B
                                         Greenhouse Gas Reduction
The Rolling Hills Estates City Council has authorized the following conditions of approval for multi-family mixed-use
projects in the City as appropriate.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
         Construction Equipment Idling. Limit unnecessary idling of construction equipment. A reduction in
          equipment idling would reduce fuel consumption and, therefore, GHG emissions.
          Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of any grading or building permit, the project plans and specifications
          shall include a statement that construction equipment shall be shut off when not in use and shall not idle for
          more than fifteen minutes. The statement in the plans and specifications shall be reviewed and approved by
          the Planning Director and subject to enforcement by the Code Administrator.
         Truck Idling. Reduce construction truck idling to a minimum. A reduction in truck idling would reduce fuel
          consumption and, therefore, GHG emissions.
          Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of any grading or building permit, the project plans and specifications
          shall include a statement that queuing of trucks on and off-site shall be limited to periods when absolutely
          necessitated by grading or construction activities. The statement in the plans and specifications shall be
          reviewed and approved by the Planning Director and subject to enforcement by the Code Administrator.
          Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of any grading or building permit, the project plans and specifications
          shall include a statement that on-road construction trucks and other vehicles greater than 10,000 pounds shall
          be shut off when not in use and shall not idle for more than five minutes. The statement in the plans and
          specifications shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director and subject to enforcement by the
          Code Administrator.
         Electrical Construction Equipment. Maximize the use of electricity from the power grid by replacing
          diesel or gasoline powered equipment. This would reduce GHG emissions because electricity can be
          produced more efficiently at centralized power plants.
          Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of any grading or building permit, the project plans and specifications
          shall include a statement that, to the extent feasible, all diesel and gasoline powered construction equipment
          shall be replaced with equivalent electric equipment. The statement in the plans and specifications shall be
          reviewed and approved by the Planning Director.
BUILDING DESIGN
         Green Building Design for Residential and Commercial Buildings. Incorporate measures that reduce
          heating/cooling requirements and, thus, greenhouse gas emissions through either development density/design
          and/or energy conservation.
          Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the design of
          the proposed buildings or structures exceeds Title 24 requirements subject to review by the City Building
          Official. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided to the Planning Director and
          Building Official for review and approval prior to issuance of the permit. Installation of the identified design
          features or equipment will be confirmed by the City Building Official prior to certificate of occupancy.
          Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the design of
          the proposed buildings or structures incorporates basic or enhanced insulation such that heat transfer and
          thermal bridging is minimized. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided to the
          Planning Director and Building Official for review and approval. Installation of the identified design features
          or equipment will be confirmed by the City Building Official prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
                                                            B-1                                             January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                 Appendix B  Greenhouse Gas Reduction
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that air leakage
        through the structure or within the heating and cooling distribution system is limited to minimize energy
        consumption. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided to the Planning Director and
        Building Official for review and approval. Installation of the identified design features or equipment will be
        confirmed by the City Building Official prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the design of
        the proposed buildings or structures meets or exceeds the performance of an ENERGY STAR labeled home
        or equivalent green building program, subject to review. Documentation of compliance with this measure
        shall be provided to the Planning Director for review and approval. Installation of the identified design
        features or equipment will be confirmed by the City Building Official prior to issuance of certificate of
        occupancy.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the design of
        the proposed buildings or structures incorporates ENERGY STAR rated or equally energy efficient windows
        or better. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided to the Planning Director for
        review and approval. Installation of the identified design features or equipment will be confirmed by the City
        Building Official prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the design of
        the proposed buildings or structures incorporates ENERGY STAR rated or equally energy efficient space
        heating and cooling equipment or better. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided
        to the Planning Director. Installation of the identified design features or equipment will be confirmed by the
        City Building Official prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the design of
        the proposed buildings or structures incorporates ENERGY STAR rated or equally energy efficient light
        fixtures or better. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided to the Planning Director
        for review and approval. Installation of the identified design features or equipment will be confirmed by the
        City Building Official prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the design of
        the proposed buildings or structures incorporates ENERGY STAR rated or equally energy efficient
        appliances or better. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided to the Planning
        Director for review and approval. Installation of the identified design features or equipment will be
        confirmed by the City Building Official prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
        buildings or structures design incorporates energy efficient domestic hot water systems. Documentation of
        compliance with this measure shall be provided to the Planning Director for review and approval. Installation
        of the identified design features or equipment will be confirmed by the City Building Official prior to
        issuance of certificate of occupancy.
       Solar Panels. Install solar panels on main buildings. Solar panels would provide the buildings with a clean
        source of electricity to replace some of its fossil fuel-generated electricity use.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that solar panels
        have been installed and shall be operated on all main buildings. Documentation of compliance with this
        measure shall be provided to the City Building Official for review and approval.
       Shade Trees. Plant shade trees around main buildings, particularly along southern elevations, to reduce
        direct sunlight into the structure thus reducing solar heating.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate that the landscape
        plans for the proposed buildings or structures are designed to plant shade trees around main buildings,
        particularly along southern elevations. Documentation of compliance with this measure shall be provided in
        conjunction with review of the landscape plans by the Park and Activities Commission.
                                                            B-2                                          January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element                 Appendix B  Greenhouse Gas Reduction
BUILDING OPERATION/MAINTENANCE
       Compact Fluorescent Light Bulbs. Fluorescent light bulbs produce less waste heat and use substantially
        less electricity than incandescent light bulbs.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall demonstrate that all
        interior building lighting uses compact fluorescent light bulbs to the satisfaction of the Building Official.
        Compliance with this measure on an on-going basis shall be monitored by the City Building Official.
       Energy Audits. Conduct a third party energy audit every five years and install innovative power saving
        technology where feasible, such as power factor correction systems and lighting power regulators. Such
        systems help to maximize usable electric current and eliminate wasted electricity, thereby lowering overall
        electricity use.
        Mitigation Measure: Every five years after issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall
        provide a third party energy audit, and innovative power saving technology identified as part of the audit
        shall be installed where feasible. The audit and any structural, mechanical or maintenance alterations
        implemented shall be provided to the City for review and approval by the Planning Director. This mitigation
        measure shall not apply to entirely for-sale projects or to the for-sale portion of mixed-use projects.
       Truck Idling. Reduce truck idling at commercial/office uses to a minimum. A reduction in truck idling
        would reduce fuel consumption and, therefore, GHG emissions.
        Mitigation Measure: Prior to issuance of any Conditional Use Permit or business license, property/business
        owners shall demonstrate their understanding of the Citys desire for on-road delivery trucks or other
        vehicles greater than 10,000 pounds to be shut off when not in use or not idle for more than five minutes. A
        related condition of approval shall be included on any resolution approving a Conditional Use Permit, and a
        property/business owner shall demonstrate understanding of this condition through his or her signature on the
        Affidavit of Acceptance. Business owners shall indicate understanding of this issue through a signed
        statement by the business owner at the time of business license issuance. Property/business owners shall
        inform operators of delivery trucks and other vehicles greater than 10,000 pounds of this issue whenever
        possible.
                                                          B-3                                              January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing Element Appendix B  Greenhouse Gas Reduction
This page intentionally left blank.
                                                B-4                               January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing ElementAppendix C  Public Participation Summary
                                           Appendix C
                                 Public Participation Summary
Section 65583(c)(5) of the Government Code states that The local government shall make diligent
effort to achieve public participation of all the economic segments of the community in the
development of the housing element, and the program shall describe this effort. Public participation
played an important role in the formulation and refinement of the Citys housing goals and policies
and in the development of a Land Use Plan which determines the extent and density of future
residential development in the community.
City residents had several opportunities to recommend strategies, review, and comment on the draft
Housing Element during its preparation and adoption. An initial public study session was held jointly
by the Planning Commission and City Council on October 8, 2013. After receiving comments from
HCD, a revised draft element was prepared and made available for public review. A direct mail notice
of availability of the revised draft was sent to all of the organizations list in Table C-1. Prior to
adoption, additional public hearings were held by the Planning Commission on January 21, 2014 and
City Council on January 28, 2014.
All meeting notices were posted on the Citys website, and notification was published in the local
newspaper in advance of the meetings. Copies of the draft Element were made available for review at
City Hall and were posted on the City website. These service providers included organizations that
represent the housing interest groups.
                                                 C-1                                     January 2014

City of Rolling Hills Estates 2013-2021 Housing ElementAppendix C  Public Participation Summary
                                                Table C-1
                                  Public Notice Distribution List
                      City of Rolling Hills Estates Housing Element Update
 Shelter Partnership                Westside Center for Independent  Harbor Regional Center
 523 W. 6th Street, Suite 616            Living                      21231 Hawthorne Boulevard
 Los Angeles CA 90014               12901 Venice Boulevard           Torrance CA 90503
                                    Los Angeles CA 90066
 The Arc-South Bay                  Emma Hoff-Regional Community     Social Vocational Services (SVS)
 1735 Rosecrans Avenue                   Service Coordinator         South Bay Independent Visions
 Gardena CA 90249                   Catholic Charities               2461 W. 208th Street, Suite 102
                                    123 E. 14th Street               Torrance CA 90501
                                    Long Beach, CA 90813
 L.A. County Department of          Kenny Nickelson Memorial         Tom Baumann
     Children and Family Services        Foundation for Homeless     Rebuilding Together South Bay Los
 2325 Crenshaw Boulevard                 Veterans and Children, Inc.      Angeles
 Torrance CA 90501                  P.O. Box 3098                    P.O. Box 6367
                                    Manhattan Beach CA 90266         Torrance CA 90504
 Salvation Army His House Family   Salvation Army                   First Baptist Church of Palos
     Services                      30840 Hawthorne Blvd                  Verdes
 20830 S. Vermont Avenue            Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90275    28 Moccasin Lane
 Torrance CA 90502                                                   Rolling Hills Estates, CA 90274
 Rolling Hills Covenant Church      Rolling Hills Seventh-Day        Rolling Hills Methodist Church
 2222 Palos Verdes Drive North           Adventist Church            26438 Crenshaw Boulevard
 Rolling Hills Estates, CA 90274    28340 Highridge Road             Rolling Hills Estates, CA 90274
                                    Rolling Hills Estates, CA 90274
 Saint Lukes Presbyterian Church   Jamboree Housing Corporation     Peninsula Seniors
 26825 Rolling Hills Road           17701 Cowan Avenue, Suite 200    30928 Hawthorne Boulevard
 Rolling Hills Estates, CA 90274    Irvine, CA 92614                 Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90275
                                                     C-2                                     January 2014

                                              SECTION 5.1
                                            INTRODUCTION
The Conservation Element of the Rolling Hills Estates General Plan is concerned with the
management of natural and cultural resources in the planning area. The Element identifies significant
resources within the City and establishes a plan for their conservation, management, or preservation.
The Conservation Element is a state-mandated element as required by regulations in Section 65302(d)
of the California Government Code and the State Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA). The
Element is intended to increase public awareness concerning the presence and condition of natural and
cultural resources and to promote their conservation and management.
The earth's resources are limited and often non-renewable. Ignorance, indifference and misuse could easily
lead to their exploitation, destruction or neglect. As such, it is the City's responsibility to inform residents
of the importance of local resources in relation to regional concerns. The City is empowered to regulate
the use of certain local resources to prevent their destruction and exploitation and to ensure that
conservation efforts are constant and equitable. Conservation includes the regulation of the extent of
resource utilization, of the appropriate preservation techniques and of the conduct of activities which affect
or preclude the use of resources.
Natural resources in the planning area include water, air, and biotic resources. Cultural resources include
historical , archeological and paleontological sites and structures. The City's conservation plan will consist
of independent programs for the managed use of mineral resources, the maintenance of good air quality,
the protection of native plant and animal life and the preservation of cultural resources. The plan will help
maintain ecological balance and improve the quality of life in Rolling Hills Estates.
                                                      5-1
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK.
            5-2
                                                SECTION 5.2
                                        GOALS AND POLICIES
The Conservation Element deals with the management of natural and cultural resources in the planning area.
The Element is intended to increase awareness of the presence of natural and cultural resources in the
community and to promote the conservation and management of these resources. The goals and policies
of the Conservation Element address the managed use of water and land resources, the maintenance of
good air quality, the protection of native plant and animallife, and the preservation of cultural resources and
aesthetic amenities of the area.
Issue: Natural Environment
Local efforts to preserve the natural environment will promote harmony between nature and man. The City
will support the preservation of those significant resources in the Palos Verdes Peninsula which make it
unique from the rest of Los Angeles County.
Goal 1           Preserve the natural environment of the Palos Verdes Peninsula through
                 the conservation of natural resources, the maintenance of a balanced
                 ecology and the prevention of environmental degradation.
Policy 1.1       Maintain the natural canyons and hillside areas for passive open space and/or for
                 incorporation into the Citywide trails system.
        1.1.1 Implementation Measure: Implement the General Plan Land Use policy which
        indicates the location and extent of future land uses in the area.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 1.2 Encourage planting of native drought tolerant plant species to minimize erosion and to
provide habitats for wildlife while being sensitive to the wildfire hazard.
        1.2.1 Implementation Measure: Publish and distribute a pamphlet outlining how drought
        tolerant landscaping and drip irrigation can save water and be aesthetically pleasing. The City will
        consider establishing a demonstration garden at City Hall if needed to supplement the South Coast
        Botanical Gardens which illustrates how drought tolerant vegetation can be used for landscaping.
                                                      5-3
               Timing: 1993-1995
               Agency: Planning Department and Community Service Department
               Funding: General fund and Capital Improvement Budget
Policy 1.3     Discourage the excessive grading of slopes in those areas of the City that are undeveloped
               such as canyons, archaeological sites, and areas with established vegetation.
      1.3.1 Implementation Measure: Future development must conform to all grading guidelines
      and requirements in the General Plan and Municipal Code. The Cultural Resource Overlay Zone
      requirements (Section 5.3) must be adhered to.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.4     Require that all future developments connect to public sewers to prevent contamination and
               pollution of the local groundwater.
      1.4.1 Implementation Measure: During site plan review, plans will be examined to ensure
      sewer connections are made. All new subdivisions will be required to connect to sewers.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.5     Develop and implement a comprehensive program for the recycling of waste such as
               paper, aluminum, bottles, organic waste, and motor oil pursuant with the requirements of
               AB939, AB1820, and AB2707.
      1.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement its Comprehensive Source
      Reduction and Recycling Element and Household Hazardous Waste Elements. The implementation
      of this program will be monitored by the designated environmental coordinator.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Information Officer
               Funding: General fund
                                                  5-4
Policy 1.6    Participate in management programs established by Los Angeles County for water
              conservation, liquid and solid waste management, and flood control.
      1.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to participate in programs designed
      to promote water conservation, recycling, and flood control. City staff (including the environmental
      coordinator) will review new development in the environmental review process to ensure that
      appropriate mitigation measures are identified.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department and City Manager
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.7    Provide guidelines for the protection of hillside slopes and canyons, the reduction of soil
              erosion and the control of the velocity of water run-off.
      1.7.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review its grading ordinance and publish an
      informational brochure that outlines the grading ordinance requirements.
              Timing: 1993
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.8    Inform residents of the environmental concerns regarding air quality, water resources, land
              and other ecological resources to solicit cooperation and support in the City's conservation
              plans.
      1.8.1 Implementation Measure: The City will work with local organizations and other
      agencies in sponsoring a booth at the City Celebration and other events such as the Peninsula
      Street Fair, Las Amigas, and California Carriage Classic, in addition to newsletters, fliers, and
      brochures as needed.
              Timing. Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Community Services Department and City Manager
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.9    Ensure that the long-term protection of the environment shall be a primary consideration
              in approving development projects. Require all future construction projects, both public
              and private, to mitigate their potential environmental impacts through the environmental
              review process.
                                                  5-5
      1.9.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will prepare environmental guidelines concerning
      mitigation monitoring. The City will designate a staff person to serve as environmental coordinator.
      This person will be responsible in overseeing mitigation monitoring programs.
               Timing: 1994
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.10 Environmental impact reports for future projects must address cumulative impacts which
               will include other projects on the peninsula, downstream traffic, regional air quality, sewage
               generation and other environmental constraints of the area.
      1.10.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will compile and maintain a data base of "related
      projects" in the Peninsula which may result in cumulative impacts. This data base will begin with the
      Master Environmental Assessment that will be completed as part of the General Plan Update.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.11 The City planning staff will strengthen enforcement of planning ordinances and standards,
               including those regulations concerning the maintenance of private property.
      1.11.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department will review past and present
      code enforcement policies to ensure they are adequate. A report will be made to the City Council
      and Planning Commission on an annual basis.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.12 The City will continue to assist the Lead Agency Authority for Chandler Quarry pursuant
               to the State Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA) requirements related to A.B. 3551
               and A.B. 3903 amendments.
                                                    5-6
        1.12.1 Implementation Measure: Assist the Lead Agency by enforcing SMARA policies
        and Chandlers Condition Use Permit for landfill operations.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Issue: Biological Resources
The biological resources of the Peninsula are diverse and some are unique to the Peninsula. Due to existing
development, the City should strive to maintain ecological balance through the protection of its remaining
biological resources.
Goal 2:          Preserve local plant and animal life and their habitats in the Peninsula.
Policy 2.1       Strive to protect the remaining wildlife population of the area and prevent the destruction
                 of the remaining natural habitats.
        2.1.1 Implementation Measure: All new development within areas determined to have a high
        ecological sensitivity will be required to submit biological field studies to identify potential impacts.
        All subdivision located within the Ecological Resources Overlay Zone will be required to comply
        with the General Plans special guidelines (refer to Section 53).
                 Timing: Ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 2.2       Preserve the existing vegetation in the open space corridors in its natural state while being
                 sensitive to fire protection policies.
        2.2.1 Implementation Measure: Implement the General Plan Land Use Policy, which calls
        for the maintenance and preservation of these areas through the Science Resources Overlay Zone.
        The City will consider establishing a demonstration garden if needed to supplement the South Coast
        Botanical Garden displays in order to illustrate how new development can utilize native vegetation
        in landscaping.
                 Timing: 1993 - 1995
                 Agency: Planning Department and Community Services Department Funding:
                 General fund: Capitol Improvement Budget
                                                      5-7
Policy 2.3       Encourage the re-establishment of appropriate native plants by requiring developments to
                 prepare landscape plans that promote the preservation, protection, and enhancement of
                 vegetation, wildlife and natural habitats.
        23.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review and amend existing development
        standards if necessary so as to promote the use of native vegetation and maintenance of existing
        habitats.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 2.4       Implement the General Plan guidelines for the restoration of habitats for sensitive and/or
                 endangered species.
        2.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will consult with local environmental organizations
        to participate in the restoration or development of native wilderness areas in canyons or other
        public open space areas. The City will encourage private open space land to do likewise. Those
        areas under public control will be inventoried as candidate sites for restoration.
                 Timing: 1994-1996
                 Agency: Planning Department and Community Services Department
                 Funding: General fund
Issue: Cultural Resources
The rich and colorful history of the Peninsula provides the area with a sense of importance and historical
pride. The preservation of cultural resources will enrich the educational aid cultural aspirations of residents
and visitors alike.
Goal 3:          Promote the preservation of cultural, historical and natural resources
                 within the City.
Policy 3.1       Implement General Plan guidelines for the protection of sites of paleontological,
                 archaeological, historical or culturally valuable significance.
        3.1.1 Implementation Measur e : New development in areas designated as having a high
        cultural sensitivity will be required to have archaeological surveys and on-site
                                                      5-8
      monitoring when deemed necessary. All development shall be subject to the provisions of
      Appendix K in the CEQA Law and Guidelines.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 3.2     Encourage and support local high quality projects and programs devoted to the visual and
               performing arts, the sciences, the humanities, and educational programs related to these
               topics.
      3.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will cooperate with local organizations to promote
      and advertise special events and activities in the City's newsletter and public access cable.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General fund
Policy 3.3     Develop the George F. Canyon open space at Palos Verdes Drive North and Palos
               Verdes Drive East from the water district's pump and extending down the canyon, as a
               cultural and natural preserve. Encourage a cooperative effort to extend the formal
               preservation of George F. Canyon into Rolling Hills and Rancho Palos Verdes Canyon.
      3.3.1 Implementation Measure: Implement the General Plan which calls for the development
      of this area as a historic and natural preserve. The Community Services Department will establish
      a timetable for the planning and development of this site.
               Timing. 1992
               Agency: Community Services Department
               Funding: Pepper Tree Foundation
Policy 3.4     Explore funding for a nature/environmental center for the City, possibly to be connected
               with the George F. Canyon openspace/natural preserve. Work with the City of Rolling
               Hills to promote the preservation of the canyon areas within its corporate boundaries.
      3.4.1 Implementation Measure: Pepper Tree Foundation will explore potential funding
      sources for the development of the natural/environmental center. The
                                                   5-9
        project will be considered for the City's five year Capital Improvement Program or through the
        Pepper Tree Foundation.
                 Timing: 1993
                 Agency: Community Services Department
                 Funding: Pepper Tree Foundation
Policy 3.5       The City will continue to assist the Lead Agency Authority for Chandler Quarry pursuant
                 to the State Mining and Reclamation Act requirements related to AB 3551 and AB 3903
                 amendment.
        3.5.1 Implementation Measure: Assist Lead Agency by enforcing SMARA policies and
        Chandler's Conditional Use Permit for landfill operations.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Issue: Air Quality
The increasing awareness on air quality issues has prompted the adoption of state and regional legislation
governing mobile and stationary air pollutionsources. While the City has generally good air quality, the need
for standards to control pollution should not be discounted.
Goal 4:          Protect and maintain the air quality of the Peninsula.
Policy 4.1       Cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) and
                 surrounding cities to develop standards for the enforcement of regulations specific to
                 Rolling Hills Estates.
        4.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City Manager will designate an environmental
        coordinator to ensure the City's compliance with the SCAQMD's rules and regulations.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: City Manager
                 Funding: General fund
                                                    5-10
Policy 4.2      The City will work with the other agencies in the region to ensure that motor vehicles
                comply with all standards for air pollution control.
       4.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will advertise the SCQAMD's program that
       involves reporting polluting vehicles to that agency. The City will prepare a flyer describing the
       program and the City's support for its continued implementation.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department and City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Policy 4.3      Implement the clear air strategies outlined in the Conservation Element for the City to assist
                in the implementation of the Air Quality Management Plan.
       4.4.1 Implementation Measure: The environmental coordinator will monitor the City's
       effectiveness in the implementation of those AQMP measures (referred to in Section 5.3) that are
       the City's responsibility.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Issue: Aesthetics
The aesthetic qualities of the environment should be preserved along with its resources. Attractive vistas,
panoramas and views are plentiful along the City's roadways contributing to the City's desirable
environment.
Goal 5:         Preserve the aesthetic quality of the area through the regulation of
developments along view corridors and scenic roadways.
Policy 5.1      Encourage the preservation of view corridors and discourage developments and additions
                which obstruct view corridors.
       5.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will amend the neighborhood compatibility
       ordinance to consider preservation of significant view corridors. The criteria and guidelines listed
       in Section 5.3 will be implemented.
                                                    5-11
              Timing: 1994
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 5.2    Implement the General Plan criteria for the designation of scenic roadways, with
              consideration for the visibility of scenery, major landform, vegetation, structures, and
              panoramas, and develop a plan for the undergrounding of existing telephone and electrical
              poles.
      5.2.1 Implementation Measure: Implement the Scenic Highway Guidelines in the
      Conservation Element (Section 53) and works with the telephone company to prioritize the
      placement of telephone lines underground.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department and Public Works Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 5.3    Preserve the existing rural road character of Palos Verdes Drive North by maintaining the
              roadway's designation as a scenic corridor/roadway part of a peninsula wide loop.
      5.3.1 Implementation Measure: None required. The roadway's designation is reflected in
      the Conservation Plan
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 5.4    Implement criteria for the designation of scenic roadways in the City and evaluate existing
              roadways for their qualities as local scenic routes.
      5.4.1 Implementation Measure: Implement the Scenic Highways Guidelines and overlay as
      outlined in the Conservation Plan.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Public Works Department
              Funding: General fund
                                                 5-12
Policy 5.5      Implement criteria and procedures for the preservation and beautification of present and
                future roadways and for the designated scenic roadways.
        5.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review existing ordinances and regulations to
        ensure the guidelines related to preservation and beautification of roadways are reflected.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Public Works Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 5.6      Continue to promote the rural environment of the City by discouraging light and glare
                except where lighting is required for public safety.
        5.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will require the use of low pressure sodium lighting
        for parking areas, street lighting, and other exterior lighting.
                Timing:1993
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Issue: Grading and Landforms
Grading and construction activities could disrupt the stability of soils and create geologic hazards. The City
will make every effort to make sure new development will not result in unstable soils, soil erosion, or
landslide.
Goal 6:         Minimize grading and significant changes in the natural topography and
                grading activities should be designed to preserve the unique and
                significant cultural and biologic features to maintain the identity, image
                and environmental qualities of the City.
Policy 6.1      Evaluate and distinguish between the destruction of land and the enhancement of land.
                Discourage any grading beyond that necessary to create adequate building pads and
                reasonable recreation areas for equestrian use, pools, tennis courts, etc.
        6.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review all grading plans to ensure they are in
        compliance with City standards.
                                                     5-13
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 6.2    The project review process must give major consideration to the health, safety, and welfare
              of the community without violating the homeowners' rights to modify/improve their
              property.
      6.2.1 Implementation Measure: All new development will be reviewed by the environmental
      coordinator to make sure that this development will not adversely impact neighboring properties
      or residents.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 6.3    Preserve natural land forms, vegetation, and wildlife by requiring more stringent regulations
              for the development and alteration of slopes greater than 2 to 1.
      63.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review existing hillside and grading ordinances
      to make sure they reflect current City standards and amend these if necessary.
              Timing: 1993
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
                                                 5-14
                                                SECTION 53
                                        CONSERVATION PLAN
INTRODUCTION
Most of the City is presently developed and open space is limited. Over time portions of the remaining
undeveloped areas that are privately owned will experience pressure to develop. Nevertheless, the lower
density character of the City, the City's topography, and canyons that have been maintained for recreation
use, provide an abundance of opportunities for resource conservation.
A study was conducted as part of this General Plan to identify those areas within the planning area where
significant resources are found. Many of these areas were not originally developed because they are subject
to environmental constraints. These constraints include flooding problems, excessive slopes, and soil
limitations. A substantial portion of the undeveloped land is located in those areas that are subject to these
environmental constraints.
LAND USE POLICY
Land use policy outlined in the Land Use Element is instrumental in protecting many of the natural and
cultural resources identified as being significant. A number of land use designations overlay zones will be
used in either preserving environmentally significant areas or substantially reducing potential impacts from
development through more stringent development standards. The base land use categories that will be
effective in conserving important resources include the following:
         Open Space: This designation applies to parkland and open space lands which are not going to
         be developed during the life of the General Plan. This designation applies to public parks, canyons,
         and other public and private land reserved from development.
         Institutional: A number of public and private uses are included in this category. Portions of these
         uses could be used for resource conservation purposes.
         Commercial Recreation: This category of development applies to a variety of land uses
         including private equestrian facilities, golf courses, and other types of privately-owned land used
         for recreational activities.
A number of General Plan Conservation Overlay Zone designations are included in the land Use Element.
While not all Conservation Overlay Zones will be expressly used for
                                                      5-15
preserving environmentally significant areas, the majority indicates those areas where development
standards are more stringent. In this way potentially adverse impacts from development can be minimized.
The Overlay Zones include the following:
         Ecological Resource Overlay: This overlay designation applies to those portions of the
         planning area where sensitive habitats are located.
         Scenic Corridor Overlay: The scenic corridor designation applies to the major roadways in the
         area that have been designated as scenic corridors.
         Cultural Resource Overlay: This designation applies to those areas that have been designated
         as having a high sensitivity for cultural resources and where future development may affect these
         resources.
         Multi-Use Trail Overlay: The Open Space and Recreation Element's Master Plan of Trails
         indicated the placement of future trails and maintenance of existing trails. The Overlay Zone
         indicated the location and extent of both existing and future trails.
The following sections of the Conservation Plan describes standards and guidelines that apply to each
overlay designation.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES
There are a number of goals and policies in the General Plan that are concerned with the maintenance,
preservation, or conservation of natural resources. These natural resources include important ecological
habitats found in the planning area. These policies will be effective in mitigating the impacts of development
on sensitive ecological areas within or adjacent to properties undergoing development. The focus of the
Resource Management Guidelines is to provide further direction related to the maintenance and
preservation of these resources.
Significant natural resources within the planning area are described in detail in the Conservation Element
Background Report (Section 5.4). For planning purposes, three sensitivitycategories have been developed
to identify the planning area's sensitivity to development. This sensitivity rating is described as follows:
         Low Sensitivity: Areas with no significant natural habitats are in this classification. Past
         development in the urbanized areas is likely to have destroyed or significantly altered native plant
         communities and animal habitats. This designation is not
                                                      5-16
        intended to undervalue the importance of introduced or existing vegetation in the developed areas.
        Moderate Sensitivity: A number of areas in the City have been developed at densities
        sufficiently low so that remnants of environmentally significant habitats remain. In addition, some
        development is located adjacent to ecologically significant zones, which could be adversely
        impacted by any increase in density or intensity of development.
        High Sensitivity: The Resource Management Technical Report identified those portions of the
        planning area that are judged to be ecologically significant by biologists and naturalists. These areas
        correspond with the Ecological Resource Overlay Zone shown in Exhibit 5-1. The Zone
        corresponds to those areas identified as having a high sensitivity. Areas presently developed are
        not included in overlay.
Development proposals within those areas with high sensitivity ratings identified in Exhibit 5-1 will be
reviewed to determine the extent of significant ecological resources on the property and the potential
impacts new development will have on these resources. The location of sensitive lands as shown in Exhibit
5-1 is generalized and not parcel-specific. Exhibit 5-1 is a tool to be used as an aid in locating sensitive
lands, but is not an exact or exclusive determinant. However, a detailed identification and review of the
presence of sensitive resources will be required with each development proposal within the areas located
designated as having a high sensitivity.
For those areas located within the Ecological Overlay Zone, the guidelines listed below apply to new large
scale development. The guidelines do not apply to minor lot improvements which might be undertaken by
individual homeowners:
        #        Field surveys to identify potential resources must be undertaken prior to any development
                 or significant alteration of these areas.
        #        Any fuel modification program for fire prevention must be evaluated by knowledgeable
                 professionals to ensure appropriate mitigation is followed.
        #        All new development in these areas must undergo appropriate environmental review
                 pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.
        #        Trustee agencies including the California Department of Fish and Game and local
                 environmental organizations such as the Audubon Society must be
                                                      5-17
                 notified of large scale development proposals as part of the environmental review process.
        #        When threatened and/or endangered species are encountered, the directives of the
                 Department of Interior and the State of California Department of Fish and Game will be
                 considered.
Preservation of Scenic Visual Resources
A number of policies in the General Plan are concerned with preserving scenic and visual resources in the
planning area. For example, the Recreation Element provides for the development and maintenance of
points within the existing parks, while the Land Use Element promotes urban design through the continued
implementation of the neighborhood compatibility ordinance.
This section of the Conservation Element includes a Scenic Roadways Overlay Zone that identifies those
corridors containing significant aesthetic and visual resources. Proposals for new development need to be
evaluated to ensure that significant views along these corridors will be preserved. This designation is also
applied to those roads that have been previously identified as Scenic Highways. Exhibit 5-2 indicates those
areas and roadways that have been placed with a Scenic Roadways Overlay Zone.
The following criteria were used in designating Scenic Corridors in the City:
        #        Areas which characterize the rural or urban form of the City of Rolling Hills Estates.
        #        Significant historic places or sites of interest.
        #        Outstanding topographic features or unique natural features.
        #        Urban design and architecture unique to the City of Rolling Hills Estates.
        #        Important viewsheds where preservation is warranted
The following guidelines will apply to all scenic roadways and corridors:
        #        The designated route must traverse an aesthetically significant viewing corridor.
                                                      5-18


        #        The route should be a significant entry into the City and those entryways should be marked
                 with appropriate landmarks.
        #        The establishment of a Scenic Route must be consistent with traffic circulation and will not
                 affect the integrity of the area it traverses.
        #        The scenic route system must be consistent with the capability of existing street systems
                 and will not necessitate expansion.
        #        Any improvement associated with a scenic route will be consistent with the character of
                 the community and not result in any significant environmental impacts.
Pursuant to the above criteria, the following corridors (shown in Exhibit 5-2) have been placed within the
Scenic Roadway Overlay Zone:
        #        Hawthorne Boulevard
        #        Palos Verdes Drive North
        #        Crenshaw Boulevard
        #        Silver Spur Road
The protection of scenic corridors is based on standards which will prevent the alteration of the significant
views. Where it is determined by the City that specific portions of a scenic route require upgrading, a
program of improvement will be established. The following principles provide a comprehensive outline of
applicable standards that must be adhered to in future development.
        #        City Approval. New projects planned along a Scenic Route will be subject to a
                 comprehensive design review process outlined in the neighborhood compatibility
                 guidelines.
        #        Grading. Site preparation or cutting of hillside will be conducted in a manner where it is
                 least visible from designated scenic corridors.
        #        Exterior Light. Exterior lighting along scenic corridors will be limited to those systems
                 necessary for security and safety. Lighting intensities will be kept to the lowest possible
                 levels and all such lighting will be screened and
                                                       5-19
                  directed away from view of scenic routes. Special attention will be paid to the design of
                  light poles used in the corridors, traffic signal standards, and other equipment.
         #        Landscaping. Landscape plantings along scenic corridors will be regulated to prevent
                  the blocking of the view of such corridors. Landscape beautification of scenic routes will
                  be considered and, where necessary, a program for improvements commenced.
         #        Structures. The construction, placement or relocation of any structure will not block or
                  impair the view of any Scenic Corridor and these structures will be harmonious with
                  surrounding uses.
         #        Utilities. All new utility lines will be installed underground and a program of
                  undergrounding existing utility lines along Scenic Corridors as expeditiously as practicable
                  will be initiated.
         #        Land Uses. Land uses which will have an adverse impact on any Scenic Corridor will
                  be prohibited.
         #        Signs. Signage along Scenic Routes will be regulated to prevent interference with the
                  viewing of Scenic Corridors. Key entryways to the City will be attractive and
                  well-maintained.
         #        Equestrian and Bicycle Routes. Will be developed as part of the City's Scenic Route
                  System wherever possible.
         #        Route Improvement. A review of Scenic Routes in the City will be conducted to
                  determine which features along that route will be screened or upgraded in the future.
Neighborhood Compatibility Guidelines
In addition to satisfying the pertinent requirements of the specific residential district, the following design
criteria and review processes have been established to protect, and maintain the established character of
all residential neighborhoods in the City:
                                                       5-20
# Natural Amenities. Improvements to residential property shall respect and preserve,
  to the greatest extent possible, existing topography, landscaping and natural features.
# Neighborhood Character. Proposals shall be compatible with the existing
  neighborhood character in terms of architectural style and materials, and the scale of
  development in relation to surrounding residences.
# Scale. While many elements can contribute to the scale of a residential structure, designs
  should minimize the appearance of overbuilt property to both public and private view. The
  square footage of the residence and the total amount of lot coverage should reflect the rural
  character of the City and the respective neighborhood.
# Style. Proposals shall address the following design elements to ensure the compatibility
  of development:
           Facade treatments shall be designed to avoid stark, unbroken exterior walls and
           in general, shall be compatible with facade treatments in the neighborhood.
           The height of structures shall reflect the rural character of the City as well as
           maintain consistency with neighboring properties.
           Open spaces between proposed structures and subject property lines shall reduce
           the appearance of an overbuilt lot.
           Roof design shall incorporate pitches that are compatible with the neighborhood.
           The apparent bulk or mass of the structure shall be consistent with surrounding
           properties in the neighborhood.
                                      5-21
                          Any appurtenances incorporated into the design plan (including, but not limited to:
                          greenhouses, turrets, towers, chimneys, penthouses, solariums, porticos/loggias,
                          atriums, garden walls and fences) shall be constructed so that they are compatible
                          with the neighborhood.
         #       Privacy. Proposed development shall be designed to preserve the open space and rural
                 character of the surrounding neighborhood. Designs shall incorporate and maintain an
                 adequate amount of separation between the proposed structure(s) and adjacent property
                 lines. In addition, balconies, decks and windows will also be designed to respect the
                 existing privacy of surrounding properties.
         #       Landscaping. Designs shall incorporate existing and additional landscaping to ensure
                 compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. Landscaping shall not be used to create
                 hedges in front yard areas nor diminish the open, spacious character of a neighborhood.
         #       Views. Development will be designed with respect for neighboring views as required by
                 the View Protection Ordinance, Section 1950.
Cultural Resource Management
Cultural resource management and historic preservation require the cooperation of many government
agencies. Rolling Hills Estates alone, however, has the ability to preserve and enhance many of the City's
cultural resources. Furthermore, it is the City's desire to establish facilities and programs which will inspire
appreciation for the City's past and will encourage participation in a wide range of educational and social
activities. The Cultural Resources in the City and their importance to the community is underscored in the
designation of George F. Canyon open space as a natural and cultural preserve.
The existence of rich cultural resources in the Peninsula present some challenges for future development
in the City. Some protection is afforded through The California Environmental Quality Act which requires
that a project be considered "significant" in terms of impact if it will disrupt or adversely affect a site of
archaeological, paleontological, or historical
                                                    5-22

historical significance. Protection of these resources during construction activities generally involve the
salvage and curation of materials discovered at the site. Future development within the planning area and
surrounding region is certain to result in the discovery of new sites. Other sites will also undoubtedly be
discovered through the efforts of future archaeological field surveys.
A map indicating cultural resource sensitivity is provided in Exhibit 5-3. This exhibit identifies those areas
where there is a high probability of discovering archaeological sites in the course of new development. A
sensitivity rating has been applied to all of the planning area and is described as follows:
         Low Sensitivity: Areas of low cultural resource sensitivity include those lands which have been
         surveyed with the express purpose of identifying cultural resource sites but which provided negative
         results. Low sensitivity areas also include land where development or grading has resulted in the
         movement or relocation of massive amounts of earth.
         Moderate Sensitivity: Areas of moderate sensitivity include those lands which have been
         developed or altered by means which may not have resulted in the removal or relocation of earth
         on a large scale. Depending on the methods by which urbanization was accomplished, variable
         degrees of destruction to cultural resources can result. For example, agricultural fields represent
         areas where the surface has been disturbed though any buried artifacts have been preserved.
         High Sensitivity: High sensitivity areas within the Peninsula planning area include those areas
         which have not been previously surveyed or have been subject to historic human disturbance other
         than agriculture. Based on the demonstrated prehistoric settlement pattern for coastal Southern
         California and on the density of recorded archaeological Eites within the planning area, those
         portions of the planning aria which retain their natural character and which have not been subject
         to surveys specifically related to the identification of cultural resources are considered to have a
         high potential for the presence of cultural resource sites.
A substantial number of archaeological sites have been discovered in those areas of the City that have
undergone past development. For this reason, any proposed project that involves a significant amount of
grading should have an archaeological survey conducted prior to construction. In addition, archaeological
resources may be discovered in the course of construction and appropriate measures must be taken to
ensure that artifacts are recorded and
                                                     5-23
salvaged. The City of Rolling Hills Estates will seek to avoid damaging effects on an archaeological
resources whenever feasible. If avoidance is not feasible, the importance of the site shall be evaluated
according to the following criteria.
         #         The site's association with an event or person of recognized significance in California or
                   American history, or scientific importance in prehistory.
         #         The site's ability to provide information which is both of demonstrable public interest and
                   useful in addressing scientifically consequential and reasonable or archaeological research
                   questions.
         #         The site's special or particular qualities such as oldest, best example, largest, or last
                   surviving example of its kind.
         #         The site's age being at least 100 years old and its stratigraphic integrity.
         #         The site's potential for answering important research questions that historical research has
                   shown can be answered only with archaeological methods.
In-situ preservation (leaving the site as is) is the preferred manner of avoiding damage to archaeological
resources. Preserving the site is more important than preserving the artifacts alone because the relationship
of the artifacts to each other in the site provides valuable information that can be lost when the artifacts are
removed. Further, preserving the site keeps it available for more sophisticated future research methods.
Preservation may also avoid conflict with religious or cultural values of groups associated with the site.
Avoiding damage to significant archaeological sites may be accomplished by any of the following
approaches:
         #         Planning construction to miss archaeological sites;
         #         Planning parks, greenspace, or other open space to incorporate archaeological sites;
         #         "Capping" or covering archaeological sites with a layer of soil before building tennis courts,
                   parking lots, or similar facilities. Capping may be used where the soils to be covered will
                   not suffer serious compaction; the covering materials are not chemically active; the site is
                   one in which the natural processes of deterioration have been effectively arrested; and the
                   site has been recorded.
                                                         5-24
        #        Deeding archaeological sites into permanent conservation easements.
The City of Rolling Hills Estates has established additional guidelines for preserving potential archaeological
resources in the community. The Conservation Element provides for a Cultural Resource Overlay Zone
which is shown in Exhibit 5-3. Future development within this overlay zone must comply with the following
guidelines:
        #        An archaeological report must be provided to the City's environmental coordinator
                 documenting known or suspected sites as part of the environmental review.
        #        An archaeologist must be present during excavation or grading as part of the mitigation
                 monitoring program.
        #        All procedures related to the excavation and disposal of resources must comply with
                 Appendix K of the CEQA Law and Guidelines.
California State Assembly Bill AB 492 and the adoption of the Appendix K in the CEQA Law and
Guidelines provide direction with regard to the mitigation, preservation, or salvage of significant
archaeologic resources that are affected by development. The City will comply withthe following provisions
of CEQA in the event a significant archaeological site is discovered.
        #        An excavation plan will be prepared according to the requirements outlined in
                 CEQA-Appendix K;
        #        If it is impossible to avoid disturbing the site through revisions in project design, the Lead
                 Agency will initiate salvage efforts according to the parameters outlined in Appendix K,
                 Section VII of the CEQA Law and Guidelines.
        #        In the event of the discovery of human remains, procedures outlined in Section VIII of
                 Appendix K contained in the CEQA Law and Guidelines will apply.
                                                      5-25
Air Quality Improvement Program
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is largely a suburban community with no polluting industrial activities.
Many local businesses are covered by Air Quality Management District (AQMD) regulations. Examples
of the types of businesses regulated include those which conduct metal plating; manufacture fiberglass and
plastic products; use or store organic solvents; utilize degreasing equipment; and use materials which emit
hazardous sir pollutants. Landfills are also subject to regulation. The AQMD controls solvent emissions
from dry cleaners, print shops, metal platers, etc. Even commercial restaurants are subject to AQMD
regulations covering charbroilers.
Any new, or modified existing, source of emissions that emits more than 1 pound a day of a regulated air
pollutant is subject to the requirements of the recently revised AQMD Regulation X, which requires that
all increases in emissions be offset by achieving at least an equal amount of reductions from existing sources.
Small sources, i.e. sources emitting less than 2 tons/year of any regulated contaminant, are eligible to
receive these offsets from the Community Bank, which is funded through shutdowns of facilities throughout
the Basin. In addition, new or modified equipment is required to install Best Available Control Technology
(BACT), as specified by the AQMD.
Facilities which do not directly emit pollutants but which attract concentrations of motor vehicles are
referred to as indirect sources. Within this category, facilities with 100 or more employees are regulated
by the AQMD's Regulation XV.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District's Regulation XV applies to all facilities which employ
100 or more persons at a single site. Employers subject to the regulation are required to develop plans
which include sufficient incentives to bring the average vehicle ridership in employee vehicles to 1.5 persons.
Some of the existing uses that will be subject to Regulation xv include the Northrop development, and the
local High School.
The 1989 Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) calls for local governments to specify the measures they
will use to improve air quality in Air Quality Elements which are to be amended into each local General
Plan. Emphasis in these elements is to be on actions to reduce local contributions to air pollution from
vehicle trips, energy usage, local vehicle congestion (a major cause of carbon monoxide buildups), and local
sources of particulates, including grading and construction. Those measures that apply to Rolling Hills
Estates are summarized below:
                                                      5-26
# Parking Management. The purpose of this strategy is to discourage use of single
  occupancy vehicles by restricting parking. Suggested measures in this category include:
            1.       Increase daytime parking fees.
            2.       Establish a surcharge on parking for single-occupant vehicles and/or a
                     discount for multi-occupancy vehicles.
            3.       Eliminate peak-period on-street parking.
            4.       Eliminate 100% employer subsidized parking.
            5.       Require employer-sponsored preferential parking for ridesharers for
                     employers of 100+ employees (short-term) and 25+ employees
                     (long-term).
            6.       Implement short-term commercial parking zones.
            7.       Implement park and ride lots with shuttle service.
            8.       Increase parking enforcement.
            9.       Establish a cap on the number of parking spaces permitted per square foot
                     for a particular use.
            10.      The environmental coordinator will provide data, monitor progress and
                     effectiveness of the ordinance, and report results to SLAG annually.
# Auto Use Restriction. This measure is directed at restricting vehicular traffic in areas
  with high pedestrian traffic. It is also directed at reducing congestion around centers such
  as the Rose Bowl, Anaheim Stadium, Disneyland, or any special event center with a
  capacity in excess of 10,000 vehicles. While no land use activity within the planning area
  falls into this category, provisions should be made to restrict auto use at other major
  generators such as schools. For cities which have such centers, ordinances are to be
  adopted which require off-site facility lots, shuttle buses, auto-free zones in the immediate
  vicinity of the event, etc.
# Track Dispatching. This measure is directed at facilitating improved truck routing and
  delivery to reduce competition with peak hour automobile traffic. The measures call for
  ordinances and voluntary agreements with local businesses and delivery companies to
  change truck traffic to non-peak hours.
# Growth Management. This measure is directed at improving job/housing balance in
  order to reduce vehicular miles traveled. It is based on the assumption that if people live
  and work in closer proximity, there will be less need to travel long distances. In the 1991
  AQMP, job/housing balance is
                                        5-27
                   changed to growth management and the goal is reductions in vehicle miles traveled through
                   a number of actions, including job/housing balance.
Mineral Resources/Geology
Section 5.4 of the Conservation Element describes the existing significant mineral resources in the City. As
indicated in the Background Analysis and as shown in Exhibit 5-4, the State of California Division of Mines
and Geology has assigned Mineral Resource Zone (MRZ) designations throughout the City. Only the
northeastern portion of the City (refer to Exhibit 5-4) has been placed in a MRZ-2 designation which
applies to areas where adequate information indicates that significant mineral deposits are present or where
it is judged that a high likelihood for their presence exists. The presence of construction aggregate resources
in the vicinity of Chandler Quarry led to the MRZ-2 designation.
The land use policy, as it applies to the Mineral Resource Zone designations does not promote the
maintenance or preservation of the continued extraction of these resources. The Chandler Quarry area has
been designated for lower density residential development in areas where this is feasible and commercial
recreation in areas of uncompacted fill. The land use policy reflects the continuing reclamation program
being undertaken by the
property owner.
                                                       5-28

                                               SECTION 5.4
                                       BACKGROUND REPORT
INTRODUCTION
The Conservation Element Background Report identifies the biological, groundwater, mineral, air quality,
and culturalresources of the planning area. These are nonrenewable or limited resources in the environment
which need to be preserved and managed in order to ensure that they are available for future generations.
Conservation, managed use and development of local resources will limit the disruption of natural cycles
and lead to ecological balance.
GEOLOGY AND GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
The majority of the Palos Verdes Peninsula is a consolidated rock formation where no groundwater
resources are found. At the northern foot of the Palos Verdes Hills, groundwater levels are between 20
to 30 feet below sea level. The Los Angeles River winds down to the area from the Coast Range
Mountains. The river originally emptied into the area which now includes the cities of Compton, Torrance,
Wilmington and Lomita. Heavily wooded areas and shrubs were found on the north side of the peninsula
in the vicinity of the original stream bed. During the great flood of 1825, the river cut its way through a
gorge into the present site of the Los Angeles Harbor, thus, draining the higher swamp lands. As water
receded from the area, native trees, left with no water source, soon disappeared. Extensive landscaping
by the first developers of the area has resulted in the revegetation of both native and non-native trees.
Mineral Resources
The Palos Verdes Peninsula contains soil formations which include a variety of sedimentary rocks. As part
of the mineral land classification of the Greater Los Angeles area, all areas in the region were evaluated for
the presence of significant mineraldeposits. Most of the Palos Verdes Peninsula and the City of Rolling Hills
Estates have been classified as areas where no significant sand and gravel resources are present and little
likelihood exists for their presence. Only a small portion is classified to have a potential for sand and gravel
resources.
The San Pedro sandstone is a marine deposit which can be seen on the northern and northeastern edges
of the Palos Verdes Hills. This sandstone layer forms a belt from San Pedro to Malaga Cove. The San
Pedro sandstone is believed to have formed in a coldwater marine environment during the period of
glaciation. Tectonic uplift of the entire Palos Verdes Peninsula left the marine deposits hundreds of feet
above sea level. The sandstone
                                                     5-29
sandstone consists of quartz and feldspathic sands which are poorly consolidated, unaltered, coarse and
uncemented. They extend to depths of 600 feet and are mainly homogenous, containing less than 2 percent
pebbly gravel. The sandstone is covered by mid-Pleistocene (1 million years before present) to Holocene
(past 10,000 years), non-marine terrace 50 feet thick for the most part and up to 100 feet in others.
The areas where mining has historically taken place (Chandler quarry and some areas north of the City)
are designated Significant MineralAggregate Resource Areas (SMARA) by the State of California Division
of Mines and Geology. The remaining areas around the quarry site and to the east and north of the city have
been classified as potentially significant areas. They are underlain by San Pedro sandstone but the lack of
adequate data on the quality of resources precludes their classification as significant resource areas. Exhibit
5-4 shows the mineral land classification of the area
The Chandler quarry is a 127-acre site which was used for the mining of sand and gravel between the years
of 1936 and 1988. Intermittent mining activities also occurred on-site from 1921 to 1936. Later, sand and
coarse aggregate was imported from the San Gabriel Valley for the manufacture of Portland cement
on-site. The quarry was a local source of Portland Cement concrete sand, plaster sand, masonry sand and
gunite sand. The operators of the quarry ceased mining operations in 1988, except on a small section of
the site where the manufacture of concrete continues. Today, approximately 60+ acres of quarry pits are
used for a compacted landfill operation which is expected to take approximately 10 years to fill. Fill is
presently accepted on-site as part of the land reclamation program.
NATIVE VEGETATION AND ANIMAL LIFE
Common birds that inhabit the planning area include the mourning dove, spotted dove, house finchor linnet,
hummingbirds, scrub jay, mockingbird, sparrows, and brown towhee. Less common birds are the Brewer's
blackbird, bush tit, crow, red-shafted flicker, killdeer, western meadowlark, orioles, peafowl, California
quail, raven, robin, starling, cliff swallow and rufous-sided towhee. Shorebirds, such as seagulls, California
gull, ring bill gull, Bonaparte's gull, western gull, Heermann's gull, terns, brown pelican, common loon,
American coot, are also found in the area Occasional winter bird visitors may also be spotted. A list of
birds found in the area is included in the Master Environmental Assessment.
Other wildlife in the area includes the striped skunk, cottontail rabbit, jack rabbit, opossum, pocket gopher,
grey fox, red fox, coyote, field mouse, domestic cats, western toads, frogs, and tree toads. A number of
reptiles, such as the Pacific rattlesnake, Pacific gopher snake,
                                                      5-30

California king snake, foothill alligator lizard, California slender salamander, and western fence lizard are
also found in the area.
The oak trees, eucalyptus trees, junipers and evergreens that line the City's streets and parks are introduced
species. The occurrence of local development has left only limited areas with native vegetation. The
remaining areas include the canyons, parks and open spaces, and the open areas on individual lots which
have steep slopes. Native vegetation and other plant species which survive in the wild include some species
of cacti, trees, grasses, wildflowers, and shrubs. Plant species found in the Peninsula are listed in Appendix
A.
A record search was conducted, using the Natural Diversity Database of the California Department of Fish
and Game, to document the known occurrences of endangered species in the Peninsula. The database,
consisting of information obtained from Federal and State agencies, identified plants and animals found in
the Peninsula which have been listed as endangered, rare or threatened, as well as those considered by the
scientific community to be endangered. A summary of the record search is discussed below. Large circles
in Exhibit 5-5 represent non-specific localities where a species may be found or where suitable habitat
exists
Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly
Glaucopsyche lygdamus palosverdesensis
The Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly is a small blue butterfly which may have evolved during the Pleistocene
period, when the Peninsula was an island. In 1977, the butterfly was found in only eight colonies on the
Palos Verdes Peninsula, where the caterpillars fed on a wild species of locoweed (Astragalus).
The Butterfly was first discovered in 1976 in a large coastal scrub terrace near Alta Vista Way within the
City of Rancho Palos Verdes. In 1978, road and housing construction destroyed this habitat. The Butterfly
was spotted again, in 1981, near the intersection of Seacrest Road and Crenshaw Boulevard and along
Crenshaw Boulevard between Altamira and Portuguese canyons. Grading activities in 1982 and 1983
destroyed the habitat near Seacrest and Crenshaw. The Astragalus habitat along Crenshaw Boulevard has
been reduced and no more Buttery sightings have been made in this area. The site is presently developed
as a park.
The Agua Amarga Canyon area was once a habitat for the Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly and Astragalus.
While gophers and weeds have destroyed the Astragalus, the area remains open space with no
development. Weed management may allow the reintroduction of the Astragalus and Palos Verdes Blue
Butterfly.
                                                      5-31
Astragalus was last seen in Altamira Canyon in 1982. The site remains undeveloped with coastal sage scrub
habitat. The plant also grows along the trails of Portuguese Bend, but the Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly has
not been observed in these areas. The trails are not heavily impacted and could be utilized in reintroduction
efforts.
The Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly was also found at the top of San Pedro Hill in 1981. Grading activities
have since destroyed the native habitat at this site. Annual grasses and ornamental plants have taken the
place of the Astragalus and only three colonies were found here in 1986.
The Fred Hesse Park, just west of the City of Rolling Hills Estates, originally had undeveloped areas
designated as native plant and nature study areas. Park development in 1982, however, destroyed the
Butterfly habitat and its larval foodplant, the Astragalus. Restoration of the Astragalus habitat in this area
is believed to be possible.
Five of the original eight Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly colonies have been destroyed by private development.
Off-road vehicle use, weed abatement and construction have uprooted most of the Astragalus in the
Peninsula. The Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly was classified as "Endangered" in the Federal listing in 1980;
however, no efforts were made to preserve the remaining three colonies of the Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly.
In 1983, a baseball field was built on the site of the last remaining colony. No butterflies have been seen
since then. The species is presumed to be extinct but the Fish and Wildlife Service has not removed it from
its list in the hope that the Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly will come alive after lying dormant for years, as some
species of moths are known to do.
California Gnatcatcher
Pilioptila californica
The California Gnatcatcher is a tiny, very active, gray or olive bird with an eye ring or line over the eye and
body. The California Gnatcatcher is a Category 2 candidate species in the Federal listing. Category 2
candidate species are threatened and/or distribution data are insufficient to support placing them on the
Federal listing. The species is presumed to still be in existence, in the planning area.
In 1989, several pairs of the gnatcatcher were observed in the Marineland area, around Sunnyridge Road
in the City of Rolling Hills, along Forrestal Road in Rancho Palos Verdes, and in the Agua Amarga Canyon
in Rolling Hills Estates. These areas are sage scrub and coastal sage scrub habitats where California
sagebrush, wild buckwheat and black sage are
                                                      5-32
abundant. The habitat areas are all owned by private entities and threatened by urban development.
Mohave Tui Chub
Gila bicolor mohavensis
The Mohave Tui Chub is a chunky fish with an olive-brown back and a white to silver belly. The fish may
be found in weedy shallows of lakes or the quiet waters of sluggish rivers. It feeds on aquatic plants, insects,
snails, small clams, crayfish and plankton. The Mohave Tui Chub once inhabited the deep pools and
slough-like areas of the Mohave river. Today, this river and its lakes are desert playas (dry lakes). The
construction of reservoirs on the Mohave have altered flow directions and the chubs have interbred with
several introduced species.
Very few genetically pure Mohave Tui Chubs could be found in 1967. The Mohave Tui Chub is listed as
an Endangered species in both Federal and State listings. Attempts to transplant the Mohave Tui Chub have
generally failed. Transplants at the South Coast Botanic Garden Refugium were temporarily successful but
the species has become extinct since 1976.
Mexican Flannelbush
Fremontodendron mexicanum
The Mexican Flannelbush plant is a Category 2 candidate species in the Federal listing and Rare in the
California listing. Rare species are species whose occurrences are threatened and/or will soon be
threatened. The Mexican Flannelbush is found in chaparral habitat, most of which has been destroyed in
the area.
Solitary flannelbush may be found on the hillsides, oak woodland and chaparral areas, approximately 1 mile
from the ocean on Via Del Monte.
AIR QUALITY
Meteorology and Climate
The climate of the Palos Verdes Peninsula is mild and pleasant year-round with maximum temperatures
ranging between 44 and 63 degrees Fahrenheit in winter and between 60 to 85 degrees Fahrenheit in
summer. From one-half to one-third of all days in a year are clear. Sea breezes are from the west and have
an average speed of 6.5 miles per hour.
                                                     5-33
Seacoast fog and warm marine air from the open sea keep the climate comfortable through summer days
when temperatures are high.
Smog is rare and generally associated with lower elevations. When there is smog, sea breezes from the
Pacific Ocean generally blow the smog inland by mid-morning each day. Intermittent fog may occur from
June through September. The higher areas are often cooler than the flatlands because the hills are
enveloped by marine air. The lower slopes of the city are slightly warmer. The canyon areas also have
cooler temperatures due to air drainage, which results from cold air seeking the lowest elevations in
canyons and valleys.
The Santa Ana winds, which blow from the northeast between the months of October through March, do
not generally reach the Peninsula. When the Santa Ana's are strong enough to reach the area, they affect
only the northern and eastern slopes of the Palos Verdes Hills. When the Santa Ana winds are blowing,
the air is dry with 10 percent or less humidity.
Annual rainfall in the peninsula is 11.72 inches with about 15 inches of rainfall in the upper elevations and
11 inches on the lower areas.
Characteristics of Air Pollution
The importance of clean air is validated by the effect of air pollutants on the environment. Air pollution is
known to cause physiological damage to both man and his environment. Ozone (O3) is a colorless toxic
gas which irritates the lungs and damages materials and vegetation. Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless
gas which interferes with the transfer of oxygen to the brain. Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is a reddish-brown
gas, which at high levels, can cause breathing difficulties. PM10 causes a greater health risk than larger sized
particles, since these fine particles can more easily penetrate the defenses of the human respiratory system
and cause irritation by themselves or in combination with other gases and pollutants. Awareness of the
numerous health impacts of air pollution has led to national and state regulation of air emissions from both
stationary and mobile sources.
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is in the South Coast Air Basin of California (SCAQMD). The Basin is
a 6,600 square mile area encompassing Orange County and the non-desert portions of Los Angeles,
Riverside, and San Bernardino counties. The Basin is bounded by the Pacific Ocean on the south and west
and by the San Gabriel, San Bernardino, and San Jacinto mountains on the north and east.
                                                     5-34
Meteorological conditions (such as light winds and shallow vertical mixing) and topographical features (such
as the surrounding mountain ranges) hinder the dispersion of airborne pollutants in the region. The South
Coast Air Basin has air pollution problems because of extensive urbanization, large volumes of traffic, and
the presence of frequent temperature inversions which tend to trap air pollutants close to the ground and
hamper dispersion. In January 1990, surface inversions occurred in the morning, 70 percent of the time.
Average wind speed in the Basin is less than 5 mph on 80 percent of the days during the summer smog
season, resulting in increased concentrations of emissions.
To determine air quality, contaminant levels in air samples are compared to national and state standards
for six contaminants and to state standards for two others. Standards are set by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Air Resources Board (CARB) at levels which are determined
to preserve public health and welfare with an adequate margin of safety. There are national and state air
quality standards for ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, PM10 (suspended particulate matter, 10
microns or less in diameter), sulfur dioxide, and lead. In addition, the SCAQMD monitors compliance with
state standards for sulfate and visibility. These standards are outlined in Table 5-1.
The South Coast Air Basin experiences the worst air quality in the nation, with peak air pollution readings
as much as three times the standard for ozone and twice the standard for carbon monoxide. The Basin has
not been able to attain national and state standards for ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and PM
to The Federal standard for nitrogen dioxide levels were exceeded during the past five years only in Los
Angeles County and nowhere else in the nation.
                                                        TABLE 5-1
                                    AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS (AAQS)
  Air Pollutant       State Maximum Concentration              National* Primary            National* Secondary
                                                               Standards                    Standards
  Ozone               0.09 ppm, 1-hr avg. >a                   0.12 ppm, 1-hr avg.          0.12 ppm, 1-hr. avg.
  Carbon Monoxide     9.0 ppm, 8-hr avg. >b                    9 ppm, 8-hr. avg.            9 ppm, 8-hr. avg.
                      20 ppm, 1-hr avg. >                      35 ppm, 1-hr. avg.           35 ppm, 1-hr. avg.
  Nitrogen Dioxide    0.25 ppm, 1-hr avg. >c                   0.53 ppm, annual avg.        0.53 ppm, annual avg.
  Sulfur Dioxide      0.05 ppm, 24-hr avg. with ozone > =      0.03 ppm, annual avg.        0.50 ppm, 3-hr. avg.
                      0.10 ppm, 1-hr. avg. or TSP >= 100       0.14 ppm, 24-hr. avg.
                      ug/m3, 24-hr. avg. 0.25 ppm, 1-hr avg.
                      >d
  Suspended Particle  30 ug/m3 annual geometric mean > 50      50 ug/m3 annual arithmetic   50 ug/m3 annual arithmetic
  Matter (PM 10)      ug/m3, 24-hr. avg.>e                     mean; 150 ug/m3, 24-hr. avg. mean; 150 ug/m3, 24-hr. avg.
                                                           5-35
                                                               TABLE 5-1
                                         AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS (AAQS)
                                                                         National* Primary             National* Secondary
  Air Pollutant             State Maximum Concentration                  Stan ards                     Standards
  sulfates                  24 ug/m3 24-hr. avg. >=                      1.5 mg/m3, calendar quarter   1.5 ug/m3 calendar quarter
  Lead                      1.5 ug/m3 30-hr. avg. >=
  Hydrogen Sulfide          0.03 ppm,1-hr, avg. >=
  Vinyl Chloride            0.010 ppm, 24-hr. avg. >=
  Visibility-Reducing       In sufficient amount to reduce prevailing
  Particles                 viability to leas than 10 miles at reactive
                            humidity less than 70%, 1 observation.
  Legend
        ppm parts per million by volume.
        ug/m3 micrograms per cubic meter.
        avg. average.
        > greater than.
        >= greater than or equal to.
  a       Effective March 9,1967. The standard was previously 0.10 ppm, 1-hr avg. >=
  b       Effective December 15, 1982. The standards were previously 10 ppm, 12-hour average and 40 ppm, 1-hour average.
  c       Effective March 9, 1987, standard charged from >= 0.25 ppm to > 0.25 ppm.
  d       Effective October 5, 1984. The standard was previously 0.5 ppm, 1 hour average.
  e       Effective August 19,1993. The standards was previously 60 ug/m3 Total suspended Particulate (TSP), annual
          geometric mean, and 100 ug/m3 TSP 24-hour average.
  f       Effective July 1, 1987. The standards were previously:
          Primary Annual geometric mean TSP > ug/m3 and 24-hour average TSP > 260 ug/m3.
          Secondary Annual geometric mean TSP > 60 ug/m3 and 24-hour average TSP > 150 ug/m3.
  *       National Primary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary, with an adequate margin of safety to protect the
          public health. Each state must attain the primary standards no later than 3 years after that state's implementation
          plan is approved by the Environmental Protection Agency.
          National Secondary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary to protect the public welfare from any known or
          anticipated adverse effects of a pollutant. Each state must attain the secondary standards within a "reasonable time"
  after the implementation plan is approved by the EPA
  Souch: California Air Resources Board (CARB) 1988.
The SCAQMD monitoring station in Long Beach is the station closest to the City and has been used to
characterize air quality conditions in the area (Exhibit 5-6). Air quality readings at the Long Beach Station
over the past five years, are summarized in Table 5-2.
The maximum ozone concentrations for the five-year period ranged between two to three times the State
ambient air quality standard. This standard was exceeded 10 to 29 days per year between 1985-1989.
The ozone concentration readings for the area do show a trend toward decreasing State and Federal air
quality standards.
                                                                  5-36

Carbon monoxide concentrations have not exceeded either the National or State standards in the past five
years. The nitrogen dioxide standard was exceeded one to four days each year with decreasing incidence
in recent years. Sulfur dioxide and lead readings did not exceed either State or Federal standards during
the five-year period. For ambient levels of suspended particulates (PM10), 32.7 percent to 44.1 percent
of the samples in each year exceeded the State standard.
                                                           TABLE 5-2
                                       SUMMARY OF ANNUAL AIR QUALITY DATAA
                                   LONG BEACH AIR QUALITY MONITORING STATION
                                                                   1985          1986       1987 1988 1989
   Ozone (O3(
        State standard (1-hr. avg.>0.09 ppm)
        National standard (1-hr. avg.>0.12 ppm)
        Maximum 1-hr ambient concentration (ppm)                    0.23         0.18       0.17 0.16 0.16
        # of days state standard exceeded                            29            29         11   18   10
        # of days federal standard exceeded                          11            10          4    7    3
   Carbon Monoxide (CO)
        State standard (1-hr. avg.>20 ppm)
        National standard (1-hr. avg.>35 ppm)
        Maximum 1-hr ambient concentration (ppm)                     19            13         13   13   13
        # of days state standard exceeded                             0             0          0    0    0
        # of days federal standard                                    0             0          0    0    0
   Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)
        State standard (1-hr. avg.>.25 ppm)
        National standard (>.0534 AAM in ppm)
        Maximum 1-hr ambient concentration (ppm)                    0.35         0.26       0.28 0.28 0.27
        # of days state standard exceeded                             4             3          1    1    1
        Percent AAM above federal standard                          3%            0%         0%   0%   0%
   Suspended Particulates (PM 10)
        State standard (24-hr. avg.>50 ug/m3
        National standard (24-hr. avg>150 ug/m3
        Max. 24-hr ambient concentration (ug/m3)                    106           136        113  149  119
   AAM = annual arithmetic mean
   ppm = parts per million
   ug/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter
   a    The South Coast Air Basin is a non-attainment area for these pollutants.
   Source:    California Air Resources Board, California Air Quality Data. 1985 through 1988.
              SCAQMD, Air Quality Data. 1989.
                                                              5-37
CULTURAL RESOURCES
Cultural resources in the Palos Verdes Peninsula are rooted in a rich and colorful history that dates back
over 100 million years. The historical record of the Peninsula includes the formation of the region's unique
physiography, the settlement of Gabrielino Indian villages, explorations by the Spanish, early ranching
exploits, the American conquest, the establishment of the Port of San Pedro and the development of
housing tracts. Paleontological, archaeological and historical resources in the area are discussed below.
Paleontological Resources
The oldest rocks found in the Peninsula date back 150 million years to the Jurassic period when reptiles
were the most advanced form of life. Evidence of this period is found in the greenish or blue grey Catalina
schist (Franciscan schist) rock exposed in George F. Canyon in the southeastern section of the City. This
is the basement rock layer on which sedimentary rocks lie. The Franciscan schist is also found in the bottom
of wells drilled on the flatlands north and northeast of the Palos Verdes Hills. Most of the hills in the area
are believed to have formed in the last 20 million years.
Sediments from the erosion of the San Gabriel mountains, north of the peninsula, have accumulated in the
area as seen in road cuts through the Palos Verdes Hills. Sea shell fossils are found at higher elevations and
fish and sea mammal fossils at lower elevations. Fossils of a complete whale, a skull of an elephant-like
mammoth, a mastodon tusk and other fossils have been uncovered and preserved in local museums.
Evidence shows that 15 million years ago, the Peninsula was submerged beneath the Pacific Ocean. A rim
of mountains progressively uplifted and through the years of geological uplift, erosion and deposition, the
Palos Verdes Hills emerged. Then, the peninsula was submerged slowly and emerged a second and a third
time. During the process of repeated submersion and uplift, ocean waves cut through the hills to form
terraces in the rocks. Incremental uplift of the land and continuous erosion by ocean waves brought about
the present physiography of the Peninsula. There are terraced surfaces on all sides of the peninsula but they
are most evident on the seaward side of the hill. Thirty-eight cut terraces have been observed and more
than a hundred are suspected to exist.
Sediments in the area are mostly Monterey shale (a crumbling brown rock also known as Altamira shale),
Valmonte diatomite and Malaga mudstone. The irregular shoreline near Portuguese Bend is believed to
have been created from tectonic activity which sends lava to the surface. Tub volcanic ash turned to rock,
is also found in inland areas.
Sand quarried on the northern slopes of the Palos Verdes Hills, from 1921 to 1988, is similar to that found
on the surface of the San Gabriel Mountains. Sand in some areas in the region are designated as
wind-blown dune sand. Open pit mining was once extensive and
                                                     5-38
involved the mining of diatomite on the northern slopes of the Hills. Diatoms are microscopic one-celled
plants that were deposited in the sea more than 15 million years ago when the Peninsula was submerged.
These organisms accumulated in a bedrock interlayered with shale and mudstone, forming a materialknown
as diatomite. Diatomite is used as a lightweight industrial filter agent. It is also used in insulation and paint
filler. Other ground materials found in the area include sandstone shale layered with limestone and black
adobe clay. Once the quarries were abandoned, they were used for landfills and some were later
developed into parks.
Archaeological Resources
Intensive archaeological investigations have been made to trace the evolution of man in California. Recent
emigrants from the Great Basin were of the Shoshonean family, relatives of the Hopi Indians. The
Shoshonean people began migrating to California about 500 B.C.. Gradually over a thousand years, these
people began to form different tribes with unique political, social and religious practices.
The Palos Verdes Peninsula is known to have been inhabited by the tribes of the Gabrielino or Canalino
Indians, the last of the three separate Indian groups. The Gabrielinos were peaceful Indians who lived as
seafarers, fishermen and traders. They lived in circular huts constructed of tule or grass. Their political
structure may be described as a limited monarchy. Families or clans lived together in a village and the village
chief was the leader of the dominant clan. Religious and social practices were strictly observed.
Ten villages are believed to have occupied the Peninsula. Most village sites were near to a supply of water
and safe from winter floods. Malaga Cove is the best known site of early habitation. Other villages in the
Peninsula include the Suangna, Masaungna, Xuxungna, Kingkingna, Tsauvingna, Harasngna, Ataviangna,
and Munikangna.
Records from UCLA's Archaeological Information Center show that eleven prehistoric sites have been
identified within the City. Three of the sites are in the southwestern section of the city, in the Rolling Hills
Estates Park area. The sites may be described as shell midden (refuse heap) with numerous stone artifacts
at a depth of 18 to 36 inches. Artifacts found on these sites include leaf-shaped point, crude leaf-shaped
biface, flaked artifacts, mortar fragment, pestle fragment with pitted grooves and asphaltum, biface
fragments, metate fragments, chert cores, hammerstones, abalone shell with ground respitory holes, and
broken base of lanceolate shaped point.
Seven sites are located in the northeastern section of the City at the quarry site, Montecillo area, Palos
Verdes Reservoir, and the Rolling Hills Country Club. The quarry site is believed to have once been the
site of an Indian village and burial ground covering several acres. A large number of mortars, pestles,
points, metates, mano stones, chipping waste, fragments of human bones, olivella beads, sandstone bowls,
and cog stones were unearthed during
                                                      5-39
excavation and mining activities. Some of these artifacts were given to the Smithsonian Institution but many
may have been lost during sand washing operations. Montecillo and the Country Club area were also part
of the village. Construction over these areas may have disturbed the burial grounds and artifacts on site.
An archaeological sensitivity map was prepared as Exhibit 5-7, using the above information. Hatched areas
are archaeologically sensitive areas and unhatched areas are areas of unknown sensitivity. Consultation with
the UCLA Archaeological Information Center is recommended before any future development takes place.
Historical Resources
During the 16th century, sailing expeditions became common. Spanish explorer Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo
traveled northward from Navidad, Mexico to find the northwest passage between the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans. He stopped at various ports along the California shores and sailed into San Pedro Bay. He died
while his ship was sailing along the coast of northern California in January 1543.
Trading expeditions between Manila and Acapulco began in 1559. Knowing that the Spanish galleons were
full of Asian treasures, English pirates like Sir John Hawkins and Sir Francis Drake hijacked the galleons
on their way to Mexico. Sir Francis Drake also explored the California coasts for a short-cut passage to
the Orient. He later took possession of California for England. Spain's interest in California was renewed
and its captains were asked to search the coast more closely for the northwest passage and for good
harbors. Sebastian Viscaino was appointed to head the primaryexpedition. Viscaino stopped at San Diego,
San Pedro, Avalon Bay and Monterey during his trip. He visited the Palos Verdes Peninsula shortly in 1602
and named the area Canada de los Palos Verdes (Canyon of the Green Trees).
During the 17th century, Russian and English explorers settled along the coast of California. In 1768, a
Spanish expedition landed in San Diego and founded a mission. In a continued colonization effort, the
Spanish explored the land northward and another mission was founded in Monterey. Other inland missions
were subsequently established. Father Junipero Serra established the San Gabriel Mission in 1771. Ten
years later, a pueblo was established for the families of soldiers guarding the mission. The pueblo was
named the Village of Our Lady the Queen of the Angels of Porcuincula (later Los Angeles). The Spanish
control of California was expanded through the influence of the missions.
In 1874, Juan Jose Dominguez decided to retire from military service and petitioned for a grant of the
Rancho San Pedro area For army services rendered to Mexico, Governor Fages of Alta California saw
fit to grant Corporal Juan Jose Dominguez, 75,000 acres of range land on which to graze his herd of cattle.
Dominguez' land, covering the present day cities of Redondo, Torrance, Compton, Gardena, Lomita,
Harbor City, San Pedro, Wilmington
                                                     5-40

the western portion of Long Beach and the Palos Verdes Peninsula, was called Rancho San Pedro.
Dominguez managed his ranch poorly until he died in 1809. Manuel Gutierrez, the executor of his will,
assumed the management of the ranch. Gutierrez allowed Juan Dolores Sepulveda to graze livestock on
the hilly portion of the ranch. Cristobal Dominguez, nephew of Juan Jose Dominguez, laid claim to the
property in 1817. Sepulveda fought the claim and litigation continued for several decades.
In 1822, Mexico declared its independence from Spain. Cristobal Dominguez filed another petition for
Rancho San Pedro. Juan Dolores Sepulveda and Cristobal Dominguez died and their sons continued to
petition for claims over the land. Manuel Dominguez and Jose and Juan Sepulveda finally agreed to have
the claim settled by the Mexican Governor Jose Figueroa. Figueroa awarded the Palos Verdes area to the
Sepulvedas and the rest of Rancho San Pedro to Manuel Dominguez with Manuel Gutierrez having only
rights to pasture his cattle. This started the prosperous years for the Sepulvedas.
Manuel Dominguez never gave up, and in 1839, he filed another petition. Governor Alvarado upheld the
previous decision of Jose Figueroa and this time Manuel Dominguez and the SepuIvedas signed an
agreement establishing the boundaries of the Rancho San Pedro and Rancho Palos Verdes.
During the American conquest, the old Sepulveda House on the eastern slope of the Palos Verdes Hills,
was used as a garrison by the Sepulveda brothers under General Flores. After short victories, the Mexican
army surrendered to the Americans under General Kearny in Cahuenga Pass in 1847.
For the most part, the American administration permitted existing civil offices and their officers to continue
to function as they had before the conquest. Governor Pio Pico allowed the Sepulveda family to keep their
land in 1846. But the years of prosperity were followed by years of turmoil caused by drought, family
squabbles, emigration of gold seekers, and declines in cattle prices. In the early 1860's, a severe drought
placed the Sepulveda family in debt. They sold their cattle and lost the ranch to creditors. Over 100
lawsuits for the Rancho Palos Verdes area were filed amidst mortgages, partition suits, squatter evictions,
foreclosures, condemnation proceedings and divorces. A permanent title to the Rancho Palos Verdes was
finally granted in June 22, 1880. By then, The Farmers and Merchants Bank owned the land and Jose
Sepulveda died a broken man.
In 1882, a portion of the Rancho, listed in records books as Lot H, was sold to Jotham Bixby who was
leasing the land as a cattle range. After Jotham Bixby's death, his son, George, inherited the land. George
Bixby hired Harry Phillips, Sr. to manage the land. Thousands of gum trees were planted and cattle
breeding was improved under Phillips. Around the turn of the century, Japanese farmers were allowed to
lease the coastal terraces of the Peninsula to plant vegetables.
                                                     5-41
In 1913, Bixby sold 16,000 acres of the Peninsula to New York investors led by Frank Vanderlip, Sr.
With E.G. Lewis, Vanderlip founded the Palos Verdes Estates in 1921. In 1923, lots were put up for
public sale. Construction in the area was slow, and several campaigns were made to attract buyers and
residents into the area. Large residences were being built in the area which is now the City of Rolling Hills.
In 1955, Frank Vanderlip, Jr. sold 7,000 acres of the remaining undeveloped areas of the Peninsula to the
Great Carbon Lakes Corporation. While the Great Carbon Lakes originally wanted to mine diatomite in
the Palos Verdes Hills, after the sale they designed a planned community for the area. The City of Rolling
Hills Estates incorporated soon after the residential areas developed. Growth was modest in the 1950's but
exploded in the 1960's through development by large corporations.
Today, residential developments in the City, typified by large houses enclosed within white rail fences, have
filled the hillsides. The rural atmosphere of the Peninsula has remained with large lot residential
developments and a generally low intensity of development. No structures are recorded on the UCLA
Archaeological Information Center's 1896 historic map of the area. The 1944 historic map shows some
roads and structures within city limits. Structures in excess of forty-five years of age are recommended for
evaluation for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
Aesthetic and Viewshed Resources
The location and topography of the City provides views of the ocean from the southern portion of the City
and the Los Angeles Basin from the northern portion of the City. In addition, the extensive trail network
provides an interconnected series of greenbelts giving residents additional views of the natural landscape.
North-facing views from the City are dominated by the varying Los Angeles basin townscape, while to the
south is the California coastline and the ocean. These views can be seen from many vantage points
throughout the City. Many wooded hills and canyons which cause views to vary from point to point are
themselves beautiful, adding to the panorama (refer to Exhibit 5-8).
The community has long recognized the need to preserve these views and has enacted legislation in the past
which regulates land uses, structures, and signing, to prevent the marring of this valuable resource.
Ongoing programs for City beautification have been in force for many years. These programs involve such
projects as street and median landscaping, park site acquisition and development, bicycle routes, and horse
trail improvements. Exhibit 5-8 indicates the major scenic corridors through the City. Viewshed areas are
also conceptually shown.
                                                     5-42

Within the City of Rolling Hills Estates, proposals for new residential construction and modifications to
existing structures are required to undergo review for neighborhood compatibility.
WASTE MANAGEMENT
Solid Waste Management
The City of Rolling Hills Estates' (City's) Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) has been
developed in response to Assembly Bill (AB) 939, the California Integrated Waste Management Act of
1989, and subsequent legislation. AB 939 requires each jurisdiction and county within the State of
California to prepare an SRRE that identifies existing solid waste management conditions, and describes
how the jurisdiction will meet the target waste diversion goals set forth in the law of 25 percent (%) by the
year 1995 and 50% by the year 2000. Each SRRE must contain goals and objectives statements that apply
to the entire plan.
The goals and objectives of the City are important because they provide direction and purpose within the
planning process. The City's goals are consistent with the direction and intent of AB 939 as summarized
below:
         # Promote the integrated waste management hierarchy within the City beginning with source
             reduction, recycling and composting, and then environmentally safe solid waste disposal.
         # Maximize the use of all feasible source reduction, recycling, and composting alternatives in
             order to reduce the amount of waste being disposed through transformation or land disposal.
         # Focus on managing special wastes by reducing the quantities generated at their source, by
             recycling or composting, or by other environmentally safe methods of disposal if these wastes
             cannot be reduced, recycled, or composted.
         # Attain broad public awareness of programs.
         # Expand all diversion programs and encourage broader public participation in the medium term
         # Consider multi-jurisdictionalapproaches to solid waste management and SRRE implementation
             including, as a minimum, public information, cooperative marketing, and subregional and
             regional collection and processing.
                                                   5-43
A solid waste generation study (SWGS) was conducted to quantify and characterize the solid waste
disposed and diverted, hence, generated, by the City.
During 1990, haulers reported that 14,581 tons of solid wastes were collected for disposal in the City.
Residents generate about 55% of this tonnage. Commercial and industrial sources contribute 45%.
Private and public sector recovery programs reported that about 6,044 tons of solid waste are diverted
annually from disposal. About 54% of this diversion occurs from residential sources.
By adding diversion and disposal quantities, it is calculated that about 20,625 tons of solid waste are
generated in the City annually. Residential waste accounts for 55% of this total, while commercial
represents 35% of the remaining 45%. The balance is generated by industrial sources (basically
construction and debris). When existing diversion is divided by existing generation, then the existing rate
of solid waste diversion equals about 29%. This percentage of diversion exceeds the short term goal of
25% diversion by 1995 as mandated by AB 939, but falls short of the medium-term goal.
When examining the wastes that are available for diversion in the future, the SWGS identifies: wastepaper
(36%) including newspaper, corrugated containers, high grade ledger, and brown paper bags: yard waste
(16%) representing prunings and leaves and grass; and other organic wastes (27%), including food wastes,
wood wastes, tires, manure, textiles, and disposable diapers.
Another key aspect of the SWGS in that the City is the most intensively commercialized of all the Peninsula
Cities, having 162 retailers within its border. The retailers generate a large share of the wastes disposed,
which is somewhat different from adjoining cities of the Peninsula area which are more residential in
character.
Source reduction simply means to avoid generating waste. Source reduction represents the highest level
of the waste management hierarchy and consists of a variety of activities including, but not limited to,
at-source composting, the use of cloth diapers, repair of appliances, two-sided copying, and use of ceramic
mugs over disposable cups. Some of these activities are now being used in the private sector and by
residents. The SWGS identified the reduction of 230 tons of solid waste per year in the City, or about
1.1% of the waste generated annually.
Since the City fully supports the concept of source reduction, it will encourage the continuance and
expansion of such source reduction activities in both the short and medium term planning periods.
                                                    5-44
A curbside collection program for recyclables is operated in the City, so the City is reasonably familiar with
the issues, costs, and opportunities presented by diversion activities. The City does not actually undertake
the collection but, rather, contracts out services to the franchise refuse hauler. The City currently conducts
limited office paper recovery, collection of bulky items and repairables, and wood chipping for trail
maintenance. In addition, there are several in place private sector diversion efforts involving wood-green
waste recycling. All told, the existing level of diversion amounts to 3029 tons of waste per year, or 14.7%
of the solid waste generated annually.
Composting has played a key role in the management of wastes in the City, and it is projected to continue
to play a key role for the target green wastes such as yard wastes and other readily decomposable
materials. The existing amount of diverted wastes to composting equaled 849 tons per year, or
approximately 4% of the total wastestream.
The City does not plan to site immediately any facilities for composting within the City limits. It does intend
to provide for the efficient collection of compostable wastes, and to direct its attention and energies on
helping to develop the markets for composting products through such activities as proactive procurement
of composted products.
It is estimated that composting programs will divert about 590 additional tons of waste per year in the
medium term, increasing the contribution of composting in the overall diversion effort to approximately 1440
tons per year.
Hazardous Waste Management
Hazardous chemicals are prevalent in modern society, not only in commercial and industrial operations, but
also in houses and apartments. Household hazardous substances are typically small quantities of a wide
variety of household products. These small quantities vary from a small container of chemical drain opener
to five-gallon containers of paint. Included are the containers that hazardous chemicals were in when
purchased and those that stored the wastes at one time or another. Hazardous substances can be found
throughout the home, garage, garden, and hobby shop as constituents in products such as cleaners, paints,
pesticides, and glue. Once these hazardous products and their containers are no longer needed by the
consumer, they become Household Hazardous Waste (HHW). Improper disposal of HHW can pose a
risk to human health and the environment.
Until recently, programs to properly manage HHW were virtually non-existent, resulting in wastes being
disposed in the garbage, down the sewer, into storm drains, or directly onto the ground. The improper
disposal of hazardous substances can result in refuse workers being exposed to hazardous chemicals,
equipment damage, contamination of groundwater and surface water, and potential hazardous waste
leachate generation from municipal solid waste landfills. Ultimately, improper disposal of HHW can lead
to costly environmental and economic consequences.
                                                       5-45
Rolling Hills Estates Disposal Characterization Study indicated that in 1990, less than 150 tons of HHW
were generated by City residents and disposed in all area landfills. This represents nearly one percent of
the annual municipal solid waste stream.
To develop the HHWE, the City undertook a series of planning steps that identified potential and actual
alternatives to ensure reduction, recycling, composting, and safe disposal of HHW. The seven steps
consisted of:
         # Establish goals and objectives of the City.
         # Review existing conditions.
         # Describe alternatives for a potential program.
         # Evaluate alternatives.
         # Configure alternatives into diversion systems and make recommendations.
         # Portray implementation timeline, task requirements, and costs.
         # Develop a monitoring and evaluation strategy.
To establish the goals and objectives of the City, meetings were held with key City decisionmakers to solicit
input on public awareness and concerns.
The City also assembled key documents and information about private and public sector characteristics
and activities concerning MM. This information was relied upon to identify local conditions that were
instrumental in actual evaluation.
Based on local conditions, the City was included in a set of all four Peninsula Cities. This set represented
a rational grouping based on common sets of characteristics. This grouping was used only as the initial
design basis for program development, but as the costs of HHW are high for the volume of material, this
grouping may prove invaluable later when the City and adjoining Peninsula Cities strive to implement their
programs.
Using local conditions and the goals and objectives, the City evaluated several potential alternatives that
could be configured to form a program. Initially, all alternatives were screened in a preliminary manner to
eliminate those alternatives that would prove untenable for the City and Peninsula area for economic,
environmental, institutional, technical, or marketing reasons.
Following, remaining alternatives were fully evaluated against 10 basic criteria required by the California
Integrated Waste Management Board (CIWMB). Several additional criteria
                                                     5-46
used in the development of the companion Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) were not used
since they were not relevant to HHW.
These criteria are grouped into cost, technical and institutional areas. Each was applied to the remaining
alternatives, yielding a high (H), medium (M), or low (L) result. High ratings were positive for alternatives
and inferred greater success in implementation, while low ratings were negative and implied greater difficulty
in implementation. Based upon this analysis, alternatives were selected and configured into a system for
HHW management.
The results of the evaluation indicated that the County program, periodic collection, recycling, public
education, and monitoring (at collection of municipal trash) are the most appropriate alternatives for the
City.
The selected HHW alternatives for the City are as follows:
         # County program (existing but expanded).
         # Periodic collection on a quarterly basis (includes Unical's program and abovementioned
             County effort).
         # Public education.
         # Monitoring (hauler conducted activity as waste collected).
         # Recycling programs.
The eventual overall HHW management system for the City will be a combination of existing and new
efforts. The overall program provides for HHW reduction, collection, and recycling supported by an
extensive public information and education effort.
The effectiveness of any HHW program is dependent upon the success of the public education program.
The education program should be designed to create widespread public awareness of diversion activities
taking place in the community an to motivate residents and non-residents to participate in the HM
programs.
The City plans to coordinate with the other cities located on the Palos Verdes Peninsula in developing its
educational and public information program. Together, the cities in the Palos Verdes area can design an
extremely effective educational and public information program, while at the same time avoiding a
duplication of efforts.
                                                    5-47
                                    SECTION 6.1 INTRODUCTION
The Open Space and Recreation Element of the Rolling Hills Estates General Plan establishes a
long-range program for the preservation of open space areas in the City and the provision of recreation
areas and facilities to serve the needs of residents. The Element includes an inventory of both public and
private open space and plans for the continued protection of these areas.
The Open Space and Recreation Element fulfills the requirements of Section 65560 to 65570 of the
California Government Code regarding the preparation of an open space plan for the City. Open
space and recreation issues are brought together with this element because of the interdependence between
the two. Areas preserved as open space are valuable resources for both outdoor recreation and scenic
enjoyment.
Open space refers to land or water which is unimproved and devoted for the preservation of natural
resources, for outdoor recreation or for public health and safety concerns. Open space includes habitats
of wildlife species, streams, agricultural land, groundwater recharge areas, areas with mineral deposits,
trails, parks, outdoor recreation areas, utility easements, and scenic highway corridors. Open space lands
may also include areas requiring the regulation of hazardous conditions such as earthquake fault zones,
unstable soils, flood plains, and watersheds.
The preservation of open space is necessary for the enjoyment of outdoor recreation, the protection of
public safety, and the preservation of important natural resources. As a limited and valuable resource in the
City, open space areas must be preserved in spite of development pressures for urban land uses. Likewise,
parks and other public recreation areas require protection from development pressures.
The Open Space and Recreation Element is closely related to the Conservation Element. Both elements
deal with the preservation of natural resources. By designating an area as open space, its natural resources
are protected from destruction.
                                                      6-1
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
            6-2
                               SECTION 6.2 GOALS AND POLICIES
The Open Space and Recreation Element establishes a long-range program for the preservation of open
space areas in the City and provides for recreation areas and facilities to serve the needs of residents. The
preservation of open space is tied to outdoor recreation, public safety and the use of natural resources.
Open space areas must also be preserved to protect the rural character of the City. The following goals
and polices aim for the continued availability of open space areas, parks and recreational facilities for
residents of the City.
Issue: Maintain Existing Open Space
Open space areas in the City contribute to rural character of the area and provide recreational
opportunities. Continued growth puts pressure on open space areas for their development to more urban
uses.
Goal 1:          Maintain existing natural open spaces, parks and recreational facilities
Policy 1.1               Preserve natural open space areas and design future recreational facilities to
                         protect the local natural environment for present and future generations.
        1.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use policy and
        the Park Facilities Plan contained in this element.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department and Community Services Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 1.2               Maintain the rural and lower density character of Rolling Hills Estates which is
                         defined by the presence of wide open spaces and low density development.
        1.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use policy.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 1.3       Preserve and enhance the natural environmental and cultural heritage of the
Peninsula and of the City of Rolling Hills Estates.
                                                     6-3
        1.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will adhere to the requirements and provisions of the
        Open Space Plan.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 1.4               Cooperate with neighboring cities, the County and the State in the planning for
                         recreational and open space programs to preserve and enhance the Peninsula's
                         natural environment and cultural heritage.
        1.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will contact neighboring jurisdictions to identify
        programs where joint use and cooperative agreements are possible.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Community Services Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 1.5               All efforts should be made to preserve existing open space areas and other
                         undeveloped land where appropriate.
        1.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use policy and
        the Park Facilities Development Plan.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding General fund
Issue: Recreational Areas
The recreational needs and interests of a community are largely served by local parks and facilities. Rolling
Hills Estates will continue to provide diverse recreational opportunities for local residents.
Goal 2:          Provide for the recreational needs of residents of the City.
Policy 2.1               Promote a cooperative, neighborly and cultural community by encouraging
                         recreational programs which stimulate, educate and enrich the lives of residents.
                                                    6-4
       2.1.1 Implementation Measure: The Community Services Department will continue to work
       with arts organizations to establish and promote arts and cultural activities in the City. The City will
       implement the Park Facilities Development Plan.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Community Services Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.2             Cooperate in sharing a Peninsula-wide system of parks and recreational facilities.
       2.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will contact neighboring jurisdictions to share plans
       for a Peninsula-wide system of parks and recreation facilities.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Community Services Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.3             Many of the open space and park areas are currently designated for very low
                       density residential uses. They should be redesignated to reflect their actual use and
                       to ensure future open space, recreational, or park use.
       23.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement its General Plan Land Use policy and
       zoning ordinance which indicates areas that will be preserved from future development.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.5     Encourage the use of vacant school sites for recreational use.
       2.5.1 Implementation Measure: Staff review of future development proposals for school sites
       will examine potential reuse of school sites for recreation use. The City will implement the Open
       Space Plan and the Park Facilities Development Plan included in this Element.
                                                   6-5
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department and Community Services Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 2.6               Encourage local citizens groups to participate in the planning, development and
                         maintenance of recreational facilities.
       2.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will establish an "Adopt-a-Park" program as a means
       for residents to provide equipment for existing and future facilities.
                Timing: 1993
                Agency: Community Service Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 2.7               Preserve and promote the equestrian and hiking trail network within the City of
                         Rolling Hills Estates.
       2.7.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the Trails Plan included in the Open
       Space and Recreation Element.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Community Services Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 2.8               Provide a permanent site for an Equestrian Center, similar to what now exists and
                         prepare a general design and operational plan for the facility.
       2.8.1 Implementation Measure: The City will identify the future City Equestrian Center in the
       Capital Improvement Program. The General Plan Land Use Policy and the Parks Facilities
       Development Plan indicates a future equestrian center could be included in the future development
       of Palos Verdes Landfill.
                Timing: 1994 for CIP programming
                Agency: Community Services Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 2.9      Review and amend as appropriate ordinances relating to equestrian facilities within
                residential areas. The ordinances must take into consideration storage
                                                   6-6
                  facilities for feed, bedding, equipment, manure removal, emergency water storage, safe
                  interior height and minimum stall and corral size per horse.
         2.9.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will review the Zoning Ordinance and make
         appropriate revisions. Revisions regarding required minimum corral size will be made part of the
         proposed Hillside Development Guidelines.
                  Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                  Agency: Planning Department
                  Funding: General fund
Policy 2.10                 Identify a location for a Community Center.
         2.10.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan Land Use Policy and
         undertake the necessary zoning ordinance revision to accommodate a Community Center.
                  Timing. 1993
                  Agency: Planning Department
                  Funding: General fund
Issue: Development of Open Space, Parks and Recreational Facilities
Additional development of open space, parks and recreational facilities should accompany growth and
development in the City. Preservation efforts will allow the City to maintain its rural character and the
quality of the environment.
Goal 3:           Develop additional parks and recreational facilities and preserve open space
                  areas under private ownership.
Policy 3.1                  Encourage property owners to contribute lands to the City for open space and
                            recreational use. One such organization involved in preserving open space in the
                            City is the Pepper Tree Foundation.
         3.1.1 Implementation Measure: Any land set aside or dedicated for open space will have deed
         restrictions to ensure land is reserved for open space.
                  Timing. Immediate and ongoing
                  Agency: Planning Department
                  Funding: General fund
                                                        6-7
Policy 3.2                Seek County, State and/or Federal funds or the possibility of sharing funds with
                          other agencies and organizations to acquire additional parkland or develop
                          additional facilities.
        3.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will identify a staff person or consultant to evaluate
        the feasibility of obtaining grants for new park development where funds are available.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Community Services Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 3.3                Develop plans for financing the acquisition of open space areas should they be
                          placed on the market by current property owners.
        3.3.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will identify potential sources of funds for the
        acquisition of future parkland and facilities.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Community Services Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 3.4                Review and revise ordinances (such as the Quimby Ordinance) to require builders
                          and developers to provide lands and/or funds for acquisition and development of
                          land for recreational use.
        3.4.1 Implementation Measure : City staff will review the current park development fee
        ordinance to determine whether or not the appropriate fees are being charged.
                 Timing: 1993
                 Agency: Planning Department and Community Services Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 3.5       Maintain or increase current ratio of parkland to population. The current ratio of parkland
                 to City residents must be maintained or increased and not be less than the current ratio of
                 6.7 acres of parkland for every 1,000 residents.
                                                     6-8
       3.5.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will ensure that the current parkland service ratio is
       maintained through the environmental review process.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Community Services Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 3.6      As stated in the Transportation Element (Policy 3.1), encourage the development of
                connections between existing trails where feasible.
       3.6.1 Implementation Measure: The CommunityServices and Planning Departments will review
       future development proposals to identify potential connections to the trail system. Future trails must
       be consistent with the Multi-use Trail Plan.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department and Community Services Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 3.7      Proposed subdivision developments, new construction, and additions should be reviewed
                for compliance with the City's trail plan, and the improvement programs outlined in the
                Open Space and Recreation Element.
       3.7.1 Implementation Measure: Expand the discretionary review process currently followed for
       the Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance to include recreational open space, and trail needs.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department and Community Services Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 3.8              The City will work with property owners, community organizations and other
                        agencies so that existing multi-use trails are maintained where appropriate.
       3.8.1 Implementation. Measure: The City Planning and Community Services Departments will
       identify all easements that have been recorded and examine the status of the easements.
                Timing: Begin in 1994
                Agency: Community Services Department and Planning Department
                Funding: General fund
                                                   6-9
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
           6-10
                     SECTION 6.3 OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PLANS
INTRODUCTION
While the majority of the City is developed, there are large areas of the City which are presently
undeveloped. These areas include Open Space set aside for parks, commercial recreation, and trails.
This section of the Open Space and Recreation Element establishes a hierarchy of park facilities, and
corresponding standards that can be utilized for the development of new parks and recreation facilities and
the improvement of existing ones. Finally, a detailed inventory of existing open space and recreational
facilities is provided in the Background Report (Section 6.4).
This element indicates open space and park development standards for the City. The standards for
recreational facilities apply to those that presently serve the City as well as those which will be developed
over the life of the Plan.
In considering the application of the Open Space and Park Facilities Development Plan, the following issues
need to be considered.
          #       Open Spore Resources. The City's lower density character, the character and nature of
                  past development, the area's varied topography, and the community's concern with the
                  preservation of environment has resulted in the preservation of a substantial amount of
                  open space. A major focus of the General Plan and the Open Space and Recreation
                  Element is the continued preservation of the remaining open space in the City.
          #       Park Facilities. The City needs to continue to provide facilities for both passive and
                  active recreation in the City. As a result, parks and facilities must continue to provide
                  athletic facilities, picnic areas, and play areas for small children.
          #       Equestrian Facilities. The majority of the City is located within an equestrian overlay
                  zone and interest in preserving the equestrian character of portions of the community
                  remains strong. As a result, many of the recreational facilities in the community are directed
                  towards equestrian users.
          #       Multi-use Trail Facilities. The entire City is linked by a system of trails that are used by
                  equestrians, hikers, and bicyclists. These facilities will be maintained and new trails
                  developed over the life of this General Plan.
                                                        6-11
        #        Environmental Resources. The City is rich in natural and cultural resources which
                 warrant preservation. A major objective of the Open Space and Recreational Facilities
                 Plan will be to preserve these resources for the future enjoyment and education of the
                 region's residents.
OPEN SPACE PLAN
The Land Use Element and map provides for a number of land use designations that will be effective in
preserving and maintaining open space. These land use designations include the following:
        Open Space: This land use designation applies to public lands reserved for open space, parks,
        equestrian facilities, and other public facilities containing large undeveloped areas. This category
        also includes privately owned land that has been reserved for open space through development
        agreements and/or dedications.
        Commercial Recreation: This category of land use applies to golf courses (existing and future)
        and private clubs. Activities included in this category typically have large amounts of open space.
The Land Use Element and the Open Space and Recreation Element also include a number of Overlay
Zones. These Overlay Zones include the following:
        Horse or H Overlay: This overlay designation applies to those areas of the City where horses
        are permitted. Areas of the City within the "H" Overlay designations are connected with equestrian
        trails. The Horse Overlay Zone is indicated in Exhibit 6-1.
        Parks Development Overlay: The General Plan policy provides for new park facilities in certain
        areas of the City. The purpose of the designation is to indicate, in a generalized way, the location
        of future facilities that are envisioned under the Open Space and Recreational Facilities Plan.
        Multi-use Trails: The Open Space and Recreation Element includes a plan for trails
        development. This Trails Plan identifies both existing and future trails in the City. The Multi-use
        Trails Plan is shown in Exhibit 6-1.
The Open Space and Recreation Element establishes a classification system that applies to all existing and
future park and recreation facilities in the City. Specific standards have been developed for each category
of park and facility that address their spatial requirements, function, and improvements.
                                                      6-12


A specific policy included in this element calls for the City to maintain or increase the current ratio of 6.7
acres of open space for every 1,000 persons living in the City. This objective reflects the community's
desire to maintain or increase the ratio of parkland to residents which existed at the time of the preparation
of the General Plan.
The community understands that while the population may fluctuate, the City does not want to lose the open
space resources which were in the public domain at the time the policy was written
PARK FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Parks Classification and Standards
Parks that provide picnic areas, athletic fields, game courts, or even areas for passive activities will continue
to play an important role in meeting the recreational needs of the community. Parks in the City of Rolling
Hills Estates have been placed into four categories. Specific criteria and standards for each park
classification are listed below and summarized in Table 6-1.
         #        Mini Parks. Mini-parks are specialized facilities designed to serve a concentrated
                  population and/or a specific target group such as preschool-aged children or the elderly.
                  Facilities of this type should be located near higher density residential development such
                  as apartments, condominium developments, and senior housing, in urbanized areas where
                  acquisition of larger park units is unlikely.
         #        Neighborhood Parks. Parks in this category provide for both active and passive
                  recreational activities and include a variety of facilities. In the City of Rolling Hills Estates,
                  a number of neighborhood parks have equestrian facilities.
         #        Community Parks. Community park facilities generally provide a diverse range of
                  facilities and equipment. Park facilities in this category may include a variety of athletic
                  fields, tennis and other game courts as well as equestrian facilities. This category of parks
                  generally offers a wide range of recreational amenities to the surrounding community which
                  may include athletic complexes, riding arenas, swimming pools, picnic areas, and
                  playgrounds.
         #        Special Use Parks.. Special Use Parks are those which are developed for a specific type
                  of use. The equestrian facilities, South Coast Botanical garden, the arts center, and golf
                  courses fall into this category.
                                                       6-13
                                                     Table 6 - 1
                                              PARK LAND STANDARDS
      Type            Size          Area per 1000       Service Area           Location           Usual Facilities
                                       Persons                                                     and Remarks
Neighborhood     3 to 5         0.25 to OS acres per Approximately 1/4 In highly developed     Children's play area,
park             acres          1,000 persons        mile radius       neighborhoods where     landscaping,
                                depending on other                     neighborhood park       picnicking, open
                                available services                     land is unavailable     play area for pick up
                                (17-33 acres total)                    and there are no other  sports and riding
                                                                       services.               rings.
                                1.0 to 2.0 acres per Approximately    Preferably adjoining    Play areas, multi-
                                1,000 per persons    mile radius       an elementary school    purpose courts,
                                (66-132 acres total)                   near the center of a    tennis courts, picnic
                                                                       neighborhood unit.      areas, open turn
                                                                                               area, on-site parking
                                                                                               optional.
Community Park   10 to 20 aces  5.0 to 8.0 acres per Approximately 1   At or near the          Baseball, football,
                                1,000 persons (320   to 2 mile radius  intersection of major   softball, soccer,
                                to 520 acres total)                    or secondary            tennis and other
                                                                       thoroughfares near      active athletic areas,
                                                                       center of service area. community center,
                                                                                               children's play area,
                                                                                               on-site parking,
                                                                                               restrooms, picnic
                                                                                               areas and riding
                                                                                               rungs.
Special Use Park No size        5.0 to 8.0 acres per Citywide          Wherever                Botanical gardens,
                 constraints    1,000 persons when                     appropriate.            lagoons, sports
                                it provides one or                                             complexes, open
                                any combination of                                             space, marine
                                community park                                                 refuges, etc.
                                services.
                                Otherwise, no spec
                                standard.
  Park Dedication Standards
  The State of California Planning and Zoning Laws and the Subdivision Map Act Code Section 66477 (The
  Quimby Act), indicates that the City Council may, by ordinance, require the
                                                      6-14

dedication of land, the payment of fees, or a combination of both, for park and recreational purposes as a
condition to the approval of a final map or parcel map. In cases where such dedication/fees have not been
obtained for particular lots through a map, they may be imposed at the time that building permits are issued.
Among other requirements, the following conditions must be met:
         #          The ordinance must include definite standards for determining the proportion of a
                    subdivision to be dedicated and the amount of any fee to be paid in lieu thereof; and
         #          The legislative body has adopted a General Plan containing a Recreation Element, and any
                    proposed park and recreational facilities are in accordance with definite principles and
                    standards contained therein.
In conformance with this statute, the City of Rolling Hills Estates Open Space and Recreation Element
includes standards determining land requirements for future park sites. This element indicates standards that
will be considered in selecting sites for parks and these standards should serve as guidelines governing the
acceptance of land dedicated to the City for parks development. Future acquisition will focus on acquiring
land for neighborhood parks as well as obtaining easements and property for trails. In addition, these same
standards will apply to the development of a future equestrian facility proposed within the Palos Verdes
Landfill. The following guidelines should be adhered to when acquiring land for future park development:
         #          The site should have water, storm drains, sewer and electricity available.
         #          The site should provide an adequate amount of land area required for the particular park
                    being developed.
         #          The site of a future park, when not attached to a school, should have street frontage.
                    On-site parking should be required.
Parks Development Program
This section of the Parks Development Program responds to the community's desire to both maintain the
existing facilities and to provide for additional facilities where this is feasible. The recommendations contained
herein are based on recommendations drawn from the goals and policies developed by the General Plan
Advisory Committee and by City staff.
The General Plan and the Open Space and Recreation Element promote the development of a number of
new parks and the upgrading of facilities in the City.
                                                          6-15
          #       George F. Canyon Neighborhood Park/Ecology Center. A number of policies call
                  for the creation of a new parkland area and the development of a nature/ecological center
                  on a parcel southwest of the intersection of Palos Verdes Drive North and Palos Verdes
                  Drive East. A nature center will describe the local ecology and cultural resources found in
                  the area. This area is to be maintained as "natural parkland" with native landscaping.
          #       Dapplegray School Site - Neighborhood Park. The entire site has been designated
                  as Institutional in the land use plan.
          #       Ernie Howlett Park. Encourage use of the park by renovating the athletic fields including
                  baseball and soccer fields, continue with improvements to the picnic shelters, volleyball
                  courts, basketball courts, handicapped access and an expansion of the existing grandstands
                  for the tennis courts.
          #       Pepperwood Park. The City is considering the development of Pepperwood Park as a
                  mini-park and/or greenbelt.
EQUESTRIAN FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A significant number of recreational facilities in the City are devoted to equestrian uses. The General Plan
and the Open Space and Recreation Element promotes the development of a new equestrian center and the
upgrading of other equestrian facilities in the City. The major features of the Equestrian Facilities
Development Plan involves the development of a new equestrian center as part of the redevelopment of the
Palos Verdes Landfill for Commercial Recreation. The equestrian center proposed within the landfill site
would be linked to the City-wide system of trails.
MULTI-USE TRAIL PLAN
A number of policies included in both this element and the Resource Management Element are concerned
with the maintenance and continued development of a City-wide system of hiking, biking, and equestrian
trails in the City. Precise development standards for the various types of trails are difficult to establish since
trail width and gradient will depend on topography, surface features, and availability of an easement. For
planning purposes, three categories of trails are considered in the City of Rolling Hills Estates General Plan:
          #       Bridle and Hiking Trails - Should be well defined and maintained to a maximum of 20'
                  and a minimum width of 8'. The graded width of the path should be 10' where possible. A
                  grade of 0 to 15% is desirable though a maximum grade of 30% is permitted for distances
                  up to 200 feet. The hiking trails should not be paved but left in their natural condition with
                  a minimum of change to the existing topography.
                                                       6-16
# Multi-Use Trail - This category of trail may be used by equestrians, bicyclists and hikers.
  The bikeway and hiking trail will be developed in a similar fashion to that found in the
  hiking/bike trail. The equestrian trail is separated from the hiking and bicycle trail by a
  planting and/or fence, space permitting. A sample cross-section of this type of facility is
  included in Exhibit 6-2.
# Way-Side Parks - Park-like areas or open spaces adjacent to riding or hiking trails should
  be provided at intervals of the heavily used trails. These wayside parks will be developed
  to enhance the multiple-use character of the trails.
                                      6-17
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
            6-18

                                 SECTION 6.4 BACKGROUND REPORT
INTRODUCTION
The Open Space and Recreation Element Background Report provides an inventory of open space, vacant
land, and parks and recreational facilities in the planning area. Also, a recreational needs assessment helps
to identify the adequacy and the accessibility of existing parks.
Vacant land in the City includes undeveloped private land or public areas retained for open space. Open
space areas include those areas unsuitable for development due to steep slopes or unstable ground
conditions. Other open space areas remain undeveloped in order to comply with existing land use controls.
These include parks, building setback areas, utility easements, school fields and equestrian trails.
Vacant Lands and Open Spy
The Palos Verdes Peninsula rises from the floor of the Los Angeles Basin to a 1,200-foot elevation in the
Palos Verdes Hills. The Peninsula spans an area of nine miles, from north to south, by four miles, from east
to west, encompassing over 22,000 acres. The City of Rolling Hills Estates covers 4.18 square miles in the
central and northeastern portions of the Peninsula. The Palos Verdes Hills, crossing through the southeastern
portion of the City, provide elevations ranging from 300 feet, in the canyons and gullies located throughout
the area, to 1,200 feet, the highest point on the Peninsula.
The City is relatively built out with fairly low density development in most areas. The land use analysis shows
that while there are large undeveloped areas in the City, many of these areas are not suitable for
development. They generally feature steep slopes or serve as water drainage courses. Although much of this
land best serves as open space, only the George F. Canyon is designated as open space at the present time.
Other areas, under private ownership, remain undeveloped at the property owner's discretion.
Field surveys were conducted in the summer and fall of 1990, as part of the General Plan program, to
identify the location and distribution of development in the City. The information was mapped, using the
ARC-INFO and AUTOCAD computer software to provide an accurate depiction of existing development
and the distribution of land uses.
The City's open space includes quarry land (the Chandler quarry); vacant land (parcels where future
development may occur); parks; trails; private open space (consisting of golf courses and other
private recreational facilities) and other open space such as unimproved gullies, greenbelt, steep hillsides
and canyons. Exhibit 6-3 shows the location and types of open space in the City. Open space areas,
scattered throughout the City, are mostly undeveloped due to steep slopes. Table 6-2 summarizes the open
space areas within the City.
                                                        6-19

                                                     TABLE 6-2
                                       OPEN SPACE/VACANT LAND
                                    Land Use Acreage                            Acreage
                                          Quarry                                 127.0
                                          Vacant                                  49.4
                                        Open Space                                32.6
                                            Park                                  52.5
                                           Trails                                200.0
                   Source: City of Rolling Hills Draft Housing Element, 1990.
                            David Evans and Associates, 1991.
Existing Parks mid Recreation Facilities
The Rolling Hills Estates Community Services Department maintains and operates 7 public parks, parkways,
equestrian trails, the Municipal Stables, a tennis club, and all recreation services in the City. The seven City
parks, excluding the George F. Canyon and the Municipal Stables, have a total area of 52.5 acres. Table
6-3 identifies and describes the public recreational facilities that serve the City and Exhibit 6-3 shows their
location. In addition to the parks and recreational facilities, the City offers a full range of recreational
activities for its residents. These activities include:
         #         Annual City Celebration - commemoration of the anniversary date of the City on the third
                   Saturday of September.
         #         Tracy Austin Tennis Tournament - tennis tournament for two consecutive weekends in July
                   at Rolling Hills Estates Tennis Club.
         #         Cross Country Run - 5K and 10k runs along horse trails and bike paths in the city.
         #         Seasonal Recreation Programs - classes in aerobics, equestrian, tennis, volleyball, and
                   sports camps (baseball, soccer, basketball, T-ball, and swimming).
         #         Summer Swim Program - swimming, lessons and recreation swimming at Rolling Hills High
                   School Swimming Pool during summer.
                                                         6-20
            #        California Driving Classic event.
            #        Cultural Activities - music, dance and theater programs (Peninsula Ballet, Peninsula
                     Symphony, Norris Community Theater).
                                                     TABLE 6-3
                                      PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
           Facility/Address                  Size                                     Facilities
Ernie Howlett Park                      35 acres       4 one-wall handball courts, basketball court, sand volleyball
25851 Hawthorne Blvd                                   court, 3/4 mile running track with 9 exercise stations, bicycle path,
between Palos Verdes Drive                             and playground equipment, fire pit and picnic area, two Little
North and Rolling Hills Road                           League fields, and playfield, barn, 2 riding rings, a dressage
                                                       arena, & show grandstand.
Rolling Hilly Estates Tennis Club       3.5 acres      8 tennis courts, a patio, refreshment center, and grandstand
Ernie Howlett Park
Highridge Park                          10.5 acres     Game fields, tot lot, multi-use equestrian trail, par-course, picnic
Corner of Highridge Road and                           area, and public parking.
Crestridge Road
Chandler Park                           2 acres        Equestrian riding ring, volleyball court, open grass field for kite-
Northwest of City Hall at corner of                    flying, Frisbee, baseball, and picnics.
Crenshaw Blvd and Palos Verdes
Drive North
Pepperwood Park                         1.5 acres      Open landscaped area.
Northwest corner of Crenshaw
Boulevard and Palos Verdes Drive
North; at City Hall
Dapplegray Park                         0.5 acres      Bridle trails, riding rings, lunging ring, dressage arena, parking.
Northwest corner of Palos Verdes
Drive North and Palos Verdes Drive
East
Silver Spur Park                        1.5 acres      Open grass field for picnics.
Southwest corner of Silver Spur Road
and Palos Verdes Drive North
                                                         6-21
                                                    TABLE 6-3 - Contd
                                       PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
           Facility/Address                   Size                                     Facilities
Rockbluff Park                           3 acres        Childrens Playground
End of Rockbluff Drive cul-de-sac
Municipal Stables                        7 acres        112 corrals to stable horses, train in riding, care and feeding of
25401 Crenshaw Blvd                                     horses, sponsors competitions, shows and lessons, 3 riding rings
                                                        and 2 hotwalkers
Dapplegray School Site                   12.9 acres     Baseball and soccer fields
George F Canyon Open Space               36 acres       Preserved open space
Eastern section of City near Palos
Verdes Drive North and Palos Verdes
Drive East
South Coast Botanic Gardens              87 acres       Botanic gardens over former landfill, plant and birds, gardening
Between Rolling Hills Road and                          classes, bird walks, library, tours. This facility is owned by Los
Crenshaw Blvd.                                          Angeles County and is located within an unincorporated county
                                                        area. It is bounded on three sides by the City of Rolling Hills
                                                        Estates.
Source: Rolling Hills Estates Resident Handbook, 1985; City of Rolling Hills Planning Department, 1990.
  A number of private recreational facilities are also available in the area. They are listed in Table 6-4. Private
  parks and recreational facilities within residential developments in the City include tennis courts, riding rings
  and playgrounds designed to serve neighborhood residents.
                                                        Table 6-4
                                        PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                       Facility/Address                                               Description
   Jack Kramer Tennis Club                                  13 tennis courts, swimming pool, paddle tennis courts, etc.
   11 Montecillo Drive
   Rolling Hills Country Club                               18-hole golf course, 4 tennis courts, clubhouse, dining
   2700 Palos Verdes Drive East                             area and bar.
   Empty Saddle Club                                        Horse stables, equestrian and jumping ring, roping and
   39 Empty Saddle Road                                     cutting arena, and clubhouse.
   Seahorse Riding Academy                                  Hunter/jumper training facility, stables, riding rings,
   26411 Crenshaw Blvd, north of Palos Verdes Drive         lessons.
   North
   Dapplegray Lane Property Owners Association              Riding arena, lunging arena, community center building.
   Community center
                                                          6-22

                                                     Table 6 - 4
                                       PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                     Facility/Address                                             Description
 Rolling Hills Park Estates Stable and Peninsula         Horse stables and training facilities.
 Riding Club
 (Fritdjof) Nansen Feld                                  Park and playfield; This facility is owned by Norwegian
 Hidden Valley Road                                      Seamen's Home and maintained by the Norwegian
                                                         government for the use of its Merchant Marines.
 Source: Rolling Hills Estates Resident Handbook, 1995; City of Rolling Hills Planning Department, 1990.
Trails
Recreational facilities in the City of Rolling Hills Estates and throughout the Palos Verdes peninsula are
centered around equestrian activities. Fully developed trails in the City cover approximately 16 miles and
200 acres of land. Bridle trails range from eight to twenty feet wide with a minimum 10-foot right-of-way.
White three-rail fences line the trails in most areas. (Over 50,000 linear feet of railing is found in the City.)
Exhibit 6-1 shows developed equestrian trails, riding rings and related facilities in the City.
The Horse Overlay Zone ("H" Zone) covers the majority of the northern and eastern sections of the City,
as shown in Exhibit 6-1. This zone allows horses to be stabled and ridden for personal recreation. Stables
and riding rings are also found in a number of private developments. The City sponsors and actively
encourages the presentation of rodeos, equestrian parades, horse and carriage shows and other equestrian
activities.
There are 10 miles of designated bikeways along major roads in the City. They interconnect with bikeways
of adjacent cities to form an integrated system throughout the peninsula. Exhibit 6-4 shows bikeways in the
City. The Transportation Element includes a description of bicycle trail development standards.
Golf Courses
The Rolling Hills Country Club, in the City of Rolling Hills Estates, is one of three golf courses on the
Peninsula. It features an 18-hole course and is located in the northeast quadrant of the City, just south of
the Chandler quarries. The two other golf courses on the Peninsula are the Los Verdes Country Club in
Rancho Palos Verdes and the Palos Verdes Country Club in Palos Verdes Estates.
                                                       6-23

School Facilities
Some schools in the Palos Verdes Unified School District feature tennis courts and playfields which are
available for public use after school hours if prior arrangements are made with the schools. Schools in and
near the City include Peninsula High School, Rancho Vista Elementary School, Ridgecrest Intermediate
School (closed), Silver Spur Elementary School, and Dapplegray Intermediate School (closed).
During the summer, the Rolling Hills Estates Recreation Department opens the swimming pool at Peninsula
High School for public use. A variety of swimming lessons are offered to members. The Little League Park
at Dapplegray Intermediate High School is also available for public use.
Other Facilities
Points of interest in the Palos Verdes Peninsula include the Wayfarer's Chapel, Palos Verdes Country Club,
Los Verdes Country Club, the Malaga Cove Plaza, and the Peninsula Shopping Center, and Shops at Palos
Verdes. The many parks on the Peninsula include the Los Verdes County Park, Point Vincente Park and
Interpretive Center, Point Fermin Park, Pacific beaches, and Cabrillo Marine Museum.
The South Coast Botanic Gardens, located between Rolling Hills Road and Crenshaw Boulevard, is
bounded on three sides by the City of Rolling Hills Estates. The site was formerly a canyon and landfill which
was filled with approximately 3.7 million tons of trash between 1957 to 1965. The Garden is owned and
operated by Los Angeles County and has an exhibition hall and a gift shop, as well as several acres of plants
and trees. Garden sales, concerts, and plant shows are held year-round.
PARKS NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The recreational needs of City residents vary widely and depend on the type of household, number of
children, age and the avocational interests of the household. The City is well-known for the equestrian
facilities (both public and private) that are available to residents. The extensive network of equestrian trails,
the stables and riding rings, and the rural character of the eastern half of the City reflect this interest. Other
specialized facilities of obvious interest to local residents include tennis courts, golf courses, and athletic fields
for organized sports such as Little League baseball and soccer.
Some areas of the City are developed at higher densities ranging from the typical single-family subdivision
to multiple-family housing, consisting of condominiums and apartments. Residents living in multiple-family
housing units (which are of a limited number in the City) would be more likely to utilize picnic facilities and
passive open space areas than residents living in homes situated on larger lots.
                                                        6-24
The National Parks and Recreation Association (NPRA) has established area standards for parkland. These
standards recommend a minimum of 2.5 acres of parkland for every 1,000 residents. The City of Rolling
Hills Estates, witha 1990 population of 7,789 persons, would require approximately 19.3 acres of parkland
to meet the minimum NRPA standards. As discussed earlier, there are a total of 52.5 acres of parks and
recreational facilities in the City, providing a more than adequate share of parkland for its residents.
Another NPRA criteria for park provision is accessibility. Small parks are generally accessible to the area
within 1/4 mile from the park and neighborhood parks are accessible to areas within a  mile radius. Most
residential neighborhoods are within easy access to a park. An abundance of parks and facilities are
available to residents living north of Palos Verdes Drive North. As a result of the opening of Highridge Park,
the lack of public parks in the southwestern section of the City in the higher elevations has been addressed.
This service area analysis is constrained by other factors that determine accessibility, including manmade and
natural barriers, distance to a major highway or freeway and available site facilities.
The City standard for parkland is currently 4 acres per 1,000 population. With a 1990 population of 7,789
and a total park acreage of 525 acres, the City is approximately 22 acres over its own standard. Exhibit 6-5
illustrates the park standard in comparison to existing facilities.
The project team (consisting of both consultants and City staff) surveyed existing recreational facilities and
identified issues and/or needs for each facility that should be considered in future planning. These needs are
summarized below:
          #       Chandler Park. Future plans for this park are limited to providing more tables and picnic
                  facilities, and possibly a tot lot. Residents living near the park are opposed to the
                  construction of any additional equestrian arenas because of problems with dust.
          #       Pepperwood Park. This park is actually a small landscaped area on the north corner of
                  Crenshaw Boulevard and Palos Verdes Drive North, adjacent to City Hall. Possible
                  improvements appropriate for the area include a small nature trail, a water conservation
                  demonstration garden, a picnic area or a tot lot.
          #       Rock. bluff Park This parcel was originally developed as residential until it experienced a
                  landslide in 1960 (the site is on top of fill material). The City made efforts to stabilize the
                  surface though the fill is still shifting.
                                                           6-25


        #         Dapplegray Park. This park is used primarily for equestrian activity. Existing
                  improvements include a dressage ring, lunging ring (bull pen) and a large oval ring. The
                  major issues related to the continued operation of this facility include availability to the public
                  and the need for continued maintenance of the footings. The City recently passed an
                  ordinance restricting the park's use by commercial trainers during certain times of the day
                  to ensure that the rings are available to the general public.
        #         Silver Spur Park. There are presently no plans for further development or improvements
                  to this park.
        #         Ernie Howlett Park. . This park has extensive facilities ranging from an equestrian center
                  to ball fields. Potential improvements planned for the area include shelters for picnic tables
                  and tot lot equipment.
        #         Highridge Park. A new neighborhood park has been developed and opened as part of
                  the adjacent residential projects. This 103-acre facility includes athletic fields, a picnic area,
                  tot-lot, par-course, hiking and riding trail and parking.
        #         Municipal Stables. This facility is located on a former landfill and some areas are
                  experiencing shifting. The site is an interim location for stables and long-term plans called
                  for the site to be developed as a golf course by Los Angeles County, the owners. The
                  Recycling Center has been relocated on the landfill site.
Other areas that have been examined for future park development include two properties in the City. One
City-owned parcel is located at the southwest corner of Palos Verdes Drive North and Palos Verdes Drive
East, adjacent to George F. Canyon and the adjoining equestrian trail.
The other site is the closed Dapplegray School, owned by the Palos Verdes Union School District. The City
has negotiated with the School District in the past for the purchase of the site. A study by the District for the
reuse of the site will determine future uses. The local little League currently utilizes ball fields located on the
property.
                                                       6-26
                                     SECTION 7.1 INTRODUCTION
The Noise Element of the Rolling Hills Estates General Plan establishes guidelines for controlling noise in
the City. The Noise Element examines the characteristics and effects of noise, describes state and federal
guidelines relating to noise control, evaluates the existing noise environment, and discusses the future noise
environment anticipated in the future. The Element also identifies sensitive land uses and noise sources with
the intent of separating these uses.
As mandated by the California Government Code Section 65302(f), the Noise Element follows the
guidelines established by the Office of Noise Control of the State Department of Health Services.
The Noise Element indicates noise levels from traffic along major roads and highways. Noise contours are
used to illustrate noise levels in areas adjacent to major roadways. The noise contour maps identify existing
noise levels in the City and noise levels anticipated from future traffic.
The noise mitigation program in the Element explores these options along with noise insulation standards
and land use compatibility along major roadways which are the major sources of noise in the community.
                                                       7-1
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
            7-2
                               SECTION 7.2 GOALS AND POLICIES
The Noise Element establishes guidelines for controlling noise in the City. Excessive noise levels disturb and
disrupt of human activities and affect the health of individuals. The goals and policies of the Noise Element
provide measures to minimize noise problems in the community to protect public health. With the majority
of the planning area devoted to residential uses which are especially sensitive to noise it is important that
noise be controlled at the source.
Issue: Acceptable Noise Levels
Excessive noise levels disrupt human activities and often results in health problems. To support ongoing
activities and protect the residents of Rolling Hills Estates, levels of tolerance for noise should be
established.
Goal 1:           Implement acceptable noise levels guidelines included in the Noise
                  Element for each land use category.
Policy 1.1                Adopt the acceptable noise levels for land uses established by the California
                          Department of Health and as adopted by the City of Rolling Hills Estates in the
                          Noise Element.
         1.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review applicable ordinances to ensure that
         they reflect noise guidelines established as part of the Noise Element.
                  Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                  Agency: Planning Department
                  Funding: General fund
Policy 1.2                Limit the time and levels of noise from construction and maintenance equipment
                          and activities, especially in residential areas.
         1.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to implement the City's Noise Control
         Ordinance and other applicable ordinances so that specified hours can be set for construction and
         maintenance activities.
                  Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                  Agency: Planning Department
                  Funding: General fund
                                                       7-3
Policy 1.3            The City will continue to implement the City's Noise Control Ordinance.
      1.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to implement the Noise Control
      Ordinance. The time limits designed to reduce construction noise impacts will be reviewed to
      ensure they are consistent with other regulations and ordinances.
              Timing. Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.4            Require all proposed or remodeled pool equipment to be enclosed in structures
                      with sound dampening doors.
      1.4.1 Implementation Measure: The zoning ordinance will be revised accordingly.
              Timing: 1993
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.5            The City will respond to noise complaints associated with household equipment
                      in a timely manner.
      1.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to implement the Noise Control
      Ordinance.
              Mining: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: Planning Department
              Funding: General fund
Policy 1.6            Respond in a timely manner on noise complaints.
      1.6.1 Implementation Measure: The Planning Department will monitor both complaints and
      enforcement of the noise control ordinance. City staff will review current agreements and contracts
      with the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department to determine the responsible agency for
      enforcement of noise control ordinance.
                                                 7-4
               Timing. Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.7              Ensure that schools, medical facilities and other noise sensitive land uses are
                        located in areas where noise levels are within acceptable ranges as defined by the
                        City's Noise Element.
      1.7.1 Implementation Measure: Noise sensitive land uses must not be located within areas
      subject to ambient outdoor noise levels in excess of 65 dBA unless effective mitigation can be
      identified. The acceptable noise level should not exceed 55 dBA where no mitigation is possible.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.8              Continue to encourage good acoustical design in new construction.
      1.8.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will implement the Noise Control Ordinance which
      establishes criteria and design guidelines for noise reduction.
               Timing. Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 1.9              Residential development adjacent to major arterial roads shall be designed to
                        reduce noise impacts from traffic.
      19.1 Implementation Measure: Future residential development will be subject to noise
      standards regulating exterior ambient noise levels as defined by the Noise Compatibility guidelines
      outlined in the Noise Element. The noise contour map included in the Noise Element will be
      referred to in identifying future development that would be subject to these regulations.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
                                                   7-5
Issue: Noise Control
When noise sources cannot be prohibited without undue hardship, measures for minimizing potential
adverse noise impacts on noise-sensitive land uses should be established.
Goal 2:          Promote the control and reduction of traffic noise and stationary noise
                 created on existing and proposed land uses.
Policy 2.1               Work with surrounding jurisdictions to limit excessive noise due to aircraft
                         operations, review established flight corridors, and review new development
                         proposals that will involve aircraft operations.
        2.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will designate a staff person to review cumulative
        projects which could result in significant increases to ambient noise levels due to helicopter
        operations, traffic, or machinery. The City will oppose any project that will result in a significant
        adverse impact on the environment unless the impact can be mitigated.
                 Timing: 1993
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 2.2               Control the movement of heavy construction vehicles through the City to minimize
                         noise impacts and enforce the hours of operation.
        2.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will amend the Noise Control Ordinance, if
        necessary, to minimize noise impacts from heavy construction vehicles. In addition, staff will work
        with the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department to enforce regulations related to speed and
        weight of vehicles on City roadways.
                 Timing. 1993
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 2.3               Preserve the natural ambient noise environment as much as possible.
        23.1 Implementation Measure: All development proposals will be reviewed by staff as part
        of the environmental review process to determine the nature and extent of potential stationary and
        mobile noise impacts. CEQA review of all projects will be closely
                                                    7-6
monitored to ensure that noise impacts are identified and adequately monitored to minimize
potential noise impacts.
        Timing: Immediate and ongoing
        Agency: Planning Department
        Funding: General fund
                                        7-7
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK.
            7-8
                             SECTION 7.3 NOISE REDUCTION PLAN
INTRODUCTION
Residents in the City of Rolling Hills Estates are exposed to a wide range of noise levels that are common
in a suburban environment. Major noise sources in the City include automobiles traveling on the major
roadways that traverse the City. In addition, stationary noise sources within the City also generate noise
affecting noise-sensitive uses located nearby. These stationary noise sources may include a wide range of
recreational, commercial, and business activities.
A number of major issues related to noise in the City include the following:
         #       The major mobile noise sources include vehicles operating on the major arterials that serve
                 the City: Hawthorne Boulevard, Crenshaw Boulevard, Palos Verdes Drive North, Palos
                 Verdes Drive East, Silver Spur Road, and Highridge Road.
         #       Residential areas located near or adjacent to the major roadways are exposed to traffic
                 noise that often exceeds 60 dBA in many areas.
         #       The Peninsula Center Commercial District includes a concentration of retail commercial
                 activities whichgenerate substantial vehicular and pedestrian traffic along Silver Spur Road
                 between Hawthorne and Crenshaw Boulevards.
         #       Through traffic, traveling on major arterials, which often includes large trucks which are
                 responsible for much of the noise in the community.
The traditional definition of noise is that it is unwanted sound. Sound becomes unwanted when it interferes
with our normal everyday activities. Sound waves travel through air creating sound energy. This sound
energy can be measured using a variety of measurement scales. Various methods are used to evaluate the
loudness of a particular noise. The most commonly used units for measuring the level of noise are decibel
(dB), Equivalent Noise Level (Leq), and the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL).
A decibel is a unit used for measuring the intensity of so-and. A scale of 0 to 140 is used in which zero
represents the lowest sound that can be heard by humans and 140 is the rupture point of the eardrum
Exhibit 7-4 in the Noise Element Background Report provides an acoustical scale
                                                       7-9
illustrating the physical impact of various common noise generators. The Leq measure represents the
average of the sound levelenergy for a 1-hour period and employs an A-weighted decibel correction which
corresponds to the optimal frequency response of the human ear. The CNEL is based upon 24 1-hour Leq
measurements. The average noise levels for the late evening and early morning hours (the period between
10 p.m. and 7 am.) are weighted 10 decibels to compensate for the fact that people are much more
disturbed by noise at night than at any other time.
Another method of noise measurement commonly used is the day night average sound level system,
symbolized mathematically as Ldn. The Ldn system is very similar to the CNEL method. The day night
average sound level measures the 24-hour average sound level, expressed in decibels, obtained after the
addition of a 10 decibel penalty for sound levels which occur at night between 10 p.m. and 7 am.
Intermittent or occasional noise, such as noise associated with stationary noise sources, is not of sufficient
volume to exceed community noise standards that are based on a time averaged scale such as the CNEL
scale.
NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
The goal of the Noise Element is to protect the residents from excessive or irritating noise. The impacts
from noise can be eliminated or reduced through regulatory noise controls and responsible land use
planning.
Several federal and state agencies have developed guidelines relative to land use and noise. These agencies
include the Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Highway Administration, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, American National Standards Institute, and the State of California.
These agencies standards are based upon cumulative noise criteria, such as the Community Noise
Equivalent Level (CNEL) and Day-Night Average (Ldn). These guidelines represent weighted averages
of twenty-four 1-hour Leq measurements, with decibel weights assigned to the evening, night, and early
morning hours.
In 1976, the California Department of Health established noise element guidelines that contained a
recommended noise/land use compatibility matrix. The matrix, Exhibit 7-1, outlines acceptable levels of
noise for different land uses. The matrix is a good guide for noise responsive land use planning. These
standards displayed in the matrix for conditionally acceptable uses are relevant to Rolling Hills Estates. It
should be noted that transportation noises on public roads are regulated by State and Federal authorities
and therefore, local jurisdiction's ability to control these noise sources are severely limited.
                                                      7-10

Acceptable Noise Level
Acceptable noise levels (refer to Table 7-1) have been established for each of the land use districts
provided for in the General Plan. The established levels are based on existing noise levels obtained through
field monitoring, projected noise levels and community expectations to maintain an environment that is free
from all unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise. Table 7-1 indicates the acceptable noise level when
measured at the property line for each category of land use.
                                                         Table 7-1
                                                 ACCEPTABLE NOISE LEVELS
 Residential                                            55 dBA (day)                    45 dBA (night)
 Non-Residential                                        65 dBA (day)                    55 dBA (night)
 Industrial-Research*                                   65 dBA (day)                    45 dBA (night)
 Industrial Quarry*                                     75 dBA (day)                    45 dBA (night)
 * These land use categories are being eliminated
Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards
Noise/land use guidelines have been produced by a number of State and Federal agencies including the
Federal Highway Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, the American National Standards Institute, and the State of California. These
guidelines, presented in the following paragraphs, are all based upon cumulative noise criteria such as Leq,
Ldn, or CNEL.
          #         Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In March 1974, the EPA
                    published "Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Required to
                    Protect Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety"
                    (EPA 550/9-74-004). According to this publication, 55 Ldn is described
                    as the required noise level to provide an adequate margin of safety for
                    areas with outdoor uses including residences and recreational areas. The
                    EPA report does not establish standards, specifications or regulations, but
                    identifies safe levels of environmentalnoise exposure without consideration
                    for economic cost to achieve these levels.
                                                           7-11
         #       Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The FHWA has adopted and published
                 noise abatement criteria for highway construction projects. The FHWA noise abatement
                 criteria, basically, establishes an exterior noise goal of 67 Leq for residential land uses and
                 an interior goal of 52 Leq for residences. The noise abatement criteria applies to private
                 yard areas and assumes that typical wood frame homes with open windows can achieve
                 a 10 dB noise reduction when windows are closed.
         #       State of California. The state requires every city and county to adopt noise elements
                 as part of their general plans. Noise elements must contain a Noise/Land Use compatibility
                 matrix. A recommended (but not mandatory) matrix is presented in the "Guidelines for the
                 Preparation and Content of Noise Elements and the General Plan", (Office of Noise
                 Control, California Department of Health, February 1976). This matrix is reproduced here
                 in Exhibit 7-1.
A number of federal agencies have adopted standards and recommended noise criteria to protect people
in both the working and home environments. In 1969 and 1970, the Department of Labor established
occupational noise regulations through the Walsh Healey Public Contracts Act and set standards for noise
exposure for all businesses engaged in interstate commerce through the Occupational Safety and Health
Act (OSHA).
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) has set design standards for various land uses. These
standards are used in the planning and design of federally funded highway projects. The Department of
Housing and Urban Development has environmental criteria for determining project acceptability of HUD
assisted housing and financial assistance programs. It includes noise standards of 65 dB Ldn for residential
noise levels. The State of California has adopted noise standards for areas not regulated by the federal
government. State standards cover noise from motor vehicles, freeway noise affecting classrooms, noise
insulation, occupational noise and airport noise. The California Motor Vehicle Code sets noise limits for
vehicles according to type of vehicle and date of manufacture.
California Streets and Highways Code Division 1, Chapter 1, Article 6 requires State funded noise
abatement programs for freeway construction or use which will result in noise levels exceeding 55 dBA L
10 or 52 dBA Leq at existing classrooms, libraries, multi-purpose rooms, and pupil personnel services of
public and private elementary and secondary schools. The noise
                                                       7-12
abatement program may include acoustical treatment, eliminationof windows, sir conditioning, sound buffer
structures and other mitigation measures.
Sound Transmission Control Standards in the California Administrative Code, Title 24, Building Standards,
Chapter 2.5 outline noise insulation performance standards for new hotels, motels, apartment houses, and
dwellings other than detached single-family units. It requires an interior noise level of 45 dB CNEL or less
for residential projects. For projects near noise sources (airport, major roads, and industrial areas), an
acoustical analysis must be made to show compliance with the standards.
The California Office of Noise Control has prepared guidelines for the preparation and content of General
Plan Noise Elements. The guidelines include a chart to describe the compatibilityof noise sensitive land uses
in areas subject to noise levels of 55 to 80 dB CNEL or Ldn (refer again to Table 7-1).
Implementation of the Land Use Plan
As discussed, the primary sources of noise in the City comes from traffic on major arterial roadways. These
noise sources impact the land uses located along these transportation routes. Residential development will
contain noise sensitive uses that include senior housing. This type of use will not be a great contributor to
greater noise but will be sensitive due to the type of users, as well as potential locations along the roadways.
The proposed land use policy for the City of Rolling Hills Estates will not result in any significant increases
in traffic generated locally. The ultimate reuse of Chandler Quarry and redevelopment of the Northrop site
will involve residential development which will generate substantially fewer trips compared to the current
uses. Localized increases in traffic could result from the Commercial/Recreation provided for the Palos
Verdes Landfill.
Increased traffic anticipated for the major roadways will result from growth outside the City, which in turn,
will result in increased noise levels along key roadways. This projected increase in noise is not expected
to be discernible by residents in the area however. Table 7-2 indicates the distance from the roadway
centerline to the noise level contours depicted in Exhibit 7-2. New development located in areas subject
to high noise levels should implement mitigation measures to reduce interior noise to acceptable levels.
                                                      7-13
                                                               TABLE 7-2
                                                  FUTURE ROADWAY NOISE (CNEL)
                                                                                 Distance (in feet) from Roadway Centerline to
       Roadway                                 From/To                                               CNEL (dB)
                                                                                                                  CNEL        Change
                                                                               65            60          55        @ 50          in
                                                                             CNEL         CNEL         CNEL         Feet       CNEL
Highridge Rd               Hawthorne/Crestridge                                 0          149.3        457.4      62.56        1.16
                           Crestridge/Crest                                     0          141.6        443.9      63.10        1.20
Silver Spur Rd             Crenshaw/Hawthorne                                103.6         308.9        970.6      65.93        1.23
                           Hawthorne/Willow Wood                              63.7         191.1        600.8      64.46        1.16
                           Willow Wood/Palos Verdes Drive N                  115.6         364.0       1150.5      67.83        1.13
Hawthorne Blvd             Silver Spur/Palos Verdes Drive N                  195.0         609.7       1925.8      69.14        1.14
                           Palos Verdes Drive N/City Limit                   239.1         749.1       2368.5      69.95        1.95
Rolling Hills Rd           Palos Verdes Drive N/City Limit                    67.3         210.4        664.4      65.44        1.14
Crenshaw Blvd              Crestridge/Silver Spur                            115.9         357.0       1125.8      66.90        1.20
                           Silver Spur/Palos Verdes Drive N                  215.0         674.0       2129.3      69.61        1.21
                           Palos Verdes Drive N/City Limit                   118.0         358.8       1129.7      66.67        1.17
Palos Verdes               City Limit/Silver Spur                             96.3         302.8        956.8      67.03        1.13
Drive North                Silver Spur/Hawthorne                             104.1         327.3       1034.6      67.37        1.17
                           Hawthorne/Crenshaw                                 78.5         246.1        777.6      66.13        1.13
                           Crenshaw/Rolling Hills                            154.0         485.8       1535.6      69.07        1.17
                           Rolling Hills/Palos Verdes Drive E                196.8         614.6       1941.0      69.09        1.19
                           Palos Verdes Drive E/City Limit                   197.5         614.5       1940.0      68.92        1.12
Palos Verdes               North City Limit/Palos Verdes Drive N              53.7         165.9        523.3      6435         1.15
Drive East                 Palos Verdes Drive N/South City Limit              79.4         225.9        705.7      64.53        1.13
* Changes in CNEL compared noise levels from existing traffic to projected traffic 50 feet from the roadway centerline. Table 7-4
describes existing noise levels
    The implementation of the land use policy is not likely to result in any significant changes in the ambient noise
    levels of the community. The implementation land use plan will result in changes in land use for a number of
    properties (refer to Exhibit 7-3) though the changes in land use are likely to be noise sensitive in nature.
                                                                  7-14


Major noise considerations for future planning involve cumulative noise impacts from traffic generated by
development located elsewhere in the Peninsula. Major transportation corridors where increases in
cumulative or through traffic is possible include Palos Verdes Drive East, Hawthorne Boulevard, and
Crenshaw Boulevard (also shown in Exhibit 7-3).
                                                  7-15
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
            7-16
                               SECTION 7.4 BACKGROUND REPORT
CHARACTERISTICS OF NOISE
The Noise Element Background Report discusses the characteristics of noise, the existing noise environment
in the Rolling Hills Estates, stationary and mobile sources of noise and projected noise levels at buildout of
the land use plan. It also provides state and federal guidelines for the control of noise levels and summarizes
the City's existing noise ordinance.
The traditional definition of noise is that it is unwanted sound. Sound becomes unwanted when it interferes
with our normal everyday activities. Sound waves travel through air creating sound energy. This sound
energy can be measured using a variety of measurement scales. Before the existing noise environment can
be described, a number of terms need to be explained. In addition, various methods are used to evaluate
the loudness of a particular noise. The most commonly used units for measuring the level of noise are decibel
(dB), Equivalent Noise Level (Leq), and the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL).
A decibel is a unit used for measuring the intensity of sound. A scale of 0 to 140 is used in which zero
represents the lowest sound that can be heard by humans and 140 is the rupture point of the eardrum..
Exhibit 7-4 provides an acoustical scale illustrating the physical impact of various common noise generators.
The Leq measure represents the average of the sound level energy for a 1-hour period and employs an
A-weighted decibel correction which corresponds to the optimal frequency response of the human ear. The
CNEL is based upon 24 1-hour Leq measurements. The average noise levels for the late evening and early
morning hours (the period between 10 p.m. and 7 am.) are weighted 10 decibels to compensate for the fact
that people are much more disturbed by noise at night than at any other time.
Another method of noise measurement commonly used is the day night average sound level system,
abbreviated as DNL and symbolized mathematically as Ldn. The DNL system is very similar to the CNEL
method. The day night average sound level measures the 24-hour average sound level, expressed in
decibels, obtained after the addition of a 10 decibel penalty for sound levels which occur at night between
10 p.m. and 7 a-m. Intermittent or occasional noise, such as noise associated with stationary noise sources,
is not of sufficient volume to exceed community noise standards that are based on a time averaged scale such
as the CNEL scale. The Percent-Noise Level (L percent) method is used in order to characterize and
evaluate intermittent noise. Ibis method gauges the percentage of time that intermittent noise exceeds the
average decibel level during the measurement period.
Traffic noise in a community is often illustrated using noise contours. Noise contours represent lines of
equal noise exposure, just as the lines on a weather map indicate equal temperature or
                                                       7-17
atmospheric pressure. The contours provide visualestimates of sound levels. The City's topography will have
an effect on noise transmission from automobiles. In addition, noise in the canyons will be altered due to
echoing effects. Generally, barriers (whether manmade or natural topography) located between a source
and receiver absorb or reflect noise resulting in a quieter environment. Where barriers or landforms do not
interrupt the noise transmission path, the contours are good estimates of average noise levels. However,
areas where barriers interrupt the transmission, noise contours overestimate the extent to which noise
intrudes into the community as it is virtually impossible to estimate each roadway segment for barrier noise
attenuation, when specific projects are proposed, a site specific acoustical analysis will evaluate noise
reduction provided by any barriers to the noise path. Noise contour maps are used in this report to describe
existing noise levels along key roadways in the City.
Existing Noise Environment
A noise survey was conducted on February 20 and 21, 1991 at seven locations around the City. The noise
measurement locations are shown in Exhibit 7-5 and the measurements are summarized in Table 7-3. The
background noise levels ranged from 60 dB to 63 dB. This indicates that the city has noise levels typical of
urban residential communities. Traffic along major roadways is the major source of noise. They include Palos
Verdes Drive North, Palos Verdes Drive East, Crenshaw Boulevard, Hawthorne Boulevard and Silver Spur
Road. Nonetheless, the City had relatively quiet residential areas. Occasionally, small planes and
motorcycles created high frequency noises throughout the City.
The noise measurements at the Rolling Hills Country Day School reflected noise levels for the intersection
of Palos Verdes Drive North and Crenshaw Boulevard. Readings ranged from 72 dB to 86 dB. These were
mostly due to the roar of traffic on the intersection, motorcycles, running buses, and student noises from the
school. The site location was surrounded by trees and was located 60 feet from the road, 4 feet higher than
the road elevation. The distance from the surrounding roadway and the surrounding vegetation may have
buffered the noise levels coming from the road.
The intersection of Palos Verdes Drive North and Hawthorne Boulevard has noise levels ranging from 64
dB to 80 dB. The measurement site was Rock Bluff Park on the southwest corner of the intersection. It was
an open area 50 feet from the street and 1 feet lower in elevation than the road. Noise on site was
generated solely by road traffic.
                                                      7-18



                                                            Table 7-3
                                              EXISTING NOISE MEASUREMENTS
   Site                                   Location                             Lmax       L10         L33      L50        L90
 1            Rolling Hills Country Day School                              86.0       81.4        77.8      76.5       72.8
 2            Rock Bluff Park                                               80.0       76.3        73.8      72.2       66.8
 3            Rolling Hills High School                                     78.0       72.0        70.0      68.3       66.0
 4            Peninsula Center - The Village (commercial)                   86.0       80.0        76.1      74.5       71.0
 5            Cresta Verde (residential)                                    76.0       68.5        62.5      62.9       61.6
 6            Remax Realty                                                  88.0       83.0        79.2      77.9       74.3
 7            Aurora Street (residential)                                   80.0       69.9        64.0      64.6       62.6
 Lmax - the maximum sound level recorded during the noise measurement period.
 L19 - the sound level exceeded 10 percent of the noise measurement period.
 L33 - the sound level exceeded 33 percent of the noise measurement period.
 L50 - the sound level exceeded 50 percent of the noise measurement period.
 L90 - the sound level exceeded 90 percent of the noise measurement period; Also considered as the background noise level
 Source: David Evans and Associates, 1991
Noise levels at the Rolling Hills High School were dominated by traffic on Hawthorne Boulevard and Silver
Spur Road. Student noise was minimal. Vehicle horns and motorcycles generated high pitched noises
intermittently. Noise levels ranged from 64 dB to 78 dB at a location 90 feet from Hawthorne Boulevard
at approximately the same elevation as the roadway. The site was on a walkway leading to the school
buildings and was separated from the roadway by a surface parking lot with a 4-foot wall and a landscaped
yard with trees.
The Peninsula Center is the commercial node of the City. Noise readings along Silver Spur Road by The
Village showed a noise range of 65 dB to 86 dB. Commercial activities provided the background noise with
road traffic dominating the noise levels. The site location was 20 feet from the roadway and approximately
10 feet above the road elevation. The wind speed at this site was observed to be greater than at other sites,
registering as an additional noise sour.
A residential street, Cresta Verde, was relatively quiet with noise ranging from 60 dB to 76 dB. Noise
sources included small airplanes flying overhead, cars passing or climbing a steep driveway
                                                              7-19
Residential activities which caused minor noise included garden watering, garage opening, piano playing,
doors closing, birds singing, peacocks and other animals, horses, barnyard animals, and humanconversation.
The intersection of Palos Verdes Drive East and Palos Verdes Drive North experienced the highest
percentage of high level noises. They ranged from 72 dB to 88 dB attributed primarily to traffic noise and
car stereo noise. The site was 35 feet from Palos Verdes Drive North and 2 feet higher in elevation than the
roadway with no trees or walls to separate the site from the roadway. The higher percentage of loud noises
at this site may be due to the time of the survey period which was nearer peak hour traffic than the survey
periods for other intersections.
Aurora Street is a residential street in the northeastern section of the City. Noise levels, here, ranged from
61 dB to 80 dB. The site was relatively quiet except for the hum of traffic on nearby streets, probably Palos
Verdes Drive North. The high levels recorded were due to dogs, small airplanes overhead, and occasional
cars. Like the noise environment on Cresta Verde, the area was dominated by noise from residential
activities and birds.
Calculated Traffic Noise Levels
Residents of Rolling Hills Estates are exposed to a wide range of noise levels. Major noise sources include
automobiles, trucks and the sand and gravel quarry operations. Transportation noise comes from major
arterials - Hawthorne Boulevard, Crenshaw Boulevard, Palos Verdes Drives North and East.
The predominantly residential development of the city makes it noise sensitive for the most part. Other uses
which may be disturbed by noise include schools, churches, and hospitals.
Existing traffic noise along major roadways was calculated using the Federal Highway Administration's
Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (FHWA - RD-77-108), December 1978. The distances from
existing roadway centerlines to the 55, 60, 65 and 70 dB CNEL contour lines are provided in Table 7-4
with the contours plotted in Exhibit 7-6.
                                                     7-20

                                                       TABLE 7-4
                                     EXISTING ROADWAY NOISE LEVELS (CNEL)
                                                                       Distance (in feet) from Roadway Centerline
       Roadway                        From/To                                          to CNEL (dB)
                                                                 65 CNEL          60 CNEL       SS CNEL      At 50 Feet
Highridge Rd     Hawthorne / Crestridge                               0               117           351         61.4
                 Crestridge/Crest                                     0               109           430         61.9
Silver Spur Rd   Crenshaw/Hawthorne                                  83               237           742         64.7
                 Hawthorne/Willow Wood                                0               147           460         63.3
                 Willow Wood/Palos Verdes Drive North                89               278           880         66.7
Hawthorne Blvd   Silver Spur/Palos Verdes Drive North               150               466          1472         68.0
                 Palos Verdes Drive North/City Limit                184               574          1811         68.0
Rolling Hills Rd Palos Verdes Drive North/City Limit                 52               161           508         64.3
Crenshaw Blvd    Crestridge/Silver Spur                              90               274           861         65.7
                 Silver Spur/Palos Verdes Drive North               165               516          1628         68.4
                 Palos Verdes Drive North/City limit                 93               275           864         65.5
Palos Verdes     City Limit/Silver Spur                              74               232           731         65.9
Drive North      Silver Spur/Hawthorne                               80               250           791         66.2
                 Hawthorne/Crenshaw                                  60               188           594         65.0
                 Crenshaw/Rolling Hills                             118               371          1174         67.9
                 Rolling Hills/Palos Verdes Drive East              152               470          1484         67.9
                 Palos Verdes Drive East/City Limit                 153               470          1483         67.8
Palos Verdes     North City Limit/Palos Verdes Drive N                0               127           400         63.2
Drive East       Palos Verdes Drive N/South City Limit               65               174           540         63.4
                                                          7-21
                                    SECTION 8.1 INTRODUCTION
The Public Safety Element of the Rolling Hills Estates General P l a n emphasizes the need for a
citywide approach for emergency preparedness and hazards prevention. The implementation of the Public
Safety Element programs and policies will reduce the potential for injury, damage and disruption due to
both natural catastrophes and man-made hazards. The Public Safety Element establishes safety standards
and programs designed to protect life and property.
As a State-mandated element, the Public Safety Element fulfills the requirements of Section 65302(g)
of the California Government Code and the State Planning and Zoning Law. The Element sets
goals and policies which address public safety issues of concern in the City. The Element provides the basis
for a public safety plan, identifying standards and programs to protect public safety and outlining adequate
facilities and services to meet the emergency needs of the City. Finally, the Element contains a
comprehensive program to deal with the different hazards and disasters which may occur in the planning
area.
The Public Safety Element also includes an inventory of both natural and manmade hazards such as
earthquakes, flood plains, landslides, geologic hazards, urban and wildfire, and hazardous materials/wastes.
In dealing with these issues, it is prudent to consider prevention as the first step in hazard mitigation where
it is possible. This is accomplished by elimination of the hazard, isolation/avoidance of the hazard, or the
regulation of land uses and structures in known hazard areas. Emergency planning involves the formulation
of strategies to minimize human injury, property damage, and economic and social disruption. Emergency
preparedness also focuses on those measures necessary to return the functions of the City to normal
conditions soon after a disaster.
                                                     8-1
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
            8-2
                                 SECTION 8.2 GOALS AND POLICIES
The Public Safety Element establishes goals, standards and programs to protect life and property. Potential
hazards due to the area's geology, seismic hazards, urban and wild fire potential, dam inundation and
flooding potential, hazardous materials contamination, and crime are also addressed in the following
policies. The goals and policies of the Public Safety Element call for the development of emergency plans
and procedures in case of a community-wide disaster and the elimination of hazards in the planning area.
Issue: Critical Facilities
Critical facilities refer to those facilities occupied by dependent populations (hospitals, schools, etc.) and
those that are designed to protect public health and safety. It is important that critical facilities remain
functional during disasters and emergencies so that they may continue to serve the rest of the City.
Goal 1:            To the fullest extent possible, the City will work with the County to
                   ensure that critical structures remain safe and functional in the event of
                   a disaster.
Policy 1.1         Ensure that existing critical and semi-critical structures throughout the City meet seismic
                   safety standards within ten years and that new facilities are developed to upgraded
                   standards.
         1.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will work with Los Angeles County Building and
         Safety Department and other agencies in ensuring that all proposed structures in the City meet
         current seismic safety code requirements.
                   Timing. Immediate and ongoing
                   Agency: Planning Department
                   Funding: General fund
Policy 1.2                  Designate and develop specific critical facilities as emergency centers to serve the
                            entire City and work with other Cities to maintain existing trauma care facilities that
                            serve the region.
         1.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will meet with other communities in the region to
         discuss the loss of trauma care centers in the region. The City will examine the feasibility of
         establishing the development of a critical/trauma care unit at one of the local clinics or hospitals in
         the region. The City will consider the establishment of such a facility as part of the discretionary
         review of future development proposals involving clinics, hospitals, or medical offices.
                                                        8-3
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.3             Work with the County to ensure that all fire equipment remains operable and
                       adequate to respond to a major disaster.
      1.3.1 Implementation Meas u r e : The City will work with the Los Angeles County Fire
      Department to ensure that fire protection services are maintained at adequate levels. City staff will
      monitor the City's fire protection rating and cooperate with the Fire Department in the correction
      of deficiencies.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.4             Cooperate with the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department to ensure that law
                       enforcement services are ready and available to serve the City in the event of a
                       major disaster.
      1.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will work with the Los Angeles County Sheriffs
      Department to ensure that law enforcement services are maintained at adequate levels. City staff
      will monitor the City's contract and budget with the Sheriffs Department to ensure that adequate
      service levels are maintained.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.5             Support earthquake strengthening and provision of alternative or backup services,
                       such as water, sewer, electricity, and natural gas pipelines and connections,
                       especially in areas of high seismic or geologic high hazard or where weak segments
                       are identified by existing or future studies.
      1.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will identify those active and potentially active fault
      traces as for special study. Future development within the areas will have to provide geotechnical
      studies indicating the location of the fault trace to proposed improvements and identify appropriate
      mitigation. The City will evaluate the seismic risk to existing
                                                      8-4
      infrastructure in these areas and where appropriate, examine the feasibility of mitigating the risk
      over time.
               Timing: 1993 for initiating study
               Agency: Planning Department and Public Works
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.6             Enforce seismic design provisions for Seismic Zone 4 of the Uniform Building
                       Code to ensure adequate review and inspection to ensure that stairways and
                       elevators are adequately strengthened and nonstructural components such as
                       emergency generators, water beaters, computers, and cabinets are securely
                       anchored in critical facilities.
      1.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will work with Los Angeles County Building and
      Safety Department and other agencies in ensuring that all proposed structures in the City meet
      current seismic safety code requirements.
               Timing. Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department/Public Works
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.7             Require fault investigations along traces of the Palos Verdes and Cabrillo faults to
                       comply with guidelines implemented by the Alquist-Priolo special Studies Zone
                       Act. Buildings for human occupancy should be setback a minimum of 50 feet from
                       those faults that are shown to be active or from fault traces where the risk cannot
                       be determined.
      1.7.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to use the UniformBuilding Code and
      update as necessary to ensure seismic safety.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department/Building & Safety Dept.
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.8             Require review by a structural engineer when a critical building or facility
                       undergoes substantial improvements.
      1.8.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will review existing ordinances to ensure that the
      appropriate review requirements are included within them. In addition, the Seismic
                                                     8-5
       Safety Ordinance will require a structural engineer to review development proposals within
       designated Special Studies Zones.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department/Public Works/Building & Safety Dept.
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 1.9              Require site specific geotechnical analysis in areas of potential liquefaction,
                        especially in and adjacent to the Chandler landfill.
       1.9.1 Implementation Measure: Future development within areas designated as having a
       liquefaction risk will be required to evaluate and mitigate the risk prior to development via the
       environmental review process.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department/Building & Safety Dept.
                Funding: General Fund
Issue: Future Development
The City can prevent the creation of additional hazards in the planning area through the review of proposed
developments, making sure that they are not exposed to existing hazards and do not create new ones to
adjacent land uses.
Goal 2:         Require that the City's Planning and Engineering Departments to review
                projects future development in the City.
Policy 2.1              Discourage development which is adjacent to earthquake faults and other
                        geological hazards.
       2.1.1 Implementation Measure: All development will comply with the Seismic Hazards
       Overlay Zone.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General Fund
Policy 2.2      Prohibit residential development on non-engineered fill of any kind.
                                                    8-6
      2.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to enforce the existing Uniform
      Building Code and the requirement to install methane barriers for new construction within the
      vicinity of the landfill.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.3               Develop stringent site design and maintenance standards for areas with high fire
                         hazard or soil erosion potential.
      2.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will work with the Los Angeles County Fire
      Department to review current standards for wildfire prevention. The City will work with the County
      Fire Department in improving standards and/or regulations where required.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.4               Regularly review the technical data on public safety and seismic safety for use in
                         the decision-making process.
      2.4.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will update and amend the Master Environmental
      Assessment when appropriate following the review of more site-specific geotechnical studies and
      reports.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department
               Funding: General fund
Policy 2.5               Continue to require preliminary investigations of tract sites by State-registered
                         geotechnical engineers and certified engineering geologists (Chapter 70 County
                         Building Code) and ensure regular inspection of grading operations.
      2.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to enforce existing Uniform Building
      Code and Safety regulations.
                                                    8-7
                Timing. Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 2.6               Encourage residents to plant groundcover to reduce the brush fire hazard in areas
                         adjacent to canyons, and to maintain native drought tolerant slope cover and
                         provide appropriate irrigation to maintain plant cover and prevent erosion.
      2.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will publish a brochure outlining groundcover that
      is effective in reducing the risk of wildfire. The brochure should be included with the City's quarterly
      newsletter.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department and City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Policy 2.7               Maintain storm drains to prevent local flooding and debris flows, and encourage
                         residents to assist in maintaining those drains that are the responsibility of the
                         homeowner.
      2.7.1 Implementation Measure: The City will cooperate with the Los Angeles County Public
      Works Department in maintaining storm drains in the City.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Public Works Department
                Funding: General fund
Policy 2.8               The City will continue to enforce the Water Conservation Ordinance adopted in
                         1991.
      2.8.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to implement the Water Conservation
      Ordinance and promote the use of drought-tolerant landscaping and irrigation.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: Planning Department
                Funding: General fund
                                                      8-8
Policy 2.9               Avoid construction in canyon bottoms and participate in the National Flood
                         Insurance Program. Require new development or expansion of existing
                         development adjacent to canyons to assess potential environmental impacts from
                         increased run-off and erosion and evaluate appropriate mitigation.
        2.9.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the General Plan's Land Use Policy
        and evaluate the flood hazard potential in future environmental review. The City will ensure that
        development within areas designated as a Flood Hazard Overlay Zone mitigate the potential
        flooding impacts.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 2.10              Continue to enforce a Class B Roofing Ordinance for new development but
                         encourage residents with wood shingle/unrated roofing materials to retrofit or
                         upgrade their roofs with resistant eaves and awnings.
        2.10.1 Implementation Measure: The City will continue to enforce existing ordinances and
        regulations that apply to roofing materials. The City will require old roofs to be removed prior to
        reroofing to increase fire-resistance of the structure.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: Planning Department/Building & Safety Dept.
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 2.11              Support the development of secondary water supplies for emergency water flow
                         needs in an emergency.
        2.11.1 Implementation Measure: The City will examine the feasibility of developing
        secondary emergency.
                 Timing: 1994
                 Agency: Public Works Department
                 Funding: General fund
Issue: Disaster Planning
So as to minimize the damage to life and property that natural and man-made disasters may cause, a plan
for prevention, preparedness and reconstruction will be developed.
                                                     8-9
Goal 3:        Plan and provide for the occurrence of disasters and emergencies.
Policy 3.1             Develop and coordinate medical assistance procedures in the event of a major
                       disaster.
      3.1.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will update the existing emergency preparedness
      plan and prepare an emergency preparedness brochure which will be distributed to the community.
               Timing: 1993
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General fund
Policy 3.2             Inventory and, where necessary, acquire supplemental disaster communication
                       equipment and other equipment, tools, and supplies.
      3.2.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will complete an inventory of supplies and
      personnel as described in the Emergency Preparedness Program outlined in this Element.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General fund
      3.2.2 Implementation Measure: A survey will be done by the City periodically to establish
      an inventory of equipment which could be used in the event of a major disaster.
Policy 3.3             Ensure that adequate provisions are made to supply drinking water for extended
                       periods of time in the event of a major disaster.
      3.3.1 Implementation Measure: City staff will inventory sources of potable water that could
      be used in the event of an emergency and the means to distribute that water to residents and others
      in the Planning Area.
               Timing. Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Public Works Department
               Funding: General fund
                                                 8-10
Policy 3.4              Develop procedures to follow in the event of flooding, erosion, and possible
                        reservoir failure and investigate ways of reducing the likelihood of their occurrence.
      3.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will review contingency plans developed for the
      Multi-functional Management Hazard Plan.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Policy 3.5              Ensure that the City Hall maintains a current emergency supply of water, food,
                        blankets, and first aid to provide for all employees for a 3 day period.
      3.5.1 Implementation Measure: A City staff person will be assigned the task of compiling
      a list of supplies and maintaining an adequate stockpile.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Policy 3.6              Encourage private businesses to develop disaster preparedness plans for their
                        employees.
      3.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will prepare and distribute a brochure outlining
      recommendations for stockpiling supplies for employees.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Policy 3.7              Support the development and further implementation of a peninsula-wide disaster
                        plan.
      3.7.1 Implementation Measure: The City will coordinate its disaster planning efforts with
      neighboring jurisdictions in the region.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
                                                    8-11
Policy 3.8             Increase public awareness of City emergency response plans, evacuation routes
                       and shelters, and in ways to reduce risks at the home and office.
      3.8.1 Implementation Measure: The City will prepare a brochure outlining procedures to
      follow in the event of a major disaster. The brochure will be distributed to every household and
      business in the City.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General fund
      3.8.2 Implementation Measure: The City will encourage the implementation of a City-wide
      Neighborhood Watch program.
               Timing: 1993
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General Fund
Policy 3.9             Establish and maintain a Multi-hazard Functional Plan, mutual aid agreement with
                       neighboring jurisdictions, and coordinate with the American Red Cross and Los
                       Angeles County Fire, Sheriff, and Public Social Services to develop specific plans
                       for responding to emergencies.
      3.9.1 Implementation Measure: The City will submit copies of its Multi-functional Hazard
      Management Plan to the Los Angeles County Fire and Sheriffs Departments for review. The City
      will review similar plans prepared by neighboring cities.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General fund
Policy 3.10            Coordinate emergency planning efforts with building managers of high-occupancy
                       facilities, dependant care centers (nursing homes, day care centers, etc.) and
                       critical facilities located in the City to facilitate emergency response.
      3.10.1 Implementation Measure: The City will send brochures outlining emergency
      procedures to all critical facilities. The City will cooperate with the Los Angeles County Fire
      Department during the inspection of these facilities.
                                                     8-12
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: City Manager
                 Funding: General fund
Issue: Individual Responsibilities
Individuals and agencies should take on the responsibility of protecting themselves from harm. Also,
assistance fromother individuals and agencies will provide the City with increased manpower and resources
to better protect public health, safety and welfare.
Goal 4:          Assign key Individuals In both the public and private sectors the
                 responsibility of implementing public safety programs.
Policy 4.1                Provide City officials with a basis for disaster preparedness decision making and
                          establish a public education program for disaster preparedness.
         4.1.1 Implementation Measure: The EmergencyServices Coordinator will conduct quarterly
         meetings with City personnel to ensure they are familiar with procedures outlined in the
         Multi-functional Hazard Management Plan.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: City Manager
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 4.2                Establish a line of command to ensure that the decision making process will
                          function satisfactorily in the event of a major disaster.
         4.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement the Multi-functional Hazards
         Management Plan which has been adopted by reference.
                 Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                 Agency: City Manager
                 Funding: General fund
Policy 4.3                Coordinate with the citizen groups and organizations to establish a viable body to
                          provide emergency assistance in the event of a natural disaster.
         4.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City Emergency Services Coordinator will work with
         local equestrian groups and other organizations to establish a Rolling Hills Estates Search and
         Rescue Team. The City will ensure that multipurpose trails are maintained in order to be serviceable
         by emergency vehicles in the event of a disaster.
                                                      8-13
                   Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                   Agency: City Manager/Public Works
                   Funding: General fund
Policy 4.4                Encourage cooperation among adjacent communities to provide back-up law
                          enforcement assistance in emergency situations.
        4.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will submit copies of its Multi-functional Hazard
        Management Plan to the Los Angeles County Fire and Sheriffs Departments for review. The City
        will review similar plans prepared by neighboring cities.
                   Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                   Agency: City Manager
                   Funding: General fund
Issue: Crime
The City of Rolling Hills Estates and the L.A. County Sheriff's Department will continue to work together
to provide residents with safety and security. Criminal activities will be met with measures designed to deter
criminal activity.
Goal 5:            Reduce local crime, to the greatest extent possible.
Policy 5.1                Work with, and support the Sheriffs Department in crime prevention and law
                          enforcement efforts, to make sure there are adequate resources to meet the needs
                          of the community.
        5.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will conduct an annual review of its contract with
        the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department to ensure current service standards are maintained.
        Alternatives will be considered if service levels are considered inadequate.
                   Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                   Agency: City Manager
                   Funding: General fund
                                                    8-14

Policy 5.2               Cooperate with neighboring cities, Los Angeles County, California State and U.S.
                         Federal agencies in crime prevention and law enforcement.
        5.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will cooperate with all law enforcement agencies
        in combating crime.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Policy 5.3               Evaluate the incidence of crime and develop measures needed to deter crime or
                         apprehend the criminals.
        5.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will monitor crime statistics for the peninsula and
        the City. The City will meet with Los Angeles County on a regular basis to discuss programs,
        ordinances, and other measures that will be effective in combating crime.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
Issue: Hazardous Materials
The unhealthful effects of certain chemicals and substances has led to extensive regulation of identified
hazardous materials. The City should be active in the regulation of the use, generation, transport and
disposal of hazardous materials in the City in order to protect the health and safety of residents.
Goal 6:         Reduce the potential for hazardous waste contamination in the City.
Policy 6.1               Restrict the travel of vehicles carrying hazardous material through the City.
        6.1.1 Implementation Measure: The City will ensure the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
        Department and the California highway Patrol enforce licensing and current laws regarding the
        transport of hazardous materials through the City.
                Timing: Immediate and ongoing
                Agency: City Manager
                Funding: General fund
                                                     8-15
Policy 6.2              Monitor and limit the use and production of hazardous materials by businesses and
                        industries in the City.
      6.2.1 Implementation Measure: The City will ensure that the Los Angeles County Fire
      Department conduct regular inspection of major users in the City. The Emergency Services
      Coordinator will monitor the results.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: City Manager
               Funding: General fund
Policy 6.3              Ensure that no hazardous materials are dumped in Chandler Quarry landfill or in
                        any other areas of the City.
      6.3.1 Implementation Measure: The City will work with Los Angeles County to ensure that
      periodic inspections of the Chandler Quarry are conducted.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department and City Manager
               Funding: General fund
Policy 6.4              Ensure that the Los Angeles County Sanitation District implements its closure and
                        reclamation plans for Palos Verdes Landfill.
      6.4.1 Implementation Measure: The City will meet with the Los Angeles County Sanitation
      District to review the District's reclamation and redevelopment plans. The City will cooperate with
      the District to ensure future development plans are consistent with those outlined in the General
      Plan.
               Timing: Immediate and ongoing
               Agency: Planning Department and City Manager
               Funding: General fund
Policy 6.5     Support County Hazardous Materials Management Plan (adopted by C.C. Ordinance
               516) objectives and enforcement of current Fire Code regulations regarding the storage
               of hazardous materials.
                                                   8-16
      6.5.1 Implementation Measure: The City's Emergency Services Coordinator will review
      current ordinances and practices to ensure that everything possible is being done to implement the
      County's Hazardous Materials Management Plan.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: City Manager
              Funding: General fund
Policy 6.6    Work to promote the safe use and disposal of household hazardous wastes.
      6.6.1 Implementation Measure: The City will implement those programs outlined in the
      Household Hazardous Waste Element.
              Timing: Immediate and ongoing
              Agency: City Manager
              Funding: General fund
                                                8-17
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
           8-18
                                SECTION 8.3 PUBLIC SAFETY PLAN
INTRODUCTION
This section of the Public Safety Element provides an assessment of risk for both natural and man-made
hazards in the city. In addition, the Element provides the basis for emergency preparedness in the city.
The following issues need to be considered in disaster and safety planning efforts:
        #        The City needs to coordinate with the County Fire, Sheriff, Area G Emergency Services
                 Coordinator, and City Administrator's Office to develop an effective Rolling Hills Estates
                 Multi-Hazard Function Plan. Emergency plans for the City of Rolling Hills Estates must
                 also reflect the nature of impacts likely to result from earthquakes, storms, and fires.
        #        The City needs to coordinate with County Public Social Services and the American Red
                 Cross to designate and operate emergency shelters and reception centers. Ideally, shelters
                 should serve as first aid stations, public information and emergency coordination centers,
                 as well as gathering and collection areas for displaced or evacuated people.
        #        In addition to regular training exercises, coordination with self-help neighborhood and
                 communitygroups is necessary to maintain the efficiency of the City's emergency response.
        #        Increased public awareness of City emergency response plans, evacuation routes, and
                 shelters, in addition to information on how to reduce risks at the home and office, improves
                 overall safety in the City.
        #        Provisions need to be made for traffic Control contingencies along City designated disaster
                 routes, especially for Palos Verdes Drive North which can become highly congested at
                 certain times of the day.
        #        The Newport-Inglewood Earthquake Scenario by Toppozada et al., 1989 needs to be
                 assessed in the development of emergency planning contingencies for the City. In addition,
                 a major earthquake on the Palos Verdes fault should also be used as a worst-case
                 earthquake disaster for emergency planning purposes.
                                                      8-19
         #         Reconstruction policies are necessary to guide rebuilding and reconstruction in the
                   aftermath of a major earthquake or other disaster. Rebuilding decisions often require
                   detailed structural analysis and geotechnical/geological studies. Some California
                   jurisdictions require studies if more than 50 percent of the property is damaged in a
                   disaster to ensure that repair is permanent and not a public safety hazard.
LAND USE POLICY AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Many of the safety issues that require consideration in future planning are directly related to Southern
California's seismic setting, while other issues are particular to the Peninsula's distinctive geologic and
topographic setting. Southern California is located in a seismically-active region of the world, experiencing
on average, an earthquake of Magnitude 4 or greater every four years.
The Los Angeles Basin is traversed by many active faults and folds associated with the boundary between
the North American and Pacific plates. Some of these faults include the San Andreas, Newport-Inglewood
and Palos Verdes. The basin is also subject to compressive forces responsible for many east-west trending
folds, including the Palos Verdes Hills, the Puente Hills, and the chain of hills and mesas that stretch along
the length of the Newport-Inglewood fault.
The climate, topography, and local geology also play important roles in defining the threat to the City from
fires and floods. The native soils and local climate sustain certain kinds of chaparral vegetation. The varieties
of chaparral found on the peninsula contains particularly high concentrations of volatile oils which are
extremely flammable. Areas where stands of this kind of vegetation are especially dense, such as along
canyon bottoms, are very susceptible to brush fires. The ridge and canyon topography also control where
the primary flood hazards in the City occur, primarily along canyon bottoms.
Rolling Hills Estates is largely developed into low and medium-density residential uses, with only smaller
areas designated for high-density residential and light commercial uses. Large-scale growth is not
anticipated to be a major planning factor in the coming years. Small-scale development will likely occur in
the form of infilling of isolated parcels and expansion of existing residential lots. Given the expected growth
pattern and environmental setting, certain safety planning issues are apparent. The following are findings,
selected and abbreviated to present principal safety planning issues.
                                                       8-20
# The City is at risk from strong ground motion from a number of nearby seismically active
  faults. Potential damage to new and most existing development will be slight to moderate
  though severe damage to vulnerable buildings cannot be precluded. Given the risk, critical
  facilities must be designed and maintained with a greater safety margin.
# A major earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood, Palos Verdes, Cabrillo, or
  Torrance-Wilmington faults has the potential for setting into motion multiple events,
  including injuries, crowd control problems, landslide-blocked roads, hazardous materials
  releases, and isolated structural damage and/or fires. A major earthquake on the Palos
  Verdes fault is a credible worst-case scenario and must be considered in the development
  of an emergency response plan.
# Certain localities of undeveloped land in the northeast section of the City are underlain by
  the Palos Verdes fault or man-made sediments prone to earthquake-induced ground failure
  (liquefaction), making any new development in these areas susceptible to damage.
# Small, potentially active landslides will continue to pose constraints to new development
  and enlargement of existing residential lots adjacent to canyons areas; and one postulated
  "Silver Spur Landslide Complex" remains a long-term threat unless its existence is
  adequately disproved.
# The failure of the Palos Verdes Reservoir is unlikely. If the dam is breached, the impact on
  Rolling Hills Estates would be minimal, as long as new development does not occur in the
  potential inundation zone.
# Flood risk in the City will remain low if canyon drainages remain undeveloped, although
  long-term planning for drainage devices may be needed to control runoff and prevent local
  ponding.
# Chaparral-filled canyon areas will continue to pose a significant fire hazard in the City,
  highlighting the need for strict enforcement of brush management and fire prevention
  programs. The risk of fire is as much influenced by brush hazards in neighboring
  jurisdictions.
# Hazardous materials accidents in the City are not likely to cause widespread impact,
  however, a major accident in neighboring industrial districts could effect the entire City.
                                     8-21
         #        The closed Palos Verdes Landfill received large volumes of wastes, some of which may
                  be hazardous materials, through the early 1980's; contamination is a site constraint, as well
                  as a threat to a shallow ground water aquifer underlying the Los Angeles Basin.
The degree of risk from these hazards are separated into three distinct categories:
         #        Acceptable Risk. Level of risk below which no specific action by government is deemed
                  to be necessary.
         #        Unacceptable Risk. The level of risk above which specific action by government is
                  deemed to be necessary to protect life and property.
         #        Avoidable Risk. Risk not necessary to take because individual or public goals can be
                  achieved at the same time, or less, total "cost" by other means without taking the risk.
Appropriate risk must be determined with maximum citizen input. In making this determination, the
appropriate planning response to a potential hazard involves the judgement, either expressed or implicit,
of the risk that is acceptable. There is no such thing as a perfectly hazard-free environment. Natural and
man-made hazards of some kind and degree are always present. However, efforts can be productively
undertaken to try to mitigate the consequences of known hazards.
For planning purposes, hazards, and the degree of risk in Rolling Hills Estates has been further refined. The
objective of the Public Safety Element is to provide the community witha comprehensive inventory of those
hazards that are a major concern in the community (geologic hazards, flooding, and fire hazards) and to
develop appropriate policies that address those hazards.
The Public Safety Element Background Report (Section 8.4 of this Element) provides a detailed inventory
of hazards in the city. For planning purposes this background information should be consulted to determine
the nature and extent of any hazards that may be present on a site. This section of the Public Safety Element
provides for a Hazard Management Overlay Zone which identifies those areas where some hazard is
present which will need to be considered or evaluated prior to any development proposal.
For planning purposes, the City of Rolling Hills Estates has been divided into a series of risk zones including
the following:
                                                     8-22
        #        High Risk. Areas where environmental hazards are significant enough to warrant on-site
                 investigation to evaluate the risk and to design appropriate mitigation.
        #        Moderate Risk. Areas where a risk is likely to be present and current precautions
                 sustained in building, public, and safety codes should be adequate.
        #        Low Risk. This designation applies to those areas subject to the same environmental
                 hazards are that found elsewhere in the region.
The categories of risk discussed above considers the following hazards:
        #        Satanic Hazards and fault rupture zones. Areas where fault traces are present and
                 fault investigations should be completed prior to development.
        #        Wildfire Risk. Areas where brush hazard factors, vegetation type, proximity to source,
                 and slope present a moderate to high risk of fire hazard.
        #        Flood Hazard. Areas at risk due to flash flooding in channels or inundation due to a
                 break of the Palos Verdes Reservoir.
        #        Slope Stability. Area where potentially active landslides are present and mitigation may
                 be required to stabilize the slopes.
        #        Landfill Gases. Areas of known landfill (i.e. Howlett Park, Botanical Gardens,
                 Hawthorne Canyon, and Palos Verdes Landfill) may generate gases. To mitigate any
                 hazardous risks associated with these gases, proposed developments within 1,000 feet of
                 a landfill must submit a special report to the Building Department. The report must describe
                 methods by which the proposed development will prevent gas intrusion and prevent the
                 accumulation of gases within or under enclosed portions of a building.
Exhibit 8-1 indicates those areas where the above risks are present and the Hazards Management Overlay
designation applies. The Planning Department will require the following actions to be completed prior to
issuance of a building permit for areas located within the Hazards Management Zone Overlay designation.
        #        All development request must undergo a preliminary environmental assessment to
                 determine the nature of additional study required.
                                                     8-23

        #        Appropriate evaluation by seismic, flooding, geotechnical, or wildfire risk must be
                 completed by knowledgeable professionals to determine the. nature and extent of risk.
        #        Appropriate mitigation must be identified and implementation must be monitored
HAZARDS REDUCTION/EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PROGRAMS
Hazard reduction programs are designed to improve the safety of existing development. For example, some
older development, being built to outmoded code standards, could benefit from seismic upgrading. Owners
of older residences or commercial structures may voluntarily upgrade, or if a commercial facility is
undergoing significant reconstruction, newer safety standards can be incorporated. Additional examples
of hazard reduction programs include:
        #        Strengthening of waterlines and utilities infrastructure and the development of emergency
                 back-up capability by public utilities serving the City.
        #        Regular fire safety inspections and fire flow tests to identify areas withcracked or damaged
                 water lines.
        #        Auxiliary water systems to supplement existing water lines to ensure needed fire flow if
                 pipelines are damaged. Gravity-fed or generator-operated pumps from swimming pools
                 or tanks can also supplement flow.
        #        Requiring planted slopes to prevent erosion.
        #        Planning for emergency response at the government and individual level reduces hazards
                 and risks to the public.
The State and Federal Governments require local governments to prepare and maintain emergency plans
as a condition of certain funding assistance. The City of Rolling Hills Estates is planning to update its local
emergency plan to meet current standards found in Office of Emergency Services (OES) Multi-Hazard
Functional Planning Guidelines (OES, 1985). One of the first steps of a Multi-Hazard Functional Plan
(MHFP) is to create an emergency response organization. The main elements of the Rolling Hills Estates
organization will provide the following functions:
                                                     8-24
         #        Emergency Operations Carter (EOC) - The EOC coordinates and directs local and
                  mutual aid resources to urgent crisis situations in the City. The center operates as a liaison
                  with the County, other City emergency operations centers, and the Governor's Office of
                  Emergency Services.
         #        County Sheriff Department - The Sheriffs Department provides perimeter and crowd
                  control, restricts and reroutes traffic, and manages evacuations as required.
         #        County Fire Department - The Fire Department provides fire suppression, emergency
                  medical, urban search and rescue, and hazardous materials response and control services.
         #        County Department of Building and Safety - The Department of Building and
                  Safety provides emergency cleanup of debris and inspections of hazardous buildings and
                  County utility services.
         #        City Agencies - The City will provide or support emergency functions, such as search
                  and rescue, management of fatalities and injured persons, emergency shelter, coordination
                  with private utilities, and dissemination of public information. The City will provide
                  emergency cleanup of debris in the City's public right-of-ways.
Disaster preparedness and response planning requires an assessment of hazards, identification of functions
and resources, and development of a procedural network under a variety of disaster scenarios.
Responsibility for developing short-term and long-term actions to reduce risk and lessen the impact of a
disaster falls on the Public Safety Element, and will support objectives of the City MHFP.
Risk Assessment
The City of Rolling Hills estates Public Safety Element identifies earthquake shaking, associated fissuring
and ground failure; storm induced landslides and local flooding; and brush fires and hazardous materials
accidents as emergency planning issues. A major earthquake presents the greatest challenge. Earthquakes
occur with little or no warning and often set into motion multiple events, some worse than the original
earthquake, and some similar to situations posed by other disasters. A Newport-Inglewood Earthquake
is most likely to occur within a time frame of interest for most building decisions; however, a major
earthquake on the Palos Verdes fault is a credible possibility and is useful as a worst-case disaster planning
scenario.
                                                      8-25
The following are selected planning elements that need to be considered in the development of emergency
response plans:
        #       The identification of an Emergency Operations Center, and potential temporary shelters
                and reception areas. The City Hall will serve as the EOC.
        #       The identification of casualty collection points and sheriff/fire staging areas. The Public
                Safety Element identifies these areas.
        #       The designation and training of the emergency response organization, which would include
                representatives from County agencies, City departments, utilities, schools, and volunteer
                groups. The Multi-function Hazard Plan and policies contained in this element together with
                supporting implementation measures identify appropriate actions that need to be followed.
        #       The identification of skilled human resources, such as amateur radio operators, heavy
                equipment operators, equestrian rescue units, and medical support personnel. Local
                medical resources, such as the Palos Verdes Medical Center, would be an important
                participant in the City's emergency response. The Public Safety Element includes policies
                and implementation measures calling for the identification of individuals and organizations
                which would comprise such an emergency response team.
        #       The planning for emergency equipment needs, including battery powered and mobile
                generators, cranes, bulldozers, large ladders; personal gear such as respirators, gloves, and
                protective clothing, medical equipment and supplies, and tents for temporary shelter and
                emergency medical centers. The Public Safety Element includes policies and
                implementation measures calling for the identificationof individuals and organizations which
                would comprise such an emergency response team.
        #       The development of organizational charts and brief operational checklists and phone
                numbers. The Public Safety Element calls for the development of such a list and a periodic
                review of the procedures City staff will follow in the event of a major emergency.
        #       The development of an inventory of emergency supplies and coordination with managers
                of high occupancy facilities, dependent care centers (nursing homes, day care centers), and
                critical facilities located in the City.
                                                       8-26
         #         Conducting regular training exercises or drills with the County to evaluate how well the City
                   emergency response organization responds to a regional simulated disaster. A number of
                   Public Safety Element goals and policies call for the Coordination of emergency
                   procedures with County agencies.
         #         The development of programs that increase public awareness of potential hazards and risks
                   so that they are familiar with procedures to follow in the event of a major disaster. The
                   Public Safety Element calls for the preparation of a brochure that would be distributed to
                   all households and businesses in the City.
         #         The development of voluntary and neighborhood self-help groups that can respond to light
                   rescue, local fire control, and medical assistance needs. A Public Safety Element policy
                   and implementation measure calls for the creation of a City search and rescue team.
         #         The City must provide where possible for alternative or back-up essential lifelines, such as
                   water flow, sewer, and electrical services; and redundant communication lines, such as
                   cellular phones, to ensure efficient response to a crisis, including provisions for specific
                   emergency radio frequencies for the City MHFP.
         #         The City must draft mutual aid agreements with neighboring cities, and with County, State,
                   and Federal emergency relief agencies; and with private enterprises such as Red Cross,
                   Salvation Army, and medical institutions to assist in shelter and relief operations.
After a disaster, and an earthquake in particular, short-term disaster recovery requires disaster operations
that are not as immediate as fire suppression or medical attention, but are equally important to protecting
public safety. The Multi-hazard Functional Plan will address short-term recovery, such as clearing City
streets and transportation corridors to be used for evacuation and emergency access. The Multi-hazard
Functional Plan will also contain provisions for restoring utilities and performing safety inspections of
structures or buildings weakened by an earthquake, or other consequences resulting from fire, flood, or
dam failure.
One short-term consequence of a disaster is the temporary displacement of residents and/or workers
stranded in the City. The County Department of Social Services maintains an inventory of schools,
recreation facilities, and community facilities that can be used as temporary shelters as part of the County
Multi-hazard Functional Plan. No County temporary shelters have yet been
                                                      8-27
designated for the City of Rolling Hills Estates. Exhibit 8-2 shows proposed temporary emergency shelters
for the City based on guidelines developed in coordination with Public Social Services. Public Social
Services intend to add these facilities to their County-wide inventory.
Shelters should be structurally sound, if indoors, or located adjacent to an open space, such as a park or
school. They should provide temporary housing and serve as emergency reception and communication
centers.
The Multi-hazard Functional Plan does not address longer-term recovery. Two critical issues that need to
be considered in the long-term recovery of the City following a major disaster includes the following:
         #        The long-term homelessness created by heavily damaged property or houses, through
                  earthquake, landslide, or mud or debris flow; and
         #        The rebuilding of structures in areas heavily damaged in a disaster.
Longer-term housing needs will be necessary while damage is assessed, disaster assistance applications
are considered, and rebuilding take place. Prezoning to permit temporary housing, such as trailers or tents,
can facilitate the recovery process.
After a damaging storm or earthquake, the City will need to:
         #        Define the affected area;
         #        Assess the effectiveness of emergency repairs and identify permanent repairs options;
         #        Help individuals and businesses qualify and apply for funds to repair and rebuild; and
         #        Incorporate actions to mitigate future hazards into plans to rebuild and regulate new
                  development in heavily damaged areas.
Financial impact caused by business disruption (and loss of revenue), or the homeowners desire to
reoccupy a damaged property, increases the pressure to rebuild rapidly after a disaster. Rational building
decisions must be made by the reviewing agency at this stage. A reconstruction ordinance allows the
definition of standards for rebuilding decisions before a disaster occurs.
                                                     8-28
Circumstances for bringing the damaged property up to current code or some other acceptable level are
usually incorporated into such an ordinance.
A main element of a reconstruction ordinance is the "preliminary assessment of damage" and initial
recommendations. Rebuilding decisions often require detailed geotechnical/geologic studies or structural
analysis to determine and assess the effectiveness of emergency repairs, and identify appropriate permanent
repairs. One option is to require environmental studies if more than 50 percent of the property is damaged
in a disaster, whether it is caused by structural damage or massive landsliding, fault rupture, or other ground
failure.
Cities may enact an Interim Ordinance as an urgency measure in order to consider "consistency with the
General Plan" for up to two years, if the existing use may endanger public safety if rebuilt. The interim
ordinance, however, has been a liability to some local governments. A reconstruction ordinance helps the
City consider the impact of reestablishing areas proven to be susceptible to a high-risk from a natural or
urban hazard. The Ordinance also facilitates rebuilding, in certain cases, by defining conditions when
permits can be waived if redevelopment is safe and beneficial to the City.
Emergency Evacuation Routes
Hawthorne Boulevard, Crenshaw Boulevard, and Palos Verdes Drive East are the designated emergency
evacuation routes in the City. Los Angeles County Public Works has prioritized these routes for debris
clearance and road repairs in the event they are damaged during a major earthquake or other natural
disaster. Indian Peak Road, Palos Verdes Drive North, and Silver Spur Rood are disaster routes proposed
to augment County routes for City-specific emergency planning purposes. Actions warranted along such
routes, single access ways to neighborhoods, and other routes where emergency access could be
threatened include:
         #       Implementationof mitigation measures that prevent earthquake induced slope failures from
                 blocking roads;
         #       Improvement of streets of inadequate width or inadequate drainage that can hinder the
                 mobilization of fire equipment and other emergency vehicles; and
         #       Development of specific plans for traffic control contingencies and evacuation of high
                 occupancy and immobile populations. The County Fire Department, for instance, has
                 indicated that response times are appreciably reduced during peak traffic along Palos
                 Verdes Drive North.
                                                     8-29
In addition, these roadways are important routes for police and fire vehicles responding to emergency calls
in the city. Disaster routes function as primary thoroughfares for movement of emergency vehicles (Fire,
Sheriff, heavy equipment, etc.). The selection of evacuation routes, on the other band, depends largely on
the particular situation; i.e., the nature and location of the hazard and the occupancies that need to be
evacuated. For evacuation or emergency egress to neighborhoods with only a single access, the single
access can become the critical route. Disaster routes and evacuation routes are similar in that plans must
be made for traffic control during rush hour or cleanup of debris off of roads. However, disaster routes,
by design, are in close proximity to most critical facilities, such as fire stations, schools, and high occupancy
buildings. This allows the development of specific emergency plans along County-designated routes, as well
as Palos Verdes Drive North, Silver Spur Road and Indian Peak Road.
The direction of travel on these roadways and any restrictions to vehicular movement will depend largely
on the nature, location, and spatial characteristics of the event leading to the evacuation. In all cases,
facilities with immobile populations, such as day care centers or nursing homes, or residences with the
handicapped should be pre-identified. If evacuation is required during the daytime, provisions must be made
for the high occupancy businesses in the Silver Spur commercial district, including temporary shelter. The
Public Safety Background Report identifies some facilities in the City that have already been identified by
the County Fire Department as requiring special needs in a disaster.
Emergency Shelters
The emergency shelters and reception areas are also indicated in Exhibit 8-2. Emergency shelters are
assigned to provide short-term shelter for persons stranded in the city of left homeless in the event of a
disaster. These shelters may also be used to dispense supplies, serve as first aid stations, and serve as
public information centers. Reception centers are gathering/collecting areas where information, first aid, and
supplies are dispensed.
A large department store located in the Silver Spur Shopping Complex, has been the sole emergency
shelter in the City for years, primarily for protection from a nuclear blast. Temporary shelters for evacuated
residents or non-residents displaced by a major earthquake disaster demands a different type of facility.
Temporary shelters need to be structurally sound, if indoors, or located in or adjacent to an open space,
such as a park or school. The temporary shelters shown on Exhibit 8-2 are preliminary; they should be
reviewed and formally incorporated into the City's Multi-Hazard Functional Plan. They include:
                                                      8-30

         #       Rolling Hills High School
         #       Rancho Vista Elementary School
         #       Dapplegray Intermediate School (presently unoccupied)
County Public Social Services and the American Red Cross may have additional choices. After a major
earthquake, open spaces are valuable because tents or mobile homes may be used to temporarily house
the homeless or displaced. Shelters are often operated by the American Red Cross, and also serve as first
aid stations, public information centers, and communications centers. Another important function is to
provide a reception area to reunite school children with their parents. Ridgecrest Intermediate School,
located at the corner of Crestridge and Highridge Roads in the City of Rancho Palos Verdes, is a County-
designated emergency shelter available to residents of the southern portion of Rolling Hills Estates.
Earthquake Emergency Preparedness
The potential for earthquakes represents the most significant risk to the City. As indicated in Section 8.4
of this element, there is a high probability that a major damaging earthquake will impact the area sometime
in the next several decades. In recognition of this risk, a comprehensive Multi-functional Hazards
Management Plan has been prepared indicating actions that will need to be taken by City staff and specific
areas of responsibility.
The General Plan's Public Safety Element is not intended to supplant or replace existing emergency plans
or programs. The focus of this Element is to establish policies with regard to public safety, identify
constraints and hazards that need to be considered in future planning, and to articulate specific standards
that should be maintained or strived for.
Key elements of this program will involve the following:
         #       The creation of a staff position to serve as an Emergency Services Coordinator. This
                 position may be filled by an existing member of City staff.
         #       Form an Emergency Services Committee consisting of city staff and residents which will
                 direct emergency operations in the event of a major disaster. This group will cooperate
                 with the County Fire and Sheriffs Department if county agencies are able to handle the
                 emergency.
                                                      8-31
         #       A catalogue of trained personnel for example, doctors, nurses, medics, heavy equipment
                 operators living or working in the City will be prepared and updated on a periodic basis.
                 A listing of equipment (bulldozers, trucks, etc.) located in the City will also be compiled.
         #       Members of the Traffic and Safety Committee will become familiarized with the
                 multi-functional Hazards Management Plan. This group will prepare a working "action
                 plan" to ensure every member clearly understands assigned responsibilities.
         #       The Traffic and Safety Committee will organize the formation of a volunteer search and
                 rescue group to assist in future emergency operations.
         #       The City will publish pamphlets and provide information on the public cable access channel
                 outlining procedures to follow in the event of a major disaster.
The Public Safety Element also serves the following functions:
         #       Provides an accurate and up-to-date assessment of natural and man-made hazards in the
                 City, including, but not United to, earthquakes, landslides, fire, flood, dam inundation, and
                 hazardous materials accidents;
         #       Provides a framework by which safety considerations are introduced into the land use
                 planning process;
         #       Strengthens the City's existing municipal codes, and their project review and permitting
                 processes, to identify and mitigate hazards for new development;
         #       Provides policies directed at identifying and reducing hazards in existing development; and
         #       Strengthens earthquake, flood, fire and hazardous materials preparedness planning and
                 post-disaster reconstruction policies particular to Rolling Hills Estates.
The Public Safety Element is primarily designed to develop short-term and long-term actions to reduce the
scope of a disaster, thereby lessening its impact on the City. The Multi-Hazard Functional Plan provides
a logistical framework for governmental response. However, the
                                                      8-32
Element recognizes that the public must be involved in the preparedness process to reduce risk further,
especially in the event of a damaging earthquake.
The following is a list of tasks that the individual/individuals at the home or office should take to lessen the
overall impact of a major earthquake.
Before an Earthquake:
         #       Remove or correct interior nonstructural hazards, such as top-heavy bookcases and
                 storage cabinets, water heaters and other appliances. Anchor furniture and water heaters
                 against the wall and replace gas-fired appliances with flexible connections.
         #       Set aside a supply of emergency food and water, and obtain first aid materials, a gas
                 shut-off wrench, fire extinguisher, and battery-powered radio. Identify neighbors with first
                 aid training and check for an emergency supply of medication for all members of the family,
                 especially the children, handicapped, and elderly.
         #       Practice taking cover. This exercise will make people aware of the safest places during an
                 earthquake, such as under a desk, table, bed or strong doorway. The maximum duration
                 of severe shaking from a major earthquake expected to impact the City of Rolling Hills
                 Estates is roughly 30 seconds.
         #       Practice exiting. Walk the possible escape routes from your house or office and plan to
                 avoid light fixtures, masonry chimneys, unsupported walls and other overhead hazards.
                 Power for elevators and escalators may fail in the Silver Spur Shopping Complex and
                 other high-occupancy facilities, so be aware of alternate exits. Do not panic or run;
                 crowded exits should be evacuated in an orderly manner to avoid additional injuries in a
                 rush for the door. Emergency loud speaker systems may give instructions.
         #       Practice turning off electricity and water and know how to turn off gas at the street main
                 at your house. Do not practice gas shut-off because, for safety reasons, only the utility
                 company should turn it back on. Be sure anyone in the household can locate main switches
                 and valves.
         #       Review the responsibilities of each family member after an earthquake. Plans for picking
                 up children from schools, day-care centers, or other facilities with
                                                       8-33
               dependents should be regularly checked and reviewed. Have the phone number available
               of the person outside of the area for management of family messages.
        #      Contact City and neighbors about forming a co-op self-help group.
After an Earthquake:
        #      Check for injuries in your family and neighborhood.
        #      Extinguish small fires and check for additional fire hazards, such as cracked walls, roof
               lines and attics, and other physical signs of structural damage that can cause a malfunction
               in the electrical wiring.
        #      Check for the smell of leaking gas, and if detected, shut off gas at the gas meter.
               Unanchored gas heaters or gas-fired hot water heaters may experience damage to valves
               and service connections.
        #      Shut off electrical power if there is damage to the wiring or there is a gas leak. The main
               switch is usually located in or next to the main fuse or circuit breaker box.
        #      Clean up flammable liquids, medicines, and other harmful substances.
        #      Check for structural and nonstructural damage, such as cracked chimneys, fallen power
               lines, and other objects that may become unstable and fall during an aftershock.
        #      Try not to use water in case there is drop in water pressure for firefighting purposes (fire
               flow). Toilets should not be flushed until both incoming water lines and outgoing sewer lines
               have been checked to see if they are open.
        #      Try not to use the phone unless it is a genuine emergency. Emergencies, damage report
               alerts, and other information can be obtained by turning on your radio.
        #      Report serious injuries and significant damage to a nearby City emergency reception
               center.
                                                   8-34
Development Guidelines
Technical expertise in reviewing and enforcing the Building Code and Fire Code for the City of Rolling Hills
Estates is provided by the County of Los Angeles. The codes establish site-specific investigation
requirements, construction standards, and project inspection procedures to ensure that development does
not pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The County Building Code, adapted from
the Uniform Building and Fire Codes every three years, also contains base line minimum standards to guard
against unsafe development. As discussed in the background report, investigation findings and other project
variables may modify the implementation of a particular standard. Examples of County minimum standards
include:
         #         Grading standards: minimum slope angles of 1:5 (slope ratio - rise over run) for cut slopes
                   and 2:1 for fill slopes.
         #         Fire access and fire flow requirements: minimum 20 foot width is required for private
                   access roads; minimum fire flow of 750 to 1250 gallons per minute (gpm) is required for
                   single-family residential homes.
Additional guidelines and standards can be introduced through the City's Safety Element and Municipal
Codes. Zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations also support regulatory codes, and safety is
protected as the City carries out its responsibilities under the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA). CEQA requires that environmental constraints be considered prior to approval of significant
projects.
Special development regulations reinforce and augment existing code standards by raising the level of
hazard conscious project design and hazard mitigationengineering. Special development regulations include
additional geologic/geotechnical investigation and construction standards. Fault and liquefaction
investigations are required in the County Building Code, however, it is in the City's best interest to
emphasize the level of investigationand protection. Some standards may apply to only critical facilities, such
as detailed seismic analyses in high risk areas. Special construction standards may include reinforced
foundations in areas of potential ground failure. Avoidance of the hazard may be appropriate in some cases
where engineering methods cannot mitigate the hazards, such as is the case where active fault traces are
identified during project investigation. Special minimum setbacks away from active faults can be defined
for structures, lifelines, or critical facilities planned on or traversing the project site.
                                                         8-35
The General Plan establishes the following grading guidelines for future development:
      #        All grading work should be in conformance with the provisions of the City's grading
               ordinance and Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code.
      #        Grading activities should strive to minimize adverse impacts of the natural topography and
               environment.
      #        Approved protective measures and temporary drainage provisions must be used to protect
               adjoining properties during grading.
      #        The grading contractor shall provide for compaction tests and reports by a soils engineer
               certifying compliance with the above-mentioned Chapter 70.
      #        Import materials shall be tested and certified prior to placement.
      #        No work whatsoever shall be started without first notifying the grading inspector and soils
               engineer.
      #        The location of dumping excess soil shall be approved by the grading inspector prior to the
               start of excavation.
      #        Any damage caused during the grading operation must be corrected prior to the final
               approval of the grading operation.
      #        All recommendations of the soils engineering report and all subsequent reports, addenda,
               and recommendations, etc., shall be considered a part of this grading plan and shall be
               complied with.
      #        An erosion control plan shall be submitted to the City Engineer prior to start of the rainy
               season and all erosion control devices shall be provided and maintained during rainy
               season between October 15 and April 15 of the following year and shall be in place at the
               end of each day's work.
      #        All on-site improvement shall be in accordance with the "Standard Specifics for Public
               Works Construction" (Latest Edition).
                                                   8-36
# Minimum on-site structural pavement section shall be 2 inch A.C. on 4 inch aggregate
  base. Actual section shall be determined by field soil test and to be approved by the City
  Engineer.
# Maximum slopes shall be 2:1 for cut and fill unless otherwise directed.
# Fills are to be compacted to not less than 90% of maximum density as determined by
  A.S.T.M. soil compact test D1557-70 and certified by soils engineer, fill layer is not to
  exceed 6".
# No fills shall be placed until vegetation has been removed and sub-grade prepared per
  Chapter 70 and applicable ordinances and approved by the grading inspector.
# No rock or lumps with greater than 6" diameter shall be placed in the fill unless such
  placement is approved by the soils engineer and grading inspector.
# Grading activities should strive to maintain natural topographic conditions.
                                      8-37
THIS PAGE TO REMAIN BLANK
           8-38
                              SECTION 8.4 BACKGROUND REPORT
INTRODUCTION
The Public Safety Element Background Report discusses safety issues in the City including earthquake,
geological, fire, flooding, and hazards. The identification of hazardous conditions in the City provide a better
perspective on the programs that are necessary to promote public health and safety.
Many of the safety issues in the City of Rolling Hills Estates are directly related to southern California's
seismic setting. Other issues are particular to the Peninsula's geologic and topographic characteristics.
Southern California is located in a seismically-active region, experiencing on average, an earthquake of
Magnitude 4 or greater every four years. The Los Angeles Basin, in particular, is traversed by many active
faults, associated with the boundary between the North American and Pacific plates. Major faults include
the San Andreas, Newport-Inglewood, and Palos Verdes faults. The basin is also subject to compressive
forces responsible for many east west trending folds, including the Palos Verdes Hills, the Puente Hills, and
the chain of hills and mesas that stretch along the length of the Newport-Inglewood fault.
The climate, topography, and local geology are major factors in fire and flood hazards. native soils and the
local climate support certain kinds of chaparral vegetation which contain high concentrations of volatile oils
and are extremely flammable. Areas where stands of chaparral are especially dense, such as along canyon
bottoms, are highly susceptible to brush fires. Because the local topography contains ridges and canyons,
the primary flood hazards in the City are primarily along canyon bottoms.
SEISMIC HAZARDS
Earthquakes occur frequently in southern California because many faults are present due to the complex
geology associated with the convergence of the North American and Pacific plates. The better known
seismically active faults in southern California are shown on Exhibit 8-3. The Palos Verdes Peninsula lies
at the juncture of many of these fault systems.
Faults are classified as inactive, active, or potentially active. Active faults show proven displacement of the
ground surface within the last 11,000 years (Holocene); and Potentially Active faults show evidence of
movement within the last two million years (modified to 750,000 years by USGS, 1985 and adopted by
Los Angeles County, 1990). This definition is designed as a yardstick for surface rupture potential, and is
used to prevent development from being constructed directly on an "active" fault trace. In general,
potentially active faults are, relative to
                                                        8-39

active faults, less likely to be the origin of a damaging earthquake. However, there is a gradation of seismic
risk posed by potentially active and active faults. For example, of the "active" faults closest to the City, the
Newport-Inglewood, Palos Verdes, and Cabrillo faults pose successively decreasing degrees of seismic
risk.
Table 8-1 lists the likelihood of a major earthquake on active and potentially active faults in the region and
the degree of intensity and potential impact on the City. The "low likelihood" faults may have a greater
impact on the City due to their proximity. Earthquake intensities are reflected in a modified Mercalli scale
which is described in Table 8-2.
                                                         TABLE 8-1
                  RELATIVE LIKELIHOOD AND IMPACT OF SELECTED MAJOR EARTHQUAKES
                                      ON THE CITY OF ROLLING HILLS ESTATES
                             Fault Name                               Occurrence         Max. Cred. a        Intensity b
    San Andreas (Mojave Segment)                                          High                 7.5              VII
    San Andreas (San Bernardino Mountain Segment)                         High                 7.5              VII
    San Fernando                                                       Moderate                6.5              V-VI
    San Andreas (Carrizo Segment)                                      Moderate                8.0            VII-VIII
    Elsinore                                                           Moderate                7.1             VI-VII
    Whittier                                                           Moderate                7.3            VII-VIII
    Newport Inglewood                                                     Low                  6.9            VII-VIII
    Offshore Newport Inglewood                                            Low                  6.8               VI
    Palos Verdes                                                          Low                  7.0             IX-X
    Malibu Coast                                                          Low                  6.9             VI-VII
    Cabrillo                                                               ow                  6.6            VII-VIII
    Santa Monica                                                          Low                  6.7             VI-VII
    Redondo Canyon                                                        Low                  6.4             VI-VII
    a)       Maximum Credible Earthquake each fault is predicted capable of generating, and the likelihood of such an
             earthquake occurring within the next 100 years. The probabilities were ranked as high, moderate and low as
             follows: high- greater than 50%, moderate- 10 to 50%, low- less than 10%.
    b)       Intensity is based on the Modified Mercalli Intensity which is defined in Table 8-2.
                                                            8-40
                                                          TABLE 8-2
                                      MODIFIED MERCALLI INTENSITY SCALE*
I    Tremor not felt.
II   Tremor felt by persons at real or in upper floors of a building.
III  Tremor felt indoors. Vibrations feel like a light truck passing by; may not be recognized as an earthquake. Hanging
     objects swing.
IV Hanging objects swing. Vibrations feel like a heavy truck passing by, and the jolt feels like a heavy ball striking the
         walls. Standing cars rock. Windows, dishes and doors rattle. Glasses clink and crockery clashes. Wooden walls
         and frames crack in the upper range of scale IV.
V    Earth felt outdoors, and its direction can be estimated. liquids are disturbed, some spilled. Small unstable objects are
         displaced or upset. Doors swing, closing and opening. Shutters and pictures move. Pendulum clocks stop, start,
         or change rate.
VI Earthquake felt by everyone. Windows, dishes, and glassware are broken. Knick-knacks and books fall off shelves;
         pictures fall off walls. Furniture moves or is overturned. Weak plaster and masonry Dare cracked.
VII Steering of motor cars is affected. Partial collapse of masonry C structures. Some damage to masonry B; none to
         masonry A. Fall of stucco and some masonry walls. Twisting and falling of chimneys, factory stacks,
         monuments, towers, and elevated tanks. Frame structures, if not bolted to foundation, shift. Loose panel walls
         are thrown out; decayed pilings brake off.
VIII Damage slight in specially designed structures though considerable in unreinforced buildings.
IX Masonry D structures destroyed, masonry C heavily damaged, sometimes completely collapsed. General damage to
         foundations. Frame structures, if not bolted, shift off their foundations. Underground pipes are broken.
         Conspicuous cracks in the ground.
X    Most masonry and frame structures are destroyed. Most foundations destroyed. Some well-built wooden structures
         and bridges are destroyed. Serious damage to dams, dikes, and embankments. Underground pipelines are
         seriously damaged. Large landslides.
XI Underground pipelines completely out of service. Many and widespread disturbances of the ground, including broad
         fissures, earth slumps and land slips in soft, wet ground. Sea-waves (tidal waves or tsunami) of significant
         magnitude. Severe damage to wood-frame structures, especially if near to the shock center.
XII Damage is nearly total. Lines of sight and level are distorted. Objects are thrown into the sir. Great and varied
         disturbance of the ground, including numerous shearing cracks, landslides, large rockfalls, and numerous and
         widespread slumping of river banks.
Masonry A:          Good workmanship, mortar and design. Reinforced, especially laterally, and bound together with steel,
                    concrete, etc. Designed to resist lateral forces.
Masonry B:          Good workmanship and mortar. Reinforced, but not designed to resist lateral forces.
Masonry C:          Ordinary workmanship and mortar. Not reinforced or designed to resist horizontal forces.
Masonry D:          Weak materials, such as adobe; poor mortar. Low standards of workmanship; weak horizontally.
These masonry types are not to be confused with the conventional Class A, B, and C construction types
*     Modified and rewritten after Richter (1958) and Toppozada and others (1988) using Rossi-Forel's Intensity Scale.
                                                              8-41
Groundshaking froman earthquake can result in liquefaction, landslides, or structural damage. The intensity
of seismic ground shaking at any given location is influenced by the magnitude of the earthquake, the
distance of the epicenter to the planning area, and local geologic and topographic conditions. The amount
of damage generally depends on the size, shape, age, and engineering characteristics of affected structures.
Development in the City of Rolling Hills Estates is built to relatively modern standards, and the single-story,
woodframe construction of the residential developments, although not immune to structural damage, is
notably resilient to earthquake shaking.
Detectable ground shaking in Rolling Hills Estates could be caused by a number of faults in the area (refer
to Table 8-1). However, as indicated previously, only a number of the faults have the potential for causing
strong ground shaking in the City. The Palos Verdes, Cabrillo, Redondo Canyon, Newport-Inglewood,
Santa Monica-Malibu Coast, Whittier and Torrance-Wilmington fault systems are most likely to cause high
ground accelerations in the City.
The San Andreas fault has the highest probability of generating a maximum credible earthquake in California
within the next 30 years. The anticipated "big one" is thought to be capable of generating peak horizontal
ground accelerations of 0.9g (g is the acceleration of gravity, equal to 32 feet per second squared) in
Rolling Hills Estates, with seismic intensity values of VII (refer to Table 8-2). Such an event would have
an expected duration of 35 to 50 seconds. Several factors affect earthquake impacts on structures, making
the hazard of ground shaking difficult to predict. In general, long-period seismic waves (characteristic of
earthquakes that occur 9 miles or more fromthe planning area) damage preferentially long-period structures
such as high-rise buildings, bridges and freeway overpasses. The San Andreas fault is 35 miles from Rolling
Hills Estates at its closest point. The City does not have any major long-period buildings and infrastructure,
thus, a "big one" on the San Andreas is not likely to cause any significant structural damage in the City.
The Palos Verdes fault has, in the last few years, been considered as active, based on late Pleistocene
and Holocene age displacements that have been interpreted along offshore segments of the fault in the San
Pedro shelf (Darrow and Fischer, 1983). The fault is considered to be capable of generating a maximum
credible earthquake of Magnitude 7.0 that would cause peak horizontal ground accelerations in Rolling Hills
Estates and seismic intensities in the IX to X range.
The proximity of the Palos Verdes fault to the City would result in greater damage than that anticipated
from an earthquake on the San Andreas fault. The short period seismic waves generated by nearby
earthquakes interact preferentially with low-rise building and other
                                                      8-42
structures such as electric substations. With most buildings in the City being low- to mid-rise, a moderate
to strong earthquake on the Palos Verdes fault will have more impact on the City than a stronger
earthquake on a more distant fault. Ground shaking can also be focused on ridge tops, as evidenced in the
1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake by fallen trees, displaced boulders, and damaged structures located on the
crest of hills and other topographic highs (EERI, 1989).
The nearest segment of the Newport-Inglewood fault is located approximately 9 miles east of Rolling Hills
Estates. The 1933 Long Beach Earthquake, attributed to the Newport-Inglewood fault, generated
Modified Mercalli intensities of about VII in the Palos Verdes Peninsula (Wood, 1933 in Toppozada et
al., 1988). A maximum credible earthquake of Magnitude 6.8 on the Newport-Inglewood fault has the
potential of generating horizontal peak ground accelerations of about 0.2 to 0.3g in Rolling Hills Estates.
Ground shaking could last approximately 22 seconds, with seismic intensity values in the VII to VIII range.
This earthquake would be particularly damaging to the low-rise, single-family structures in the City.
The Cabrillo fault is classified as active, also based on offset Holocene (younger than 11,000 years)
sediments along its offshore segments, and on scattered micro-earthquakes. A maximum credible
earthquake on this fault would generate peak horizontal ground accelerations of up to 0.5 to 0.6g in the
City.
The Redondo Canyon fault, located offshore and extending from just north of the Palos Verdes Peninsula
and into Redondo Canyon, is approximately 25 miles from Rolling Hills Estates at its closest point. A
maximum credible earthquake on this fault (estimated Magnitude 6.4) could generate peak horizontal
accelerations of about 0.45g in the City for approximately 18 seconds. This earthquake would also impact
low-rise buildings preferentially.
The Santa Monica-Malibu Coast Fault System is an east-west trending fault system along the southern
margin of the western Santa Monica Mountains and into Santa Monica Bay. Although there has been very
little seismic activity along this fault system, the Malibu Coast fault segment has been characterized as active
by Los Angeles County, based on displaced colluvial soils estimated to be about five thousand years old
(Los Angeles County, 1990). The Santa Monica fault segment is considered to be potentially active. A
maximum credible earthquake on the Santa Monica-Malibu Coast fault is estimated to result in peak
horizontal ground accelerations of 0.11 to 0.14g in Rolling Hills Estates, with an estimated duration of
approximately 21 seconds.
                                                        8-43
Maximum credible earthquakes on other faults further away from the City would generate horizontal peak
ground accelerations ranging from .01 to .14g, with an average duration of approximately 20 seconds. The
Whittier fault, which at its closest point is 23 miles from Rolling Hills Estates, has the potential of generating
peak horizontalground accelerations of 0.14g in the City. The duration of strong ground shaking associated
with such a maximum credible earthquake is estimated at 31 seconds; seismic intensities in Rolling Hills
Estates may be in the VIII range.
The Torrance-Wilmington fault is a newly postulated, blind thrust fault and fold system occurring at depth
under the Palos Verdes Peninsula. (Blind thrust faults are low-angle or low-lying faults occurring generally
5 to 15 kilometers below the ground surface which have no surface manifestation.) These concealed faults
have been recognized as capable of generating strong, damaging earthquakes since 1987, when a similar
blind thrust caused the Whittier Narrows earthquake of Magnitude 5.9. Although the location of the
Torrance-Wilmington Fault System is not well defined, the fault and fold belt has been divided into three
segments. Hauksson (1990) estimates that if one of these segments ruptures, an earthquake of Magnitude
5 to 7.5, would occur. If two or more segments rupture simultaneously, an earthquake of Magnitude greater
than 7.8, would occur.
Fault Rupture Hazard
Fault rupture hazards are classified by the youngest geologic layer on the fault offsets. Surface fault
ruptures, with consequent damage to structures directly overlying the trace of a fault, has led to the
enactment of the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Act (APSSZ) of 1972. Evidence of fault
displaced sediments that are less than 11,000 years old is used as a yardstick to gauge the surface rupture
potential of faults. The objective of fault investigations within an APSSZ is to define the trace of the fault
so that setbacks from the fault can be established. No Special Studies Zones have been designated within
the City of Rolling Hills Estates. However, the APSSZ Act allows individual jurisdictions to create special
studies zones around faults not yet recognized by the State as active.
The Palos Verdes fault, which extends across the northeastern corner of Rolling Hills Estates is considered
active, but has yet to be characterized by the State with the Alquist Priolo Act (Exhibit 8-4). The
proposed active designation is based on displaced Holocene sediments which were interpreted from
geophysical data collected along the offshore segments of the fault in the San Pedro shelf.
The onshore segment of the Palos Verdes fault has generally been located along the north escarpment
flanking the Palos Verdes Hills. A more precise location of the fault, however, has
                                                        8-44

eluded geologists because the trace of the fault has been concealed by urban development, and by thick
colluvial deposits (Darrow and Fischer, 1983). The lack of surface evidence of lateral movement on the
Palos Verdes fault suggests to Hauksson (1990) that this fault is either accommodating very little of the
stress in the Los Angeles Basin, or that moderate to large-sized earthquakes on the fault rarely rupture the
surface. Although surface verging splays of the Wilmington-Torrance thrust belt may be within a few miles
of the surface, the surface rupture potential of this fault is probably minimal. Rather, most stress may be
regionally distributed through general uplift of the Palos Verdes Hills.
The onshore segment of the Cabrillo fault is hidden by landslides, complicating attempts to confirm its
location and evaluate its onshore activity. Inferred traces of the Cabrillo fault, together with normal faults
subparallel to the main fault, extend into the eastern boundary of the City (Cleveland, 1976). These faults,
which bound the Silver Spur graben (down-dropped valley), have been attributed to either tectonic faulting,
faulting associated with the postulated Silver Spur landslide complex, or to a combination of tectonic and
landslide processes (Envicom, 1975; Robert Stone & Associates, 1985).
Ground fissuring has been documented on hillside areas in recent earthquakes. Ground fissures triggered
by the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake appear to have occurred along previously mapped secondary faults
to the San Andreas fault, or were associated with apparent fault-related topography (EERI, 1989).
Displacement, generally along the fault line with some components of lateral and vertical movement,
appeared to occur mostly along high-angle bedding planes in bedrock of similar age and characteristics as
the siltstones underlying the Palos Verdes Peninsula. The surface rupture potential of the onshore Palos
Verdes or Cabrillo fault segments is credible, given the geologic and geophysical evidence from offshore
characteristics.
Earthquake-Induced Ground Failure
Secondary earthquake hazards such as liquefaction, lateral spreading, dynamic settlement and landsliding
are generally associated with relatively high intensities of ground shaking. Liquefaction, lateral spreading and
dynamic settlement are associated with shallow ground water conditions, and loose, sandy soils or alluvium.
Liquefaction occurs when soil densifies and settles as a result of the seismic vibrations and resultant
extrusion of water-soil slurries. This, in turn, may cause structural foundations to fail, settle below the
original grade, and cause overturning of the structure. Most of Rolling Hills Estates is underlain by
consolidated bedrock and is not susceptible to liquefaction. The Chandler quarry and some canyons,
however, have been infilled with uncompacted artificial or hydraulic fill (refer to Exhibit 8-5). These fills may
settle during strong ground shaking. In areas where
                                                      8-45
perched ground water conditions exist within these fills, liquefaction can occur. Site-specific geotechnical
studies are the only practical and reliable way of determining the liquefaction potential of specific sites at
risk.
Earthquake induced landsliding and rockfalls are common in areas where steep slopes expose out-of-slope
bedding, or where the bedrock is intensely jointed and fractured. Soil slips, or shallow surficial slides, may
also occur. These slides may be widespread and could impede the flow of emergency traffic along
evacuation routes. In Rolling Hills Estates, out-of-slope road cuts that may pose a rockfall or landslide
threat as a result of strong seismic shaking include Crenshaw Boulevard along Agua Negra Canyon, Palos
Verdes Drive between George F Canyon to the east and Silver Spur Road to the west, and some sections
of Hawthorne Boulevard. Extensive bedrock folding in the peninsula can also result in localized out-of-slope
cuts in other areas. Exhibit 8-5 indicates those areas of the City where potentially active landslides are
present.
Potential Impacts
Injuries and property damage (structural and nonstructural damage to buildings) from a major earthquake
in the region will be due to strong ground motion. Rolling Hills Estates is developed with low and medium
density residential areas. Other areas are devoted to low-rise commercial development (Peninsula Center),
high-densityresidential development (condominiums), and isolated research, education and public facilities.
Buildings less than 3 stories are likely to be damaged by a nearby earthquake, such as one on the Palos
Verdes or Newport-Inglewood fault.
         Residential Developments: The wood-frame construction used in residential and commercial
         developments in the City generally performs well during earthquakes. However, a trend in
         wood-frame construction in recent years, in particular in housing construction, has been the split
         level and irregular floor plan. Earthquake intensities of VIII can cause damage to the foundation
         and wall elements of irregularly shaped structures. Split level houses are susceptible to damage
         caused by the weakness of the pole platforms or pole structures used to support the structure.
         Vertical changes in strength are termed "soft-stories" and are also manifested in other types of
         construction. Single-family residences built before the 1952 Building Code was implemented are
         more likely to slip off their foundations as a result of strong ground motion associated with
         near-field earthquakes.
         Commercial and Industrial Developments: Buildings using tilt-up concrete walls are found in some
         commercial developments. Roof collapse has been observed in commercial
                                                     8-46

buildings built before 1971 and using this type of construction. Concrete and steel-framed buildings are
more earthquake resistant and should be encouraged. Unusual -architectural features such as long spans,
minimal amount of interior shear walls, or irregular shapes may be found in commercial development. These
features can result in significant damage or collapse during an earthquake.
        Critical Facilities: Critical facilities are structures that must remain operational after an earthquake.
        They include hospitals, fire and, police stations, emergency shelters, evacuation centers and
        communication centers. High-occupancy facilities have the potential for a large number of
        casualties or crowd control problems. This category includes the Peninsula Center and large
        multifamily residential projects. Dependent care facilities house populations with special
        evacuation considerations, such as preschools and schools, group care homes, and nursing and
        convalescent homes. Facilities that pose unacceptable risks to public safety if severely damaged
        are also of critical concern.
        It is important to ensure that critical facilities designed for human occupancy possess no structural
        weaknesses that can lead to collapse. The State has jurisdictional responsibility to ensure that
        public schools, such as Rolling Hills High School and Rancho Vista Elementary School, are
        adequately constructed to seismic standards (Garrison Act, 1969). The County of Los Angeles
        5-Year Earthquake Preparedness Plan has a program to ensure continued operation of County
        Fire Stations in an earthquake, such as Fire Station 106 located on Indian Peak Road.
        Site specific structural evaluation is the only reliable method of determining if there are structural
        design weaknesses in these structures. The County Fire Department is responsible for safety
        inspections of high-occupancy residential and commercial facilities. These inspections prevent
        earthquake-induced hazards, as well as improving day-to-day fire safety.
        Nonstructural Hazards: Nonstructural damage is perhaps the largest expected source of injury in
        an earthquake. Buildings with exterior nonstructural hazards, such as cornices and parapets pose
        hazards to the public if not properly secured. Toppled furniture, book shelves, and interior
        equipment and decor pose additional hazards. In structures where continued operation is important
        (critical facilities), special effort is needed to secure needed equipment and emergency generators
        to prevent damage.
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is located within Seismic Zone 4 specified in the Uniform Building Code.
The County of Los Angeles Department of Public Works reviews all projects to
                                                         8-47
ensure compliance with the existing and regularly amended seismic design provisions of the Building Code.
Seismic design provisions for conventional development, such as residential and commercial development,
specify that a building not collapse under seismic loading, therefore structural and nonstructural damage
cannot be precluded. It is seismic economically infeasible to design earthquake-resistant structures for
conventional development. The key is to enforce seismic design provisions with adequate review and
inspection to ensure maximum quality construction and optimum design.
Earthquake damage to wood-frame single-family residential structures from near-field sources will be slight
to moderate, and limited to walls thrown out of plum, fallen chimneys, and torsional racking of foundation
and wall elements. Slippage of structures off their foundations may be prevalent in houses built before 1952.
Earthquake Emergency Considerations
Medical Care: The nearest hospitals to the City are the Torrance Memorial Hospital and Medical
Center located at 3330 West Lomita Boulevard in Torrance; Bay Harbor Hospital at 1437 West Lomita
Boulevard in Harbor City; and Kaiser Hospital at 1300 West Seventh Street in San Pedro. A maximum
credible earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood, the Palos Verdes or Cabrillo faults, could result in up to
a 50 percent loss of beds available to patients (Toppozada et al., 1985).
Fires and Evacuation: Simultaneous evacuation of high-occupancy structures, such as the stores at
the Peninsula .Center, and the occurrence of earthquake-induced fires in the City will tax the Fire
Department's manpower resources. Fire hazards in the City are discussed in detail in subsequent
subsections of this report.
Fire Flow: Water pipelines can be damaged by surface rupture, liquefaction, landslides, or high
frequency seismic waves if significant vertical or horizontal displacements of the ground occur (NCEER,
1989). Breaks in the water distribution pipelines can result in significant reductions in water pressure that
can slow post-earthquake fire suppression efforts.
Utilities: Rolling Hills Estates is supplied with electrical power by the Southern California Edison who
operates the Harbor Generating Station, a 474-megawatt natural gas facility located south of Wilmington.
High frequency ground motion characteristic of a nearby earthquake and seismic intensities as low as VII
can seriously disable the electrical network system (Hayes, 1987; Toppozada et al., 1988). The downtime
of electrical facilities is expected to last no longer than three days. Damage to computer switchboards and
power loss will impair emergency communications. Communication centers should have back-up
capabilities that rely on battery-
                                                        8-48
powered radio. Damaged natural gas pipelines and connections may result in service disruption, and in
some cases, fire.
Transportation: Earthquake-induced landslides may hinder circulation on Crenshaw Boulevard along
Agua Negra Canyon, Palos Verdes Drive North between George F. Canyon to the east and Silver Spur
Road to the west, and some sections of Hawthorne Boulevard.
Hazardous Materials: The potential for earthquake-induced hazardous materials accidents in adjacent
jurisdictions must be addressed in disaster planning scenarios for the City of Rolling Hills Estates.
Hazardous materials issues are discussed later.
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
Geologic hazards and geotechnical constraints found in the City of Rolling Hills Estates are tied to the
structural characteristics of the bedrock and the overlying soil mantle. The Palos Verdes Peninsula is
predominantly underlain by a sequence of folded sedimentary bedrock. Overlying the bedrock are a series
of elevated "beach" terraces, sand and gravel formations created during the emergence of the peninsula
landform over the last 1.5 million years. These deposits lend themselves in varying degrees to landsliding,
debris and mudflows, settlement, expansive soils, and/or susceptibility to erosion.
Landslides and Slope Instability
The majority of the City is underlain by shale and siltstone units of the Monterey Formation (Altamira Shale;
the Valmonte Diatomite and Malaga Mudstone are confined to north of Palos Verdes Drive). These
interbedded units have planes of weakness that are conducive to landsliding and slope instability,
characteristic of the Palos Verdes Peninsula. Yet active landslides are not numerous in the City, in contrast
to other areas of the peninsula where massive landslides, such as the Portuguese Bend and Flying Triangle,
pose severe geologic hazards. Nevertheless, small landslides in the canyon areas and one large postulated
landslide complex northeast of the Peninsula Center area exist.
Slope modification during grading can render slopes unstable. Slope instability occurs when bedding planes
intersect the slope face of either natural slopes or designed cut slopes. The natural orientation of' major
slopes in the City are along northeast-southwest trending canyons. Bedding is generally inclined to the north
on the northerly flanks of the City and inclined to the south on the southerly side. Bedding plane
orientations, however, are quite variable throughout the City, indicating out-slope-bedding conditions may
occur locally. Site specific investigations are necessary to determine potential slope instability problems at
specific sites (tract or parcel size).
                                                      8-49
Exhibit 8-5 shows the distribution of probable landslides in the City, some of which may have been
subsequently verified and stabilized through grading activity. Landslides are considered "potentially active",
meaning they could be reactivated in the future, either by excessive rainfall, introduction of artificial water
in the slope (landscaping irrigation/broken water or sewage lines), or improper site design or grading
practices. Grading activities must consider these geologic constraints as a condition of project approval.
The County of Los Angeles Department of Public Works acts as reviewer for the City to ensure all
potential geologic problems are addressed.
Silver Spur Landslide Complex. The northwest-southeast trending valley along Silver Spur Road
could be a pull-apart scarp within a postulated "Silver Spur landslide" complex (Envicom, 1975). Robert
Stone and Associates (1985) stated that this landslide complex is probably several square miles in area and
an ancient analog of the present Portuguese Bend Landslide. Other engineering geologists believe the
presence of known or inferred faults trending subparallel to the graben (valley) support a tectonic
(fault-related) origin. Indeed, the Silver Spur graben parallels the Cabrillo fault, and small faults are mapped
bounding the northern and southern walls of the graben (Cleveland, 1976).
The size and geomorphic expression of the Silver Spur graben (outlined as an area of major artificial fill)
implies large-scale extensional faulting and very high fault slip rates; something which is not observed on
the Cabrillo fault. If movement along the Cabrillo fault is not associated with origins of the graben feature,
a landslide origin best fits the evidence to date. A landslide complex model suggests that a shallow
northward-dipping "potentially active" slip surface underlies a major portion of the residential area northeast
of the Peninsula Center. Although its location is highly conjectural, the postulated Silver Spur landslide
complex could extend as far northeast as Palos Verdes Drive North and at least as far east as Crenshaw
Boulevard.
Earthquake-Induced Landsliding: Earthquake ground shaking worsens existing unstable slope
conditions. If engineered slopes are designed properly, they will perform well under intense ground shaking.
Typical earthquake-induced landslides in bedrock and in terrain similar to Rolling Hills Estates include
shallow slumps and slides. These are commonly associated with steep road cuts and natural slopes. The
1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake showed that reactivation of larger, dormant, deep-seated landslides along
weak bedding is possible, not dissimilar to the conditions found in the City created by the interbedded
Monterey Formation.
Storm-Induced Landsliding and Erosion: Heavy rainfall often triggers surficial sliding (debris flows
and mudflows) along the sides of canyons and on steep slopes. The San Pedro Formation is an
unconsolidated marine sand deposit found on the northern flank of the City. This formation
                                                     8-50
is highly susceptible to erosion on the hillsides if they are not properly planted. Current grading codes
provide protection against mudflows and erosion, including provisions for planted and maintained slopes,
retaining walls, drainage devices, and debris basins. Older developed hillside areas of the City, most
notably areas developed before 1963, may not have benefitted from such protection, and consequently,
they stand a greater likelihood of experiencing storm damage.
Geotechnical Constraints
One of the most visible geotechnical constraints in the City is the presence of semi-controlled, man-made
fills in the northeast portion of the City. Quarry operations have resulted in various types and quantities of
fill material within and adjacent to the Chandler property. Hydraulic fills and desalting basins of various sizes
and depths occur both on and off site (Leighton and Associates, 1981). The delineation of hydraulic fills
in Exhibit 8-4 is approximate in nature, and small pockets may occur outside of the Chandler Quarry site.
Hydraulic fills in the area are extremely susceptible to earthquake-induced ground failure.
The Chandler Quarry site is used as a landfill at the eastern and northern flanks of the quarry. Large
concrete blocks, asphalt and debris (Class III), and hazardous materials (Class I and II) have been placed
in the pit. The primary geotechnical constraint of semi-controlled landfill is settlement, however, ground
water contamination is a major concern. The northern half of the quarry, underlain by the San Pedro
Formation, is in hydraulic continuity with the groundwater aquifer in the Los Angeles Basin. Hazardous
materials issues at the landfill will be discussed in more detail.
Diablo and Altamont soils and various thicknesses of expansive slope wash (colluvium) are found at the
top of terraces, and along canyon walls and bottoms. They are characteristically dark clay, with a high
shrink-swell potential. Modern soil engineering procedures coupled with present-day foundation designs
can effectively mitigate expansive soils, but soil moisture fluctuations should still be avoided.
FLOOD AND INUNDATION HAZARDS
Small-scale flooding occurs when storm drain systems become overburdened during strong winter storms.
They can damage property and hinder emergency activities, such as fire department access to fire hydrants
or evacuation.
                                                      8-51
Dam Inundation
The Palos Verdes Reservoir is located near the eastern limit of the City of Rolling Hills Estates. The
reservoir is owned by the Metropolitan Water District (MWD). It is an earthen fill dam built in 1939 with
a capacity of 1,100 acre-feet. The reservoir supplies water to the California Water Service distribution
network in the peninsula. The MWD Safety of Dams Section maintains continuous surveillance of the
reservoir, including live-in personnel at the facility. The MWD also monitors piezometers in the
embankment to warn of increases in seepage, a critical precursor that can undermine the foundation and
threaten the stability of the dam. The piezometers are connected to an automatic alarm system. As required
by State law, MWD prepared maps showing the potential flood limits and maintains emergency plans in
the remote possibility of dam failure. The potential inundation area is shown in Exhibit 8-6.
The California Division of Safety of Dams reviews MWD reports detailing repairs, maintenance, and
monitoring operations at the reservoir and inspects the facility biannually. As of 1991, the facility is in
conformance with State safety standards. The site is monitored by strong motion instrumentation and,
according to current reports, will be able to withstand a maximum credible earthquake on the Palos Verdes
fault (George Barber, 1990, MWD Safety of Dams). Dam failure is not a severe safety threat to the City
because only open space and a parking lot are in the inundation path. There are no residential
developments and main thoroughfares in the Rolling Hills Estates that area within the potential inundation
area of !he reservoir. San Pedro would be most impacted by failure of the reservoir. In the event of dam
failure, the facility's emergency plans include cooperation with the Department of Water and Power for
emergency dewatering of the reservoir. The Department of Water and Power controls the main inlet and
outlet pipeline feeders from the reservoir.
Storm Flooding
There are no widespread 100 year flood problems in the City of Rolling Hills Estates. Flash flooding does
not pose a direct threat to public safety in canyons as development is not permitted in these areas. The City
of Rolling Hills Estates has been registered in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) since 1979.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, the administering agency for the insurance program,
indicates that there are no widespread flood problems in the City, therefore 100-year flood maps are not
available nor required. Participation in the program ensures coverage from any "flash flood", "mudflow",
or "earth movement", so long as it can be directly tied to heavy rainfall caused by seasonal conditions.
                                                     8-52

In compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program, Rolling Hills Estates administers a flood
management ordinance (Ordinance 299) whereby conditions are defined in order to develop in areas
subject to flood hazard. In practice, however, canyon areas are the only natural flood hazard and they are
generally designated as open space. Storm-induced flood problems in the City, as defined by the NFIP,
would include flash floods in the canyon areas, saturated mudflows on the hillsides, and shallow flooding
in streets and residences associated with poor storm drainage. Due to the small size of the canyon
watersheds in the City, most flash floods in the canyons are short-lived. Exhibit 8-6 shows the location of
the major flood prone canyons in the City.
Localized Flooding. The previous chapter noted the importance of adequate drainage on developed
hillside lots. Channeling storm runoff away from the slopes and into storm drains prevent erosion and
minimizes the chance of shallow mudflows on graded slopes. If improperly maintained, private storm drain
systems can overflow and channel sheet flow or mud into a residence. Residential drainage infrastructure
often ties into larger storm drain systems where they empty into natural drainage such as canyon areas.
Paved concrete channels or flood velocity reduction structures are sometimes necessary in natural drainage
to prevent erosion caused by the channeled runoff. Erosion is not only unsightly, but can undermine
adjacent slopes and make them unstable.
County Storm Drain System.. The Los Angeles County Department of Public Works maintains the
largest system of storm drains in the City of Rolling Hills Estates . Storm drains are designed to convey ten
year frequency storm flows, floods that are expected to be equaled or exceeded once every ten years.
System performance is reviewed on a similar time scale. Storm drainage requirements are designed to
prevent floods from rising above the curbline and beyond the right-of-way.
Exhibit 8-6 shows areas where the County Public Works has identified future storm drain needs in order
to prevent: 1) flooding from rising outside the right-of-way and into private property or 2) environmental
impacts caused by the over capacity of existing natural drainage. Curbline inundation is not a direct threat
to public safety, however, if access to a fire hydrant is hindered by street inundation, fire fighting capability
can be indirectly affected. Street circulation is also hampered by street inundation.
Sheet flow along local or private roads in the City is directed to storm drains or catchment basins. Minor
flooding along such routes is tolerated until a flood or safety issue is posed. If system performance is
substandard, either as indicated by County studies or citizen complaint, the City can contract with the
County to correct the problem.
                                                      8-53
New development or expansion of existing developments adjacent to the canyons increase runoff and
erosion in the drainage. Environmental damage, and in some areas, slope instability may result. The impact
on canyon drainage should be evaluated for the installation of adequate connectors to existing Los Angeles
County storm drain systems.
Proper drainage is necessary to ensure adequate access for emergency response, fire fighting, or evacuation
activities. The City should encourage correction of sheet flow or concentrated channel flow problems along
existing single access routes or in areas where fire hydrants are in a drainage deficient area. For new
development, Los Angeles County Fire Code Standard No.10.207(A) requires special drains in the vicinity
of fire hydrants and states that private access roads must be designed to withstand (not undermine) a capital
flood (flood capable of occurring on a roughly 250-year flood return interval).
FIRE HAZARDS
Rolling Hills Estates is predominantly made up of residential suburban development with less extensive
areas devoted to low-rise commercial development (Peninsula Center), high density residential
development (condominiums), and various isolated public and private facilities. Some developments lie
adjacent to open space and canyon areas containing chamise and coastal chaparral and coastal
sage, plant communities which are highly combustible due to volatile oils found within the plant tissues. The
most extensive plant communities in the City, however, consist of less volatile grass and shrubs and planted
landscaping. Given the physical and urban setting of the City, fires may start inside a building, or spread
from adjacent brush and chaparral areas. Structural and brush fires are most often caused by accidental
and deliberate human means.
Brush Fire
Certain areas of the City are more susceptible to brush fires than others. Exhibit 8-7 shows the relative fire
risk based on the location and proximity of development to dense areas of volatile vegetation, relative
access by road, and steepness of the terrain. Wind conditions is a direct variable and are assumed to be
low. If fire occurs during Santa Ana winds, "branding" of wind-transported embers a mile or more from
the source of fire can ignite combustible roofs and awnings. Multiple ignitions can tax normal fire fighting
resources and increase response times to individual fires. A reconnaissance survey of roofs in the City
indicates that wood-shake shingle construction is prevalent. Combined with the potential for branding
during Santa Ana winds, many areas of the City would be vulnerable to fire under extraordinary
circumstances. Branding also makes the City vulnerable to fires from outside the City.
                                                     8-54

Earthquake-Induced Fire
The principalcauses of earthquake-related fires include open flames, electrical malfunctions, gas leaks, and
chemical spills. Commonly affected are unanchored gas heaters or gas-fired hot water heaters, appliances
which tend to tip over and damage rigid gas line connections during strong ground shaking. Damaged gas
line connections, overturned appliances, and damaged electrical circuitry could be the most likely cause of
earthquake-induced fires in the City.
The risk of fire from a damaged gas supply system can be considered low in Rolling Hills Estates. The only
segments of the system at risk are those in areas of potentially severe ground failure and surface rupture,
areas largely confined to the northeastern portion of the City. The Southern California Gas Company is
equipped to isolate and shut off sections of severely damaged supply lines. Downed power lines from an
earthquake and strong winds can start brush fires. To prevent such an occurrence, power lines are designed
to automatically de-energize if there is a break in the system and vegetation is cleared under transmission
routes.
Fire Protection and Life Saving Services
The City of Rolling Hills Estates is located in Division I of the Consolidated County Fire Protection District.
County Fire Station 106 (413 Indian Hill Road) provides fire suppression services for the City, and under
normal circumstances, is able to respond to an emergency or fire anywhere in the City in an average
response of less than 5 minutes. Five other stations in the area are also able to provide prompt additional
resources if needed. The closest fire suppression and emergency resources available to the City include:
         Station No. 106: This facility contains one engine company, one truck company, one paramedic
         unit, and a Battalion Chief.
         Subregional Stations: Subregional stations that can serve the planning area include stations
         in Lomita (one station), Palos Verdes Estates (one station), Rancho Palos Verdes (two stations)
         and Rolling Hills (one station). Any additional resources from the County Fire Department are
         available if required.
In order to maintain an adequate level of fire protection for buildings located within areas under contract
for Los Angeles County Fire Department services, minimum safety standards for fire flow and water supply,
road width and access, and turning radius for fire apparatus are required. Because the City is supported
by a local fire company with adequate response time and has a
                                                      8-55
water distribution network with fire hydrants and access for fire vehicles, the City is designated a County
Fire Zone 3. Fire Zone 3 is a fire code designation given to unincorporated areas with similar attributes.
This protection merits the Insurance Service Office (ISO) fire risk classification(3), indicating an acceptable
level of fire protection.
Fire flow is the delivery rate of water necessary to halt and reverse the spread of fire. The County Fire
Protection Engineering Unit determines specific peak water flow requirements based on building height,
occupancy, construction, contents, and other factors. Table 8-3 shows a range of fire flows mandated by
the County for selected types of development found in Rolling Hills Estates (Fire Zone 3). Fire Prevention
Regulation No. 8 provides details regarding hydrant spacing, duration of applied fire flow, and special
regulation involving additional stories, mid-rise (3-stories), high-rise (5-stories), high hazard occupancies
and many other variations of fire flow requirements.
Potential losses in water pressure due to breaks in the water distributionsystem can be caused by corrosion
of cast-iron pipelines, excavation, and earthquake related ground failure. Pipelines must be protected in
areas of potential liquefaction and landslides. Required fire flow tests are conducted by the County Fire
Department and the local water company to ensure adequate fire flow.
                                                  TABLE 8-3
                          SELECTED MINIMUM FIRE FLOW AND ACCESS STANDARDS
                                                                                                  Turning
                             Fire Flow                Road                 Access 4                Radius
       Occupancies             (gpm)               Width 2, 3               (Feet)                  Feet
 Single-Family               1000-1250               20-26                   150                     32
 (Fire Zone 4)
 Single-Family                750-1250               20-26                   150                     32
 (Fire Zone 3)
 Two-Family                     1500                 26-36                   150                     32
 (Duplex)
 Mobile Home                    1250                 26-36                   150                     32
 (Fire Zone 4)
 Multi-Family                1000-5000               26-36                   150                     32
 (Apartment,
 Condominium
 and Hotel)
                                                     8-56
                                                              TABLE 8-3
                              SELECTED MINIMUM FIRE FLOW AND ACCESS STANDARDS
                                                                                                                      Turning
                                   Fire Flow                      Road                     Access 4                    Radius
      Occupancies                    (gpm)                      Width 2, 3                  (Feet)                      Feet
 Schools                           1000-5000                     26-36                       150                         32
 Commercial and                    1000-5000                     26-42                        150                        32
 Industrial
 High-Rise (5-stories or              5000                        N/A                         N/A                        32
 75 feet)
 1)   Fire flow increases with building size (square feet) and/or lot acreage. 20 psi and 600 ft. hydrant spacing is required for
      single-family dwellings. 20 psi and 300 ft. hydrant spacing is required for all other occupancies.
 2     Road width increases where parallel parking allowances, hydrant requirements, or aerial fire suppression requirements, or
      serial fire suppression requirements indicate the need.
 3)   Minimum 20 feet private road width is permitted only if life safety is not jeopardized, topography or lot
      shape/dimensions are constraints, and the Fire Department grants discretionary approval.
 4)   A paved access is required if any portion of the first floor building exterior is more than 150 ft. from a public vehicle
      access (private driveway, bridge, alley).
 Sources: Los Angeles County Fire Department Fire Code Standards 10.207 (A) and (B) and Fire Prevention Regulation No. 8,
            Vol. 7, Chap. 1, Subject 8 - Fire Flow and Hydrant Standards.
Minimum road width, access, and turning radius standards are established to provide adequate access to
structures during fire suppression operations. Such standards are geared for private access roads including
driveways, bridges, and alleys and restricted access roads designed solely for fire department apparatus.
The majority of streets and arteries in Rolling Hills Estates are constructed to County Road Department
standards and provide acceptable vehicular access. Private roads, however, are commonly used for public
access and fire emergency access and must be reviewed for minimum access requirements.
Table 8-3 shows a range of road widths for certain types of development. A twenty-six foot road width
is required at fire hydrant locations for a linear distance of 25 feet along the street on both sides of the
hydrant. Turning radii on cul-de-sacs or street curves are required for all streets in the City. Because
insufficient turning radii can restrict emergency access, minimum turning radii standards for emergency
access roads are 32 feet. Forty feet inside and 50 feet outside radii are common in most developments.
                                                                 8-57
Brush management of vegetation adjacent to buildings is an important element in fire prevention. Minimum
requirements include managing combustible growth within 100 feet of structures, including clearance of
hazardous flammable vegetation 30 feet around the building perimeter. Additionalstandards and regulations
are found in Chapter 27 of the Los Angeles County Fire Code. Fire hazard reduction guidelines can also
be found in "Hillside Design Guidelines", a County Regional Planning Manual.
Current Standards and Regulations
The Los Angeles County Fire Department conducts annual fire prevention and brush inspections in the City.
Continued emphasis on public awareness and education concerning brush and earthquake-induced fire
during such inspections is warranted. Advocation of smoke alarms and other fire protection and/or risk
reduction devices is also appropriate.
Rolling Hills Estates currently enforces a Class B Roofing Ordinance for new development. As defined
in the 1988 Uniform Building Code, Class B roofs are pressure treated, wood-shake shingles. Class
A roofs are chemically-treated, ceramic and steel-covered wood tiles. There are a substantial number of
single-family residences in Rolling Hills Estates with wood shingle/non-rated roofing materials which could
benefit from the conversion to Class B roofing material.
The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) publishes standards for secondary water supply
systems which may be required in areas where: a) pipeline damage can reduce available fire flow, b)
municipal water sources are not available to isolated structures, and c) where the fire jurisdiction deems
it's necessary to ensure fire suppression capability. Additional fire protection is also warranted by the
County Fire Code if there is restricted access. Provisions include: on site secondary supply of water for
emergency fire flow, including emergency pumping apparatus for swimming pools, etc. (NFPA Standard
1231); fire resistant construction; interior automatic fire sprinkler system; and additional brush clearance.
Public assembly facilities, high occupancy facilities, and facilities housing immobile populations (schools,
nursing care, convalescent home) in the City require special emergency needs in addition to fire
suppression. High occupancy facilities (50 persons or more), or other occupancies noted of special concern
by the County Fire Department, include Rolling Hills High School, Rancho Vista School, Rolling Hills
Country Club, City Hall, Courtyard Mall, Peninsula Shopping Center, and Northrop Research and
Technology (Exhibit 8-7). Fire drills and public education programs are needed to facilitate rescue
operations and fire containment.
NFPA (1231) lists a variety of "High Hazard" occupancies with contents that create intense fires; examples
are department stores, barns and stables, exhibition halls and auditoriums. Los Angeles County now
requires sprinkler systems for most high occupancy and high hazard structures.
                                                     8-58
Retroactive sprinkler installation for critical facilities not covered by current regulations is a significant
opportunity to increase public safety.
Supplementary gravity-fed municipal water tanks and distribution systems and fire flow testing are
necessary elements of an emergency fire flow program.. Mutualaid agreements involving fuel management,
suppression assistance, logistical support, and an efficient fire reporting system are provided through the
Consolidated County Fire Protection District.
Erosion can result from improper brush management. "Fire Hazard vs. Erosion Control: A Homeowner
Guide" stresses substitution of existing vegetation with fire retardant plants and presents guidelines for
managing fuel loading without increasing erosion potential.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
A hazardous material is a substance that is toxic, ignitable or flammable, or reactive and/or corrosive. An
extremely hazardous material is defined as a substance that shows high acute or chronic toxicity,
carcinogenicity, bioaccumulative properties, persistence in the environment, or is water reactive. The
primary concern associated with the release of a hazardous material is the short and long term effects that
exposure to a hazardous substance may have on the public. This is particularly true when a toxic gas is
involved, since a toxic plume is more difficult to contain than a solid or liquid spill, and a gas can impact a
larger segment of the population in a shorter time span.
All businesses that handle more than a specified amount of hazardous materials are required by both the
Federal and State governments to submit a business plan to their local administering agency (the reportable
quantities are 50 or more gallons of a liquid, 500 pounds or more or a solid, or 200 cubic feet or more of
a gas at standard temperature and pressure; quantities for acutely hazardous materials vary according to
the substance). In Rolling Hills Estates, the administering agency is the Los Angeles County Fire
Department, Hazardous Materials Section. Every handler is required to submit a business plan to the Fire
Department every two years, and an inventory of hazardous substances on a yearly basis. Registration
forms for acutely hazardous materials are to be submitted on a yearly basis too (Greg Vital, 1991 personal
communication).
The Los Angeles County Fire Department inspects the businesses that have submitted business plans at
least once every two years to validate the accuracy of their plans. It is the responsibility of the handlers to
submit any changes (such as types or quantities of hazardous materials used, ownership, etc.) to the Fire
Department. On July 1, 1991, the Hazardous Materials Control Program staff and resources of the County
Department of Health Services was transferred to the Los Angeles County Fire Department.
                                                      8-59
One of the best ways to reduce the impact of a hazardous material release is through regulation governing
the storage, use and manufacture of hazardous materials. Several regulations have been implemented to
address the issue of hazardous substances; individual cities have the right to develop more stringent
requirements than those established by the State.
Most chemicals have their own unique physical and chemical characteristics and an acceptable mitigation
procedure for one chemical may be totally inadequate for another. Therefore, business plans should
contain, for each hazardous and extremely hazardous material handled, a description of the physical and
chemical properties of the material, and of the symptoms that result from contact with the material. The plan
should also have a site map that shows where each hazardous material is stored and handled and where
emergency response equipment is located, and evacuation plans and procedures. Business plans are
designed to be used by the Fire Department during a hazardous materials incident to allow for quick and
accurate evaluation of each situation for appropriate response. Employees of facilities that use, store or
manufacture hazardous materials should be aware of where a copy of the business plan is kept, and of how
the plan is put into operation if a hazardous material accident occurs.
Although significant concentrations of hazardous materials, at levels for which a business plan is required,
are generally associated with manufacturing and industrial areas, hazardous materials are also used and
stored in commercial and residential areas. Most of Rolling Hills Estates is currently zoned for residential
use. One main commercial area exists in the City, along Silver Spur Road between Hawthorne and
Crenshaw Boulevards. This area includes retail clothing and specialty stores, grocery stores, banks,
restaurants, gasoline stations and other service businesses. Fifteen handlers of hazardous materials have
been identified in Rolling Hills Estates, ten of which are located in the City's general commercial zone. The
fifteen handlers identified in Rolling Hills Estates are listed in Table 8-4. Because there are no heavy
manufacturing facilities in Rolling Hills Estates, the potential of a hazardous material accident occurring
within the City is unlikely.
A review of the Federal CERCLIS list, Federal and State Superfund sites, the State ASPIS and Cortese
lists, and the Regional Water Quality Control Board list of Leaking Underground Fuel Tanks
revealed that three leaking underground fuel tank sites and one State Superfund site (the Palos Verdes
Landfill) have been reported in the City (see Table 8-4).
                                                      8-60
                                                   TABLE 8-4
              REPORT HANDLERS OF HAZARDOUS AND ACUTELY HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN
                                          ROLLING HILLS ESTATES
   No.                  Facility                        Address                           Status
 1       Robing Hills Country Day School   26444 Crenshaw Boulevard
         Northrop Research and Technology
 2       Ice Capades Chalet                6101 Crest Road
         Palos Verdes International Auto
 3       Center                            550 Deep Valley Drive
 4       Courtyard Mall                    627 Deep Valley Drive
 5                                         550 Deep Valley Drive
 6       Arco Station No. 3005             27301 Hawthorne Boulevard      preliminary site assessment
                                                                          underway
 7       Los Angeles County Fire Station   413 Indian Peak Road
         No. 106
 8       Shell Peninsula                   27505 Indian Peak Road
 9       Jack Kramer Tennis Club           11 Montecillo Drive
 10      Chandler's Sand and Gravel        26311 Narbonne
 11      Metropolitan Water District       2300 Palos Verdes Dr. North
 12      One Hour Moto Photo               893 Silver Spur Road           preliminary site assessment
                                                                          underway
 13      Charles B. Webster III            449 Silver Spur Road           preliminary site assessment
 14      Arco Station No. 6087             828 Silver Spur Road           work plan requested
 15      Glendale Federal Property         601 Silver Spur Road
List of handlers compiled from the list of businesses supplying business plans to the Los Angeles County
Fire Department (1-13), and fromthe RegionalWater Quality Control Board List of Underground Leaking
Tanks (14-15). Information regarding leaking underground tanks compiled from the April 1990 list,
prepared by the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Palos Verdes Landfill. The Palos Verdes Landfill, located between Hawthorne and Crenshaw at north
City boundary, is considered a State Superfund Site under the State Expenditure Plan. The landfill is
approximately 291 acres in area. Non-hazardous wastes were accepted at the landfill between 1952 and
1980. In addition, both Class I (solid) and Class II (liquid) unknown waste materials which could possible
be considered as hazardous were accepted during its
                                                      8-61
operation. Hazardous wastes/materials disposed at the landfill included acid and alkaline wastes, pesticides,
solvents, tetraethyl lead, sludge, hazardous tank bottoms, oily wastes and drilling mud. These wastes were
disposed into injection wells, disposal pits and drums.
In the mid-1980's, groundwater contamination was detected beneath the landfill (the groundwater under
the landfill is not used as a drinking water source). In 1986, the Los Angeles County Sanitation District
constructed a subsurface barrier at the northern boundary of the main landfill to contain the northward
migration of contaminated groundwater. Some of the sands underlying the landfill have the potential of
promoting hydraulic conductivity with aquifers underlying the Los Angeles Basin (east of the Palos Verdes
Peninsula). The County Sanitation District began a remediation plan by which water pumped from under
the landfill is air stripped to remove some of the contaminants that occur in a gaseous phase. These off
gases are burned, together with other gases generated by the landfill, in a gas-to-energy facility on the
northwestern section of the landfill.
Additional remediation actions are expected to be implemented as a result of a site characterization and
feasibility study scheduled for completion in 1996. In the meantime, the Los Angeles County Sanitation
District and the State Department of Health Services address all health and safety concerns as they are
identified.
For future development on the landfill site, the lead agency responsible for overseeing remediation of the
site (currently the Los Angeles County Sanitation District) will probably require a sign off on the cleanup
prior to releasing the land for development.
Northrop Research and Technology Facility. The Northrop Facility located at 6101 Crest Road
is one of the five handlers of hazardous materials not located within the commercial zone of the City.
Although there is always the potential for an unauthorized release of hazardous substances, the impact of
such a release on the rest of the City may be limited. The largest concern with the research facility is the
future redevelopment of the site. Improper demolition of asbestos-containing buildings may result in the
release of asbestos into the air. Any building constructed before 1979 may have asbestos-containing
materials in its floor tiles, roofing, walls, insulation and other construction materials. Some buildings built in
the 1980's may still test positive for asbestos. Asbestos, a fibrous mineral that has been linked to lung
cancer, is generally released into the air when an otherwise safe, asbestos-containing material is crushed
or broken.
Hazardous Materials Incidence Response
The County of Los Angeles Fire Department is responsible for responding to a hazardous material release
incident in the City of Rolling Hills Estates. The Fire Department has three hazardous
                                                         8-62
materials squads; the one closest to Rolling Hills Estates is located in the unincorporated area near the City
of Carson. The Fire Department's Health Hazard Response Team (previously from the County Health
Department) will also respond to ensure the appropriate dean-up, investigation, and removal. The County
follows the procedures set in the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan for emergency operations revised in 1987.
No incident of a hazardous material release requiring a response by a hazardous materials squad has
occurred in the City in the last two years (Jay Corbett, 1991 personal communication).
Releases of hazardous materials can occur during a natural disaster, such as an earthquake. Improperly
stored containers of hazardous substances may overturn or break, pipelines may rupture, storage tanks may
fail. Containers may explode if subject to high temperatures, such as those generated by a fire. If two or
more chemicals which are reactive when combined come in contact as a result of a spill, the hazard may
be compounded. The 1988 Uniform Fire Code includes a set of criteria, designed to minimize the risk of
an accident, to be followed when storing, using or transporting hazardous materials. These requirements
include secondary containment of substances, segregation of chemicals to reduce reactivityduring a release,
sprinkler and alarm systems, monitoring programs, venting and auto shutoff equipment, and treatment
requirements for toxic gas releases.
In Rolling Hills Estates, most businesses that handle hazardous and/or acutely hazardous substances in
quantities above the reportable limits are located in the commercial area along Silver Spur Road, Deep
Valley Drive and Indian Peak Road (see Table 8-4 ). These businesses are located two, and often, less
than one mile from Los Angeles County Fire Department Station No. 106 at 413 Indian Peak Road. The
short distance between these facilities and the Fire Department means that firemen will, in general, be able
to respond to an incident in less than their 2.5 to 3 minute average emergency response time.
Several large refineries, manufacturing facilities and military stations are located within ten miles from the
City. These facilities carry the potential of causing a hazardous materials release incident that may impact
the City. They include the U.S. Naval Reservation east of the City, the Torrance Municipal Airport and the
U.S. military reservation to the north, the refineries in Wilmington and Torrance to the northeast, and the
San Pedro Hill Air Force Station to the east. Military facilities generally store and handle fuel and other
hazardous substances that, if spilled or released, have the potential of releasing toxic clouds that could
impact neighboring areas. The California Highway Patrol is in charge of spills that occur in freeways, with
local sheriffs and police departments responsible for additional enforcement and routing assistance.
Hazardous materials stored in oil refineries have the potential for toxic fumes if accidentally released during
an earthquake or fire (Toppozada et al., 1988). The Union Oil Refinery in Wilmington is approximately one
mile east of Rolling Hills Estates. Other refineries within five
                                                      8-63
miles of the City include the Mobil Oil Corporation refinery in Torrance, and the Shell Oil Co., Atlantic
Richfield and Texaco, Inc. refineries in Wilmington. Whether a toxic fume released by any of these facilities
would impact Rolling Hills Estates is in part dependent on wind direction and other climatological factors.
Evacuation and Disaster Routes. Evacuation involves relocation of occupants from buildings to ensure
public safety to guidance of residents of an entire neighborhood away fromhazardous areas. Disaster routes
function as primary thoroughfares for movement of emergency response traffic, such as fire control.
Disaster routing and evacuation are similar, in that road blockage or traffic jams can reduce response times.
They are different in that evacuation activities are controlled by particular situations, and often require
improvisation.
Storms, fire, and earthquakes can restrict access to residential neighborhoods with only single routes of
entry. Road blockage could be in the form of slope failure, road wash out or local inundation. Evacuation
is complicated during hazardous materials incidences because of the undetectable nature of some toxic
chemicals, and because the movement of gas plumes cannot be readily predicted. Industrial centers to the
north and east pose the greatest risk during Santa Ana wind conditions, when inland winds are directed
toward the City.
                                                      8-64
