CITY OF HIDDEN HILLS
GENERAL
PLAN
\ "K \ INCORPORATED /	/
CITY OF HIDDEN HILLS GENERAL PLAN
Adopted By
CITY COUNCIL
November 13, 1995 Resolution No. 572
Consultants to the City
Cotton/Beland/Associates, Inc. Urban & Environmental Planning 747 East Green Street, Suite 400
Pasadena, California 91101 (818) 304-0102
833.00
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Introduction.............................................................1
Land Use Element.......................................................LU-1
Infrastructure Element ............................................... IN-1
Natural Resources Element..............................................NR-1
Safety Element.........................................................SA-1
Noise Element..........................................................NO-1
Housing Element ........................................................H-l
Appendix
Environmental Documentation
INTRODUCTION
City of Hidden Hills
General Plan
INTRODUCTION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Role and Purpose of the General Plan..................................1
Public Participation...................................................3
Organization of the General Plan ......................................3
t#
Amendment of the General Plan..........................................4
General Plan Objectives
4
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure	Page
1.	Hidden Hills in Regional Vicinity ...................................2
2.	Sphere of Influence..................................................6
INTRODUCTION TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The City of Hidden Hills is located in Los Angeles County on the western edge of the San Fernando Valley. The City is bordered by the City of Los Angeles to the north and east, by unincorporated Los Angeles County to the south, and by unincorporated Los Angeles County and Ventura County to the west.
Rolling foothills and small valleys create the 1.6 square mile landscape of the City. Ranch style homes characterize the community, which functions in a regional context where commercial uses and services are provided by adjoining jurisdictions.
ROLE AND PURPOSE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The City incorporated in 1961. The City of Hidden Hills adopted a General Plan in June, 1973. Several years later, the City adopted a revised General Plan, with a subsequent revision to the Housing Element in 1991.
The Hidden Hills General Plan is, in effect, the constitution of the City and will serve as a blueprint for the long-range physical planning of the City. The Plan contains community goals and policies designed to shape the long-term development of the City, as well as protect its environmental, social, cultural and economic resources.
California Government Code Section 65302 requires that a general plan contain seven elements; 1) Land Use, 2) Housing, 3) Circulation, 4) Open Space, 5) Conservation, 6) Safety, and 7) Noise. The Hidden Hills General Plan Update consists of an integrated and internally consistent set of goals and polices that address a number of different topic areas related to the future development of the community. These topics correspond to the seven mandated General Plan elements - Land Use, Housing, Circulation, Open Space, Conservation, Safety and Noise.
Hidden Hills General Plan
1
Introduction


1? L
north 0
j______________I
1	2 miles
Figure 1-1 Regional Location
Hidden HilLs General Plan
Introduction
2
Although the focus of this Plan is on land use and the need to plan for future development, other issues also benefit from long-range planning. The Hidden Hills General Plan repeatedly examines the relationship of the other elements to the Land Use Element. This structure ensures compliance with State law regarding General Plan consistency. Moreover, it establishes a comprehensive document which can improve coordination of community development activities among all units of government.
This Plan is an internally consistent document which provides a comprehensive data base and set of projections for all of its parts. Therefore, it is anticipated that the Plan will require periodic review and possible amendment to ensure that its information is timely and relevant.
Planning case law has placed the General Plan atop the hierarchy of local government law regulating land use. Consequently, consistency between the General Plan and all other land use plans, policies and programs is necessary. Zoning ordinances, specific plans and individual project plans must be consistent with the goals, policies and standards contained in the General Plan. In addition, all capital improvements and public works projects must be consistent with the General Plan.
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
The public plays an important role in both the preparation and implementation phases of the General Plan. Because the General Plan reflects community goals and objectives, citizens must be involved with identifying issues and formulating goals. The City made every effort to insure that the public and various civic organizations were consulted during the plan preparation stage. Additional public involvement was also encouraged through the public hearing process.
The General Plan will undergo a review at a public hearing before the City of Hidden Hills City Council. At that time, the public will be able to express attitudes concerning the Draft General Plan.
ORGANIZATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The Hidden Hills General Plan consists of an introduction and six elements which together satisfy the content requirements of State Planning Law. To eliminate overlap in subject matter and policy, the Open Space and Conservation elements have been combined into the Natural Resources Element as permitted by state law
Hidden Hills General Plan
3
Introduction
(Government Code Section 65301). The Infrastructure Element fulfills the requirements of a Circulation Element. The General Plan elements and Land Use Policy Map clearly state the community’s goals and policies for the long term development of the City.
Each element is comprised of several sections. The first section is an introduction to the purpose of the element, and its relationship to other General Plan elements. The second section provides background information necessary for issues identification and preparation of element policies. The third section presents a summary of element issue areas which will need to be addressed by policy. The fourth and final section contains the goals and policies designed to guide development decisions relative to the element topic. In addition, the Land Use Element contains a section which describes the Land Use Policy Map, and the Infrastructure Element contains a section describing the Circulation Plan.
AMENDMENT OF THE GENERAL PLAN
State law recognizes the dynamic nature of the General Plan and provides for periodic review of the document to insure that it is consistent with the conditions, values, expectations, and needs of the community:
"The General Plan is a dynamic document because it is based on community values and an understanding of existing and projected conditions and needs, all of which continually change. Local governments should plan for change by establishing formal procedures for regularly monitoring, reviewing, and amending the General Plan."
State law (Government Code Section 65588) requires a Housing Element update to be conducted every five years and revisions to be made as necessary to reflect "new conditions, local attitudes, and political realities." The format of the Hidden Hills General Plan is designed to facilitate the updating and amending of the General Plan by the City.
GENERAL PLAN OBJECTIVES
The overall objectives of the City of Hidden Hills General Plan are as follows:
1.	To preserve and maintain the outdoor-oriented, open space, rural atmosphere of the community.
Hidden Hills General Plan
4
Introduction
2.	To provide a guide for construction and development in the City in accordance with the acreage and general building requirements as contained in the City municipal code.
3.	To protect the City’s residents from excessive noise, objectionable waste on either private or community property, and in general, from any physical condition that may encroach on any resident’s enjoyment of private property and communal areas by maintaining the general ordinances of the City that pertain to these matters.
4.	To monitor the traffic circulation within the City and safely accommodate vehicular movement in the future.
5.	To monitor and interact with, when necessary, other jurisdictions surrounding the City, when actions of those jurisdictions will have a direct or indirect effect on the lifestyle and general enjoyment of the community by its residents.
Hidden Hills General Plan
5
Introduction

County of Ventura
Ventura County Los Angeles County £
City Of Los Angeles
City of Calabasas
County of w Los Angeles 1
Sphere of Influence
City Limits
f£5cii 2 t
J
2,000 feet
Figure 2 Sphere of Influence Map
Hidden Hills General Plan
Introduction
6
LAND USE ELEMENT
City of Hidden Hills
LAND USE ELEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Introduction.................................................................LU-1
Planning Areas...............................................................LU-2
Existing Land Use ..........................................................LU-3
Land Use Classifications.....................................................LU-4
Overview of Land Use Plan...................................................LU-10
Goals and Policies .........................................................LU-14
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure	Page
1.	Existing Land Use ...............................................LU-5
2.	Floor Area Ratio ................................................LU-6
3.	Land Use Designations and	Zoning............................LU-11
LIST OF TABLES
Table	Page
1.	Land Use Categories...........................................LU-12
2.	Estimated General Plan Buildout...............................LU-14

LAND USE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The City of Hidden Hills is primarily a residential equestrian community. Future residential development will continue to adhere to the principles of the community. The City regulates commercial uses so that they will not detract from its residential nature. Public lands within the City support community services, recreational opportunities, educational facilities, and utilities.
This Land Use Element describes official City policy for the location of land uses and their orderly growth and development. It serves as a guide for public officials and citizens to determine the best uses of lands within the City. To the private citizen, the Land Use Element will set forth the type of neighborhood he or she can expect to live in, the location and type of public facilities available, and the time and distance required for travel to necessary activities. Public officials will use the Land Use Element as a guide for placement of public facilities and services, and for directing new development. The Element also serves as a basis for definition of short-range and long-range capital improvement programs.
Purpose of the Element
The intent of the Land Use Element is to describe present and projected land use activity within Hidden Hills. The Element also addresses crucial issues concerning the relationship between land uses and environmental quality, potential hazards, and social and economic objectives.
In accordance with the State of California General Plan Guidelines, the Land Use Element serves the following purposes:
° Identifies land use issues;
° Provides a statement of land use policies and proposals, distinguishing, when appropriate, between short, middle and long-term periods of fulfillment;
° Describes land use density and land use intensities
provided for under the Plan, including the relationships
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-l
Land Use Element
of such uses to social, environmental and economic goals and objectives;
° Provides for standards and criteria for physical
development within each use area with consideration for land capacity; and
° Describes and depicts land use patterns provided for under the Plan.
Relationship to Other Elements
A major goal in this General Plan Update is to achieve internal consistency throughout the various General Plan elements. Since the Land Use Element regulates how land is utilized, it integrates and synthesizes most of the issues and policies contained in the other Plan elements.
Specifically, the Land Use Element relates to the Housing Element by defining the extent and density of future residential development in the City. The Land Use Element also is coordinated with the Natural Resource Element in that open space resources are designated on the Land Use Policy Map, and environmental factors are considered in the location of land use types. The Land Use Element also relates to the Safety and Noise Elements by integrating their broad land use recommendations into detailed policies which apply to specific geographic locations. Finally, the Infrastructure and Land Use Elements are interrelated in that specific land use decisions depend upon traffic routes and circulation patterns.
Relationship to Hidden Hills Municipal Code
The General Plan Land Use designations correspond directly to the City of Hidden Hills zoning specifications, as found in the Land Use and Development Regulations of the Hidden Hills Municipal Code.
PLANNING AREAS
City Boundaries
Before the City incorporated in 1961, the Hidden Hills Community Association was established to maintain private roads and horse trails and to ensure that the rural character of the area remained. When the City incorporated in 1961, the boundaries were almost identical to the area maintained by the Community Association.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-2
Land Use Element
Today, the City Boundary is that area over which the City has direct land use planning and zoning control.
Sphere of Influence
The Sphere of Influence (SOI) is adjacent unincorporated properties over which the city has particular interest. The Los Angeles County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) established the Sphere of Influence for the City of Hidden Hills. While the City makes recommendations to the County on land use policy of the SOI, the County has final jurisdiction. The Sphere of Influence, exhibited in Figure 2, extends south of the City to the Ventura Freeway and west of the City to Quinn Canyon Road.
The City of Calabasas is annexing unincorporated land adjacent to the western and southern borders of Hidden Hills. Part of the gated community of Mountain View Estates is in the Hidden Hills SOI. The Mountain View Estates Homeowners Association owns Crummer Canyon, the open space area to the west of the City,
Other areas within the City’s SOI which Calabasas is considering annexing include Craftsman’s Corner/Center, Hideaway Farms, Hidden Hills West, the Mureau house and driving range, and the remainder of the property along Mureau Road. The Craftsman’s Comer Land Use Study, prepared for the City of Calabasas in 1993, contains an extensive analysis of the environmental concerns associated with the possible annexation of the area.
Area of Interest
The Area of Interest is an informal designation for the properties or facilities of particular concern for the City of Hidden Hills. The Area of Interest may include the Ventura Freeway south of the City or other properties whose development could affect the City in the future.
EXISTING LAND USE
The City of Hidden Hills is primarily an equestrian residential community, of mostly one-acre lots. California ranch style homes with three-rail fences and an abundance of equestrian facilities create the City’s unique atmosphere.
Lot sizes range from a minimum of one acre to several acres in size. Many lots contain a buildable ridge and steep arroyos.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-3
Land Use Element
One of Hidden Hills’ unique features is the set of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions which have assured the maintenance and uniformity of properties throughout the years. Generally, buildings are limited to 24 feet in height with three-rail fences surrounding the properties. Residences are strongly encouraged to be of a ranch style. All properties provide easements which are primarily utilized for equestrian trails. The CC&Rs are enforced through the Hidden Hills Community Association. Through the association, fees are levied which are used for maintenance of the roads, gates, trails, and recreational facilities.
Figure LU-1 illustrates existing land use.
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
The General Plan defines the planned use of all land within the City’s jurisdiction. The following section delineates the classifications of each land use in the City.
Land Use Intensity/Density
The Element uses certain terminology to describe land use designations. Land Use designations in this Element are described in terms of intensity and density. The term "density" refers to residential uses and to the population and development capacity of residential land. Density is described in terms of dwelling units per net acre of land (du/ac). For example, 50 dwelling units occupying 25 acres of land is 2 du/ac. In Hidden Hills, maximum residential density is 1 du/ac.
The term "intensity" applies to non-residential uses and refers to the extent of development on a parcel of land or on a lot. Intensity includes the total building square footage, the building height, the floor area ratio, and/or the percentage of lot coverage. Often, intensity describes non-residential development levels, but in a broader sense, intensity expresses overall levels of both residential and non-residential development types. This Element uses floor area ratio and building square footage as measures of commercial development intensity.
Floor Area Ratio, FAR, represents the ratio of the total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to the land area of that lot. To determine FAR, divide gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the area of the lot. For example, Figure LU-2 illustrates that a 10,000 square foot building on a 20,000 square foot lot yields an FAR of 0.5:1. The FAR controls the intensity of use on a lot. A 0.5:1 FAR can yield a building of one stoiy in height which covers
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-4
Land Use Element
k r. JCo/nmenrfa/f

City Limits
<Z5ei\
north 0
1,600 feet
Figure LU-1 Existing Land Use
LU-5
Hidden Hills
General Plan
Land Use
Element
-r
FAR = .50:1
In a zone district with a maximum FAR of 0.50:1, the maximum allowable floor area of a building on a 20,000 sq. ft. lot would be 10,000 sq. ft (10,000 sq. ft. divided by 20,000 sq. ft. equals 0.50).
NOTE: Variations may occur if upper floors are stepped back from ground level lot coverage.
2 Floors
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) =
Gross Building Area (All Floors)
Lot Area
fSxil
Figure LU-2 Floor Area Ratio
LU-6
Hidden Hills
General Plan
Land Use
Element
one-half of the lot area, or a taller building which covers less of the lot, providing for more open space around the building. State General Plan law requires that the Land Use Element indicate the maximum densities and intensities permitted within the Land Use Plan. This Element describes the land use designations shown on the Land Use Map.
Residential
Hidden Hills contains ranch style residential homes. The average lot size is 1.7 acres, and the City averages 3.4 persons per household. Large setback requirements and lot sizes, as well as topographic constraints on many lots provide significant amounts of open space on developed parcels that give the overall community a sense of openness. Many of the lots are large enough to support horses, and many have stables as accessory structures. The City’s municipal code provides for the following three residential districts. Residential Agricultural Suburban Zone (RA-S)
The RA-S Zone maximum development density is one dwelling unit per acre. Guest houses/servants’ quarters without a kitchen do not constitute a dwelling unit.
The RA-S Zone requires single-family homes on one acre minimum lots, with a second story containing less than 40 percent of the total living area.
Residential Agriculture Suburban-2 Zone (RA-S-2)
The RA-S-2 Zone maximum development density is one dwelling unit per one acre with provision for an additional detached dwelling unit.
The RA-S-2 Zone allows the same as the RA-S Zone with additional accessory uses and with additional building height allowances depending on building size.
Residential Zone (R-l)
The R-l Zone maximum development density is approximately one dwelling unit per one-half acre.
The Residential Zone (R-l) allows single-family homes on a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-7
Land Use Element
Community Use Zone (CU)
"ST
The maximum FAR for any commercial structure is 1:1. No commercial structure shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
A number of sites totalling slightly over 22 acres are designated for this category. These areas are fully developed and no future development is anticipated. See Figure LU-2 for an illustration of the maximum potential building on any given CU designated site, not allowing for hillside or other zoning restrictions..
This designation is for public facilities owned and/or leased by the City of Hidden Hills or other public service providers. The Community Use Zone includes the City Administration Building and adjacent recreation facilities, the Community Association and adjacent recreation facilities, the Round Meadow School site, riding rings, communication facilities.
Many of the community uses are recreational. Apart from the community pool, riding rings, and tennis courts, there is an extensive network of trails, which are controlled and maintained by the Community Association. The trails are laced throughout the City affording hikers and equestrians alike varied opportunities within the community’s boundaries.
Restricted Commercial Use Zone (CR)
The maximum FAR for any commercial structure is 1:1. No commercial structure shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
Only one 2.66 acre area is designated CR. This area is at the eastern border of the City and is divided by Long Valley Road. No additional development is currently proposed for this area, however there is a building potential for a total of up to 50,000 square feet of building area, not considering zoning restrictions other than setback requirements.
The Hidden Hills Municipal Code details permitted uses in the Restricted Commercial Zone. Permitted uses include non-medical and non-dental professional, executive, administrative, and sales offices; retail and service stores and businesses, and other accessory buildings and nonconforming structures.
Conditional uses permitted in the CR Zone, with the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit include retail food service businesses such as restaurants, ice cream parlors, and sandwich shops.
All new buildings must have an equestrian rural style and are subject to plan review and findings contained in the municipal code as well as the standards of the Community Association.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-8
Land Use Element
Vacant Lands
Currently, there are approximately 100 acres of vacant land within the City of Hidden Hills. While the parcels are vacant, most are designated for residential development. Surrounding Jim Bridger and Ashley Ridge Roads in the southwestern portion of the City, and surrounding El Dorado Meadow and Annie Oakley Roads in the northernmost section of the City, approximately 30 parcels are vacant and designated for residential use. In addition, Tentative Tract 51056 accessed by Lasher Road and Bridle Trail Road in the southern area of the City consists of 43.7 acres. It is designated for a net increase of 18 single family homes on one acre parcels.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-9
Land Use Element
OVERVIEW OF LAND USE PLAN
The Hidden Hills Land Use Policy Map is presented in Figure LU-3. The Map provides a graphic representation of the General Plan’s development policies and indicates land uses as they are designated and for which policies and standards have been formulated. The major goal of Hidden Hills’ General Plan Update is to maintain and foster the community’s rural and residential environment while ensuring that new development is in conformance with established community standards.
The land use classifications designated by the General Plan provide for the development of the community’s vacant properties in a manner that is consistent with established and approved development patterns. The land use classifications established by this General Plan Update reflect a system that is different but generally consistent with the previous land use classifications. The dominance of a low-density single family land use pattern clearly continues to be the policy of the City of Hidden Hills. Table LU-1 presents the list of updated General Plan land use categories and an acreage distribution. The following discussion elaborates on the location and intent of the General Plan land uses.
Residential Land Uses
The Plan continues the City’s three existing single-family residential land use categories: RA-S, RA-S-2, and R-l. Through these three classifications, the City will be able to ensure that the remaining undeveloped properties throughout Hidden Hills will be developed at densities that are compatible with existing residential development.
Community Uses
The majority of recreational open space and public facilities within the community are maintained by the Hidden Hills Community Association. Development on any City-owned property within a Community Use Zone must be used for public purposes, contingent upon a public hearing. Planning Agency review and approval is required. Property owned by other public agencies may be used for public purpose upon the granting of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Agency.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-10
Land Use Element
ana da hg unit p« Ms urn (average density) -fcutfri no event Is exceed tan (to) dweflng units- street right-oi-way wtfhs shal not be lets tian 53 feet
General Plan Land Use Mt	Zoning fM«	ResWenfiai-Agrfcullural, Suburban
M-l	R-AS	(1 a minftiwn fet sfrej ResWwtiaJ-Agrfcuflural, Suburban
RSF	R-1	(I acre mstfnunj lot sfee) Single-Family Residential
C	C-fl	(20.000 sq It minimum W sin) Commercial Restricted
Pubic	C-U	PubUc/Community Use
City Limits
(£50)
nort/t 0
____I
1,600 feel
Figure LU-3
General Plan Land Use Designations and Zoning Classifications
E3
LU-11
Land Use
Element
Hidden Hills
General Plan
TABLE LU-1
CITY OF HIDDEN HILLS LAND USE TABULATION
Land Use Category	Acreage
RA-S Residential	821.46
RA-S-2 Residential	88.45
R-l Residential	1.97
CR Commercial Restricted	2.66
CU Public/Community Use	22,32
Total*	940.00
* Includes 3.20 acres not designated Source: City of Hidden Hills
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-12
Land Use Element
Commercial Uses
The City wishes to maintain its rural equestrian character by continuing restrictive policies regarding commercial uses. Only a very small percentage of the City’s total land area is designated for commercial use, with only limited retail and service commercial activities permitted by right and food service uses subject to conditional use permit review. To ensure high-quality commercial development, the City will require all projects to undergo site plan review and will enforce landscaping, architecture, and sign standards contained in the Municipal Code.
Implications of Land Use Policy
The Land Use Element provides for the continued residential emphasis of the Hidden Hills community. The General Plan ensures that this growth will take place in a way that promotes compatibility with adjacent properties, preserves the existing rural residential character, and is environmentally sensitive. The amount of additional growth that can be accommodated under this General Plan is presented as Table LU-2. As this table illustrates, the Plan only provides for the expansion of residential uses.
Flood Prone Areas
State General Plan law mandates that the Land Use Element identify flood-prone areas. According to the Federal Emergency Management District (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the City of Hidden Hills is located in Area C and has no 100-year or 500-year flood zone. There is no year round stream or pond within the City. Minimal surface water accumulation occurs only during and after periods of intense rain fall.
Build Out
There are an estimated 1875 persons living in Hidden Hills? Over the City’s 1.6 square miles, the population density is 1442 persons per square mile. Based on the 1990 Census average of 3.4 persons per household in Hidden Hills, an additional 167 persons could reside in the City under General Plan buildout, increasing the City population to 2042. This would result in an ultimate population density of 1570 persons per square mile.
1990 US Census counted 1729 people living in the City. With an estimated 43 new occupied units, at a rate of 3.4 persons per household, the estimated population is 1875.
Hidden Hills General Flan
LU-13
Land Use Element
TABLE LU-2
CITY OF HIDDEN HILLS ESTIMATED GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT NET INCREASE IN DEVELOPMENT
General Plan Area	Dwelling Units	Population
RA-S-2	15	51
RA-S	34	115
R-l	0	0
Totals	49	167
Note: The Final Environmental Impact Report for Tentative Tract 51056 indicated that 76 units could be developed City-wide in the future in addition to the IS additional units resulting from the proposed project. The capacity remains for 49 additional units to be developed.		
Sources: Cotton/Beland/Associates, 1994,
GOALS AND POLICIES
The City of Hidden Hills set the following goals and policies for land use:
GOAL 1: Preserve the rural-equestrian character of the community.
Policy 1.1: Generally, all developments have conformed to the
established policies of one acre minimum building and 1.7 acre average developed lot size with no more than 25% lot coverage.
GOAL 2: Protect areas of potential slope instability from future residential developments.
Policy 2.1: Require a "slope stability assessment" to be conducted prior to taking action on future single family residential subdivisions which are located in areas of potential slope instability.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-14
Land Use Element
GOAL 3: Protect future residential areas from flood hazards.
Policy 3.1: Require a "flood assessment" to be conducted prior to taking action on residential subdivisions.
GOAL 4: Prevent the spread of wildfires to residential structures.
Policy 4.1: In fire hazard areas, maintain a cleared firebreak around and adjacent to all residential structures.
GOAL 5: To protect the natural ridgeline and hillside areas and to minimize flooding potential, it is the goal to require that lot size be governed by the natural slopes.
Policy 5.1: Require minimum land disturbance, and to require
larger lot sizes when necessary to accomplish the goal.
GOAL 6: To protect residential properties adjacent to the Commercial Zone.
Policy 6.1: Require development standards in the Municipal Code that are sensitive to the needs of the adjacent residential zone.
GOAL 7: Recommend use of the areas inside the City’s Sphere of Influence which will preserve the current City environment.
Policy 7.1: Continue discussion with City of Calabasas concerning its annexations of land south and west of the City.
Hidden Hills General Plan
LU-15
Land Use Element
INFRASTRUCTURE
ELEMENT
City of Hidden Hills
INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Introduction............................................................ IN-1
Existing Circulation System............................................. IN-2
Summary of Circulation Issues and Opportunities...................... IN-6
Overview of Circulation Plan............................................ IN-6
Circulation Goals and Policies......................................... IN-7
Existing Water and Sanitation System .................................. IN-8
Water and Sanitation System Goals and Policies......................... IN-9
Solid Waste Disposal ................................................   IN-9
Existing Energy System................................................. IN-10
Energy System Goals and Policies .................................... IN-10
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure	Page
IN-1 Street System......................................................... IN-5
LIST OF TABLES
Table	Page
IN-1 Trip Generation Rates ........................................... IN-3
IN-2 Existing and Projected Average Daily Trips ...................... IN-3
INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Infrastructure Element addresses the City’s transportation system, water system, and energy system. The infrastructure is the means by which people and commodities move within and through the City. It is a network of routes which serve the circulation needs of the area. The goal of this element is to develop a plan for an overall infrastructure network that will meet current and future transportation needs of all those who live in or travel through the City of Hidden Hills.
Purpose of the Element
The Infrastructure Element is designed to:
° Identify and analyze infrastructure needs and issues;
o Present a planned circulation system to satisfy travel demand based upon projected land use;
° Establish standards and criteria for the location, design,
operation and levels of service of various circulation facilities; and
° Set forth goals and policies to ensure the circulation, water, and energy needs of the community are adequately met.
Relationship to Other Elements
The Infrastructure Element is related to several other elements of the General Plan and perhaps most closely related to the Land Use Element. Circulation facilities are designed around the Land Use Plan’s pattern of land use. The type and design of the infrastructure system are determined by the type and density of surrounding land uses as well as inter-city access patterns and loads.
The Infrastructure Element is also related to the Noise, Natural Resources, and Safety Elements. As described in the Noise Element, the circulation system is one of the major components of urban noise. The circulation network has a direct impact on natural resources, particularly air quality. Factors of safety and seismic safety affect the location and design of infrastructure, and dictate the need for evacuation and emergency routes.
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-1
Infrastructure Element
EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM
Local Street System
The City of Hidden Hills street system consists of mostly private roadways. Within the residential zones, most streets are privately owned by the Community Association.
The streets serve a mixture of vehicles, bicycles, horses and pedestrians. The following section identifies the traffic and design characteristics of the City’s major collector streets:
Long Valley Road
Long Valley Road serves as a collector street for access to residential areas within the City. The road traverses the City in a general northwest-southeast direction. The collector provides access to the Ventura Freeway (US 101) as it ties into Valley Circle Boulevard at the freeway interchange. In addition, Long Valley Road intersects Round Meadow Road. The two lane roadway is 26 feet wide, including three foot wide concrete swales. Long Valley Road has no controls except stop signs.
Round Meadow Road
Round Meadow Road serves as a collector street and accesses Mureau Road outside the City. The road is aligned in a general north-south direction and intersects Long Valley Road.
Spring Valley Road
Spring Valley Road collects traffic from residential areas and from Long Valley Road and functions as access to Valley Circle Boulevard via Burbank Boulevard outside the City.
Trip Generation
Using trip generation rates published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, it is possible to determine the expected average number of daily trips the estimated 552 occupied housing units in the City will generate and to determine the trip generation impacts at buildout.1 Applying trip generation rates for estate residential land use to the number of housing units in the City of Hidden Hills generates the average daily trips (ADT) and the average number of trips during peak hours.
JThe 1990 Census counts 527 housing units in the City with 509 units occupied. Since the Census count, an estimated 45 units have been completed, bringing the total number of housing units to 572. Using the 1990 vacancy rate of 3.47a, there are an estimated 552 occupied units.
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-2
Infrastructure Element
Table IN-1 shows the generation rates, and Table IN-2 depicts the number of trips expected to occur in the City.
TABLE IN-1
TRIP GENERATION RATES
1—	DESCRIPTOR	DAILY	AM PEAK HOUR		PM PEAK HOUR	
			IN	OUT	IN	OUT
Estate Residential	Dwelling Units	12.45	0.25	0.72	0.86	0.46
Source: 'Trip Generation," 5th Edition; Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE); 1991.
TABLE IN-2
CITY OF HIDDEN HILLS
EXISTING AND PROJECTED AVERAGE DAILY TRIPS (ADT)
NUMBEROF UNITS		DAILY	AM PEAK HOUR		PM PEAK HOUR	
			IN	OUT	IN	OUT
Occupied Housing Units	552	6872	138	397	475	254
Unoccupied Housing Units	20	249	5	14	17	9
Additional Units at Buildout	49	610	12	35	42	23
TOTAL	621	7731	155	446	534	286
Source: 1990 US Census, Cotton/Beland/Associates, 1994.
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-3
Infrastructure Element
As Table IN-2 shows, occupied housing units average 6872 daily trips in the City, with 397 vehicles leaving their homes in the morning peak hours and 475 returning to their homes in the afternoon peak hours. At General Plan buildout, residents will make an average total of 7731 trips per day, a 12.5 percent change.
Collector streets, such as Long Valley Road, Round Meadow Road, and Spring Valley Road generally have a daily capacity of up to 10,000 trips. These collector roads actually operate similar to local or residential roads in most cities. The 1993 Final Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for Tentative Tract 51056 reported the volume on Long Valley Road at 2,800 trips per day. The EIR projected the additional trips generated at buildout to be 3,955 daily trips. This volume is far below the 10,000 daily trip capacity of a collector road.
Circulation System
Street System
The City’s street system plan is presented on Figure IN-1. Public Transit
Direct transit service is not provided for the City of Hidden Hills since all of its roadways are private. Transit service is provided along the perimeter of the City by RTD lines 245 and 161 and Commuter Express 423.
Equestrian Trail System
The community of Hidden Hills maintains over 35 miles of equestrian trails. All homes have a ten foot wide minimum perimeter access easement which connects to the community trail system. The Community Association makes an effort to ensure that each homesite has at least one bridle trail along a property line. Figure NR-1 in the Natural Resources Element illustrates the Equestrian Trails. The Community Association Trails Committee meets the third Wednesday of each month to discuss issues and plans relating to the trail system.
Pedestrian Walkways and Bicycle Paths
Consistent with the City’s rural setting, the City does not provide sidewalks or bicycle paths along the existing collector roads. All bicycles and pedestrians use the streets. Enforcement of the adequate street width and of the 30 mile per hour speed limit insures safe passage of bicycles and pedestrians.
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-4
Infrastructure Element
L7H
S3
Freeway
Collector
All other city streets are defined as local
S3
City Limits
rSxii
tr
noth
L
0
_____t
1, BOO feet
Figure IN-1 Street System
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-5
Infrastructure Element
Parking
Off-street parking is provided in conjunction with City residences.
SUMMARY OF CIRCULATION ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
The City’s existing street system has adequate capacity to accommodate existing daily traffic volumes. In general, the volumes on the collector roads are considered light for a residential street.
OVERVIEW OF CIRCULATION PLAN
The Community Association Roads Committee meets the second Tuesday of each month to discuss plans and issues relating to circulation.
Future Traffic Demand
The future traffic demand in the City of Hidden Hills is directly related to the potential for additional residential units, as discussed above. Because Hidden Hills is a gated community, potential increases in traffic in surrounding communities will not impact the City street system.
Table IN-2, page IN-3, includes the projected increase in traffic daily trips. These increases can be accommodated on the City’s street system. The projected future traffic volumes are expected to operate well within the roadway capacity.
Street Classification System
The unique characteristics of Hidden Hills’ roadway system, with the private status of its roadways, with gated community operations, and with limited future traffic volume increases, eliminate the need for a specific street classification system. The collector roads, Long Valley Road, Round Meadow Road, and Spring Valley Road operate similar to local or residential roads in most cities.
Traffic Control Devices
The installation of traffic control devices in the City should be based upon established warrants and professional analyses. A reference for implementation is the California Department of Transportation "Traffic Manual". The installation of traffic control
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-6
Infrastructure Element
devices in conformance with standards provides a safe road system and reduces potential liability on the part of the City.
These references provide guides or warrants for the installation of many traffic controls such as STOP signs, traffic signals and speed limits. In the case of speed limits, the guidelines are required to be followed by the California Vehicle Code. While these guides or warrants are not absolute, they will assist in providing uniformity, which is a safety benefit.
In August, 1994, the City Council approved a maintenance agreement for the Round Meadow/Mureau Traffic Signal, submitted by the County of Los Angeles. The County will maintain the signal, and the City will contribute one third of maintenance costs.
CIRCULATION GOALS AND POLICIES
The following goals and policies are designed to ensure the maintenance of an efficient circulation system for Hidden Hills.
GOAL 1:	Continue the existing practice of privately owned and
maintained streets within the residential zones of the City.
Policy 1.1: Require that all collector streets in new subdivisions be owned by the Hidden Hills Community Association, or, in the case of multiple driveways, by the adjacent property owners.
Policy 1.2: Continue to require that all streets be designed to
keep the rural, equestrian character of the community.
GOAL 2:	Maintain through the Community Association the
private nature of and limited access to all community roadways within the residential zone.
Policy 2.1: Maintain through the Community Association
attended gates to all entry points to the residential and community use zones.
GOAL 3:	Assure adequate construction of private streets.
Policy 3.1: Require private roads to have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet, except on cul-de-sacs or as shown on the Land Use Element Map.
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-7
Infrastructure Element
GOAL 4:	Encourage continued development of a communitywide equestrian system by the Community Association.
Policy 4.1:	Each parcel of land will have a ten foot wide perimeter equestrian access easement which connects to the community trail system.
Policy	Each homesite will have a bridle trail along at least one property line.
EXISTING WATER AND SANITATION SYSTEM
The Las Virgenes Municipal Water District (LVMWD) supplies water to the City of Hidden Hills. The system has the capacity to serve all present and projected future water needs. The LVMWD obtains all of its water supply from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD), part of the State Water Project. The LVMWD operates facilities to provide reclaimed water supplies to the City. The LVMWD provides water to residents through a system of mains and laterals. Nearly all of the water system components lie under the City’s roadways.
The LVMWD provides sanitary sewer service for the City, through local collector sewers operated by the Los Angeles County Consolidated Sewer Maintenance District. Sewage collected from the City is discharged for treatment in the City of Los Angeles’ wastewater facilities at their Tillman and Hyperion Treatment Plants, in accordance with an agreement between the LVMWD and the City of Los Angeles.
“According to the LVMWD, portions of the City’s water system have not been updated to the 1,250 gallon-per-minute minimum requirements currently required by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. LVMWD staff indicates that lines originally installed by the Hidden Hills Mutual Water Company are four- and six-inch lines, which provide pressures in the range of 750 gallons per minute. At the time the County assumed jurisdiction for nre prevention and control, the line sizes and fire flows were deemed acceptable. However, for new development, the County requires the 1,250 gallon-per-minute minimum standard. The County has not indicated a need to upgrade the now substandard lines serving the older portions of the community.”
Information on the water consumption by City residents is unavailable. However, based on the LVMWD demand factors of 2,176 gallons per unit per day (assuming 640 gallons per person at 3.4 persons per household), the City of Hidden Hills uses an estimated 1,201,151 gallons per day for 552 occupied households. At buildout, the City’s projected water consumption would be an estimated 1,351,296 gallons per day.
Hidden Hills General Plan
Z/V-5
Infrastructure Element
WATER AND SANITATION SYSTEM GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 1:	All residents should have adequate access to domestic
water supplies.
Policy 1.1: Actively support legislation which seeks to provide public water supplies to the Southern California region.
Policy 1.2: Actively support programs which promote water conservation throughout the City.
Policy 1.3: For those sites where the installation of reclaimed water systems are feasible and meet all regulatory requirements, allow their installation.
GOAL 2:	Address potential inadequacies in the City’s water
distribution system.
Policy 2.1: Initiate a study to determine possible deficiencies in the City’s water distribution system pertaining to County fire flow requirements.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
Hillside Rubbish and Las Virgenes Disposal are responsible for the collection of solid waste generated in the City of Hidden Hills. Refuse collected by these companies is transported to the Calabasas Landfill. The Calabasas Landfill is a designated Class II landfill operated by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District. Class II landfills accept municipal waste but not hazardous material.
Planners for the district estimate the useful life of the landfill to be an additional 12 to 16 years, based on anticipated growth. Permits for additional sites are being pursued to accommodate demand after that period.
On January 1, 1990, the California Legislature enacted the California Integrated Solid Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB 939). This act is intended to reduce the amount of solid waste generated through source reduction, recycling, and reuse. City and County jurisdictions must identify an implementation schedule to divert 25 percent of total landfilled solid waste by the year 1995 and 50 percent by the year 2000. The City of Hidden Hills has prepared a Source Reduction and Recycling Element, Household Hazardous Waste Element, and Non-Disposal Facilities Element, as required.
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-9
Infrastructure Element
EXISTING ENERGY SYSTEM
Southern California Gas Company supplies natural gas service to the City of Hidden Hills. Gas lines lie under the City’s streets and right-of-ways. Southern California Edison provides electrical service to the community via both underground and overhead lines. The existing energy system has the capacity to serve both present and future needs.
ENERGY SYSTEM GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 1:	Promote, practice, and encourage workable energy
conservation techniques in Hidden Hills.
Policy 1.1: Encourage the use of energy efficient systems in all new development and rehabilitation of existing structures.
Policy 1.2: Promote utilization of alternative energy resources within the City where these do not conflict with adopted design standards.
Policy 1.3: Provide input where appropriate for on-going fuel
source research, and support legislation funding such activities.
Hidden Hills General Plan
IN-10
Infrastructure Element
NATURAL
RESOURCES
ELEMENT
City of Hidden Hills
General Plan
NATURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Introduction..............................................................  NR-1
Inventory of Existing Conditions ...........................................NR-2
Goals and Policies .........................................................NR-8
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure	Page
NR-1 Open Space and Equestrian Trails................................NR-3
LIST OF TABLES
Table	Page
NR-2 Air Quality.....................................................NR-7
NATURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
Since the early part of the century, Hidden Hills has changed from a sparsely vegetated grazing land to a landscaped residential community. Such a conversion of land often endangers sensitive resources and open space lands. Thus, Hidden Hills has made a concerted effort to conserve and protect the natural environment during its development. This Natural Resources Element is a written description of the City’s commitment to maintaining a balance of preservation and development. Its purpose is to ensure future generations the same level of enjoyment from the environment as is enjoyed by present residents.
Purpose of the Element
Government Code Section 65302(d) requires that the Conservation Element address the conservation and the development and utilization of natural resources including water, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources. Sections 65302(e), 65560, and 65561 require that the Open Space Element: address the preservation of open space lands; discourage premature unnecessary conversions of open space; anticipate population increases; and plan for the conservation and preservation of open space.
The Natural Resources Element is designed to:
° Inventory the existing natural resources and the various functions served by open space.
° Balance planning activity with environmental considerations.
° Establish recognition of the social, economic and aesthetic benefits which develop from the preservation of open space.
° Prevent neglect or unnecessary destruction of natural resources.
o Set forth goals and policies concerning the conservation,
development and use of natural resources and the preservation of open space.
Hidden Hills General Plan
HR-1
Natural Resources Element
Relationship to Other Elements
The Natural Resources Element provides significant input into the Land Use and Infrastructure Elements. Land use decisions are based upon location and significance of various environmental factors. Also, new circulation proposals will be required to consider possible environmental impacts prior to their approval.
The information provided in the Natural Resources Element is significant on a project-specific basis. Through the environmental assessment process, planners and local decision-makers are required to make an initial assessment as to whether or not a proposed project will have a "significant effect" on the environment. The Natural Resources Element will serve as a tool in the environmental evaluation process.
INVENTORY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The purpose of this section is to provide information relative to the utilization of the City’s natural resources and the preservation of open space areas. The information presented herein provides the basis for the policies and strategies discussed in the element’s final section. Figure NR-1 exhibits open spaces including equestrian trails. The Community Association Parks and Recreation Committee oversees all plans and programs in the Association maintained open space. In addition, a Community Association Trails Committee oversees the maintenance and expansion of the City’s trails system.
Open Space Inventory Equestrian:
City open spaces include over 35 miles of bridle trails and three riding rings.
Tennis Courts:
A recreational facility in the northern portion of the City includes two tennis courts, as does the community center at the "old" city hall on Long Valley Road.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NR-2
Natural Resources Element
City Limits
Yj.	Figure NR-1
@8> noith 0______1,600 feet Open Space and Equestrian Trails
Hidden Hills General Plan
NR-3
Natural Resources
Element
Hillside Open Space:
Excessively steep hillsides constrain a substantial amount of land in Hidden Hills. While many sections of the equestrian trails have grades between 10 and 30 percent, a substantial number of sections have grades between 30 and 55 percent.
Management of Resources
In addition to open space areas, Hidden Hills contains natural resource components which warrant conservation. Local resources include vegetation, wildlife, water, air quality, soils, and minerals. The characteristics of these resource components will be described in the following section, providing the foundation for policies which support their conservation. The City contains no rare, threatened, or endangered species.
Vegetation
The City of Hidden Hills is a landscaped community. Prior to development in the City, natural vegetation was sparse. With the exception of individual Valley Oak trees, there is little natural vegetation in the City of Hidden Hills. The City and the California Department of Fish and Game consider oak trees a valuable natural resource. City Land Use and Development regulations protect mature oak trees.
Non-native grasslands, such as black mustard, wild oats, red brome, and ripgut grass, cover the few undeveloped areas of the City. Undeveloped areas are home to a few native species, such as California sage, buckwheat, goldenbrush, and purple needlegrass. Eucalyptus are prevalent in landscaped areas.
Animals
Animals present in the City are those known to coexist in areas of human habitation. The City is home to the beechey ground squirrel, a rodent typically found in developed areas. Rodents and lagomorphs such as the black tailed hare, the Audobon cottontail, California pocket mouse, the deermouse, the botta pocket gopher, the bush rabbit, and the dusky footed woodrat inhabit the City. Other mammals known to pass through the area include striped skunk, coyote, mule deer, and occasionally mountain lion.
Birds residing in the sage-scrub areas include the California Quail, the northern oriole, the brown towhee, the rufous-sided towhee, and the scrub jay. Nuttall’s woodpecker, the mockingbird, Ann’s humming bird, bushtit, goldfinch, and bewich’s wren inhabit the oak-woodland areas. In addition, the red winged black bird, the starling, the red tailed hawk, the turkey vulture, the western
Hidden Hills General Plan
NR-4
Natural Resources Element
meadow lark, the sparrow hawk, the common raven, the mourning dove, and the western kingbird inhabit the Hidden Hills area.
Reptiles in the area include the western fence lizard, the striped racer, the common king snake, the southern alligator lizard, the western skink, the side blotched lizard, and the western rattlesnake.
Water Resources
Water sources available to the City are derived exclusively from Las Virgenes Municipal Water District (LVMWD). The LVMWD obtains all of its water supply from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD), which is part of the State Water Project. In addition, the LVMWD operates facilities to provide reclaimed water to the City.
In recent years, drought conditions hindered the LVMWD in its efforts to provide water supplies to new customers. As a result of past drought conditions, the LVMWD has a voluntary water conservation program which encourages a 10 percent cutback in water use. The LVMWD developed a Water Conserving Landscape Ordinance in order to encourage the use of native plants in landscaping plans. The Ordinance states that the LVMWD supports jurisdiction’s efforts to conserve water.
The City of Hidden Hills has adopted a Water Efficiency and Landscape Ordinance.
Air Quality
Air quality, like other natural resources, is limited. Within any time period, the local air basin has a restricted ability to dilute contaminants and maintain air quality at levels which do not adversely affect the population. Air quality is a major concern of residents and visitors to the Los Angeles Metropolitan area, and with increasing population and development, air quality can be expected to further deteriorate until extreme efforts are made to control emissions of known pollutants into the atmosphere.
Air quality standards are set by both the State and Federal governments. The South Coast Air Quality Management District has the responsibility to monitor and enforce air quality standards in the South Coast Air Basin, of which Hidden Hills is a part.
The State Air Resources Board has designated the South Coast Air Basin a non-attainment area for ozone, carbon monoxide, particulates and nitrogen dioxide. Only lead and sulfur dioxide are in compliance with Federal and State standards. In February, 1979,
Hidden Hills General Plan
HR-5
Natural Resources Element
the Southern California Association of Governments adopted the Air Quality Management Plan, which sets forth policies and programs for localities to undertake air quality improvement strategies.
While Hidden Hills does not contain any industrial uses, the City’s resident-generated vehicle trips do contribute to air pollution. The Hidden Hills General Plan specifies policies to initiate efforts to improve local air quality, such as trip reduction techniques, and to coordinate with the South Coast Air Basin in implementing strategies set forth in the Air Quality Management Plan to improve regional air quality.
Soils
Soils in Hidden Hills, primarily sandy day, are derived from fine grained sedimentary bedrock. This soil shrinks when it is dry and expands when it is wet; therefore, it is both expansive and creep-prone. When it is wet, the expanding soil affects the foundations of structures built upon it. Along many of the drainage courses, expansive soils reach deeper than three feet. Development in the City must account for this type of soil.
Mineral Resources
The City of Hidden Hills is located in the northern foothills of the Santa Monica Mountains.
Deposits of sedimentary bedrock consisting of claystone, sandstone, siltstone, diaromaceaous shale and petroliferous shale underlie the entire City. These bedrock create the Modelo Formation. The beds of the Modelo Formation were level at one time, but they have been uplifted, folded and contorted by ancient geologic activity, creating complex bedrock plane oventations. Over thousands of years, erosion and weathering forces modified the bedrock. The more gentle slopes within the City lie on a gradient parallel to the underlying bedding plane orientations. Surfaces of these slopes have weathered, producing various thicknesses of top soil. Steeper slopes within the City indicate weathering over the harder, resistant bedrock. Most soils found in the City have moderate to very high erosion potential.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NR-6
Natural Resources Element
P	<!
TABLE NR4
AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
AIR POLLUTANT	STATE STANDARD	FEDERAL PRIMARY STANDARD	MOST RELEVANT EFFECTS
	CONCENTRATION/AVERAGING TIME	CONCENTRATION/AVERAGING TIME	
Ozone	0.09 ppm, l-hr. avg. >	0.12 ppm, 1-hr. avg.	(a)	Short-term exposures: (1)	Pulmonary function decrements and localized lung edema In humans and animals. (2)	Risk to public health implied by alterations in pulmonary morphology and host defense In animals; (b)	Long-term exposures: Risk to public health implied by altered connective tissue metabolism and altered pulmonary morphology in animals after long-term exposures and pulmonary function decrements In chronically exposed humans; (c)	Vegetation damage; (d)	Property damage
Carbon Monoxide	9.0 ppm, 8-hr. avg. > 20 ppm, 1-hr. avg. >	9 ppm, 8-hr. avg. 35 ppm, 1-hr. avg.	(a)	Aggravation of angina pectoris and other aspects of coronary heart disease; (b)	Decreased exercise tolerance in parsons with peripheral vascular disease and lung disease; (c)	Impairment of central nervous system functions; (d)	Possible increased risk to felusss
Nitrogen Dioxide	0.25 ppm. 1-hr. avg. >	0.053 ppm, ann. avg.	(a)	Potential to aggravate chronic respiratory disease and respiratory symptoms in sensitive groups; (b)	Risk to public health Implied by pulmonary and exlra-pulmonary biochemical and cellular changes and pulmonary structural changes; (c)	Contribution to atmospheric discoloration
Sulfur Dioxide	0.05 ppm, 24-hr. avg. > =with ozone > = 0.10 ppm, 1 hr. avg. or TSP > = 100 ug/m ,24-hr. avg. 0.25 ppm, 1-hr. avg. >	0.03 ppm, ann. avg. 0.14 ppm, 24-hr. avg.	(a) Qronchoconstriction accompanied by symptoms, which may include wheezing, shortness of breath and chest tightness, during exercise or physical activity in persons with asthma
Suspended ParticuialB Matter (PM10)	30 ug/m3,ann. geometric mean>50 ug/m .24-hr. avg.	50 ug/m3,annual arithmetic mean 150 ug/ms,24-hr. avg.	(a)	Prevention of excess deaths from short-term exposures and of exacerbation of symptoms in sensitive patients with respiratory disease; (b)	Prevention of excess seasonal declines In pulmonary function, especially in children
Sulfates	25 ug/m3,30-day avg. > =		(a)	Prevention of excess deaths from short-term exposures and of exacerbation of symptoms in sensitive palienls with respiratory disease; (b)	Aggravation of asihmaUc symptoms; (c)	Aggravation of cardio-pulmonary disease; (d)	Vegetation damage; (a) Degradation of visibility; (f) Property damage
Lead	1.5 ug/m3,3Q-d8y avg. > =	1.5 ug/m3,calendar quarter	(a)	increased body burden; (b)	Impairment of blood formation and nerve conduction
Visibility Reducing Particles	In sufficient amount to reduce the visual range to less than 10 miles at relative humidity less than 70%, B-hour average (9am - 5pm).		Visibility Impairment on days when rolnllve humidity is loss than 70 percent
Source: South Coast Air Quality Management District
GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 1:	Preserve and enhance the native as well as the non-
native plant life throughout the community for their scenic and biological importance.
Policy 1.1: Identify and preserve valuable introduced species of native vegetation throughout the City.
Policy 1.2: Use native California drought tolerant plants where appropriate to reduce irrigation and maintenance costs.
Policy 1.3: Regulate land uses so they are compatible with significant botanical species.
GOAL 2:	All significant oak trees should be preserved.
Policy 2.1: Proposed plans for any new construction or grading
must locate and identify all trees on site, and no plans shall be approved without an EIR if the said plan endangers an oak tree.
GOAL 3:	Preserve and enhance lands within the City that
support significant wildlife species.
Policy 3.1: Regulate land uses so that they are compatible with significant wildlife species and their habitats.
Polity 3.2: Ensure maintenance of open space and native plant communities which provide habitat for native animal species.
GOAL 4:	Significant natural land forms should be maintained
during development.
Policy 4.1: Grading practices used within the City shall minimize potential safety hazards while maintaining aesthetic qualities and natural land forms.
Policy 4.2: No manufactured slope greater than 2:1 shall be permitted.
Policy 4.3: Property owners should be encouraged to design homes to fit the natural terrain.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NR-3
Natural Resources Element
GOAL 5:
Policy 5.2:
Policy 5.3:
Maintain the rural-equestrian atmosphere of the community.
Continue to enforce existing regulations which require minimum one acre building sites and an average developed lot size of 1.7 acres, with one primary residence per site and a maximum 25% lot coverage. All new subdivisions shall have bridle trails.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NR-9
Natural Resources Element
SAFETY
ELEMENT
City of Hidden Hills
General Plan
SAFETY ELEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Introduction.........................................................................SA-I
Existing Safety Hazards..............................................................SA-2
Goals and Policies .................................................................SA-17
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure	Page
SA-1 Faults	and	Their	Proximities to Hidden Hills........................SA-4
SA-2 Emergency	Evacuation Plan ............................................. SA-15
LIST OF TABLES
Table	Page
SA-1 Faults and Their Proximities to Hidden Hills ..........................SA-2
SAFETY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
Through the requirement of the Safety Element, the State legislature has placed responsibility on the local entity for the evaluation of natural and man-induced hazards, and the formulation of programs to reduce risks associated with such hazards.
Certain natural disasters, such as earthquakes and flooding, cannot be entirely handled on the local level, and must be considered within a regional context. In light of this, the City must join its efforts with other localities in the region.
Purpose of the Element
This element’s specific focus is the reduction and/or prevention of injuries, loss of life, properly damage, and economic and social disruption due to fires, floods, seismic activities, and other natural disasters. The Safety Element serves the following three key functions:
° Provide a framework by which safety considerations are introduced into the planning and development process;
° Identify and evaluate natural hazards; and
° Establish goals and policies which minimize potential adverse effects related to natural hazards.
Relationship to Other Elements
The Safety Element is related to all elements of the General Plan. The Natural Resources Element provides for the protection of the area’s natural resources, whereas the Safety Element tries to minimize the damage caused by these resources in the event of a natural disaster. Because of the need for safe and efficient use of streets, and traffic routes for emergency evacuation, a relationship exists between the Infrastructure and Safety Elements. The Noise Element sets forth policies to ensure safe noise levels are maintained in the City. The Housing and Land Use Elements ensure that structures are of standard design and building materials, and are not subject to undue hazard based on their location.
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-i
Safety Element
EXISTING SAFETY HAZARDS
Seismic Hazards
Seismic hazards can be divided into two classes: primary hazards, such as ground shaking and ground rupture; and secondary hazards, such as landslides, tsunamis, seiches, liquefaction, and seismically induced settlement.
PRIMARY HAZARDS
Faults
The City of Hidden Hills is located within a seismically active region. Numerous active, potentially active, and inactive fault traces exist within the region. TTie State Mining and Geology Board defines an active fault as one which has had a surface displacement in the last 11,000 years, or Holocene time. In addition the Board defines a potentially active fault as one with evidence of surface displacement during the last two million years, or Quaternary time. Inactive faults have no recognized Holocene or Pleistocene offset or activity.
Several active faults and one potentially active fault could cause groundshaking in the City. These major seismic sources include:
TABLE SA-1
FAULTS AND IHEIR PROXIMITIES TO HIDDEN HILLS
FAULT	DISTANCE	CLASSIFICATION
Northridge Hills	8 miles	Active
Simi-Santa Rosa	9 miles	Potentially Active
Malibu Coast	10 miles	Active
Santa Susana	12 miles	Active
San Fernando	13 miles	Active
Newport-Inglewood	17 miles	Active
Raymond Hills	23 miles	Active
San Andreas	40 miles	Active
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-2
Safety Element
Other known faults within the region which could produce ground shaking in Hidden Hills include: Chatsworth Fault Zone, Elysian Park Thrust, Garlock Fault, Anacapa-Santa Monica Fault, San Gabriel Fault, San Jacinto Fault, San Jose Fault, Sierra Madre-Cucamonga Fault, and Whittier Fault. However, it is possible for an unknown fault to rupture and to produce ground shaking. In January, 1994, the rupture of the previously unknown Frew Fault produced a magnitude 6.8 earthquake centered in Northridge. This event produced substantial ground shaking in the City of Hidden Hills.
Ground Shaking Hazard
The intensity of ground shaking at a given location depends primarily upon the earthquake magnitude and distance from the source (epicenter) and the site response characteristics. Additional seismic characteristics that control ground response in the City include: (a) higher frequency seismic waves are more efficiently transmitted through bedrock materials; (b) topography may focus high frequency seismic energy, and (c) high frequency ground motion affects residential structures more readily than medium rise buildings.
Fault Rupture Hazard
The designation of a fault as "active" or "inactive" is largely dependent on the classification criteria used and the purpose of the designation. As a measure of the potential for ground rupture, "active" faults are defined by the State Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act and delineated through designated Earthquake Fault Zones along the trace of the fault. This designation states that a fault is active if surface displacement can be proved within about the last 11,000 years, as interpreted through geological investigations.
SECONDARY HAZARDS
Liquefaction and Ground Failure Hazard
Secondary earthquake hazards, such as liquefaction, lateral spreading, and seismically-induced dynamic settlement are generally associated with relatively high intensities of shaking, shallow ground water conditions, and the presence of loose, sandy soils or alluvial deposits. Hidden Hills is subject to moderate to high shaking from nearby faults, and the presence of sandy, fine grained soils may induce liquefaction.
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-3
Safety Element
Sferra Madre FaufP *»
efo *x
Lojl^E^tb. ~ *
'*	TC'"- VbA
- 'Ov
'■Vs
V>C %
X* \
(SBQi 2 o
Bml.
10 m
Figure SA-1 Faults and Their
Proximities to Hidden Hills
SA-4
Hidden Hills
General Plan
Safety
Element
Earthquake-Induced Subsidence
Subsidence commonly occurs from ground water or petroleum withdrawal. Subsidence resulting from ground shaking is unlikely to affect the City of Hidden Hills.
Earthquake-Induced Slope Instability and Landslide Reactivation
A few areas in the City of Hidden Hills may have potentially unstable slopes. Slope severity, soil conditions, and underlying geology contribute to these conditions in the event of high rainfall combined with seismic activity.
Residential Structural Vulnerability to Strong Ground Shaking
A trend in the new housing and modifications to existing housing in recent years has been the split level and irregular floor plan. Such designs naturally result in an asymmetrical configuration, and a probable deficiency in seismic design. This trend can be further compounded on hillslopes where pole platforms or pole structures are used to support the house structure, in lieu of conventional hillslope grading practices which place the entire foundation into bedrock or stable fill. Such foundation construction can result in "soft story" structural failures. Because some split level designs serve to mitigate landslide damage, this design may actually be encouraged in some instances. Each proposed split level should be carefully reviewed on a case by case basis.
In the case of earthquake in the faults in proximity to the City, such intensities are known to cause torsional racking of the foundation and wall elements of irregularly shaped structures, resulting in concentration of damages between wings of houses. Emphasis on symmetrical and/or simple floor plan residential design provides a viable option for reducing future earthquake losses in the City.
During the Northridge Earthquake of January, 1994, many residential structures in the City suffered loss of their chimneys. While the magnitude 6.8 earthquake caused considerable interior plaster damage, the homes incurred little structural and foundational damage.
Nonstructural damage is perhaps the largest expected source of injury and monetary losses (i.e., the damage caused by toppling of furniture and components inside the house). In cases where continued function is paramount, such as an emergency operation center in the City, special strategies to secure needed communication, generators, or emergency equipment are warranted.
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-5
Safety Element
Emergency Earthquake Scenarios
The high frequency content produced from nearby large
earthquakes will affect above ground electrical utilities, particularly electrical substations linked to the community. Dysfunction of electrical facilities is expected to last no longer than 3 days. Gas and water utilities suggest that 72 hours is an adequate estimate of maximum recovery times for service.
Dysfunction of computers, either through direct damage or electrical power failure, may affect the ability to use telephones. Telephone saturation, meaning the overuse of telephone lines in an emergency for nonemergency purposes, may also lead to loss in function of the telephone system. Residents and City emergency operators should be reliant on radio communication and consider using available phone service for emergencies only.
Issues and Opportunities - Seismic Hazards
1)	Damages will be greater for asymmetrical, split level residences and residences with irregular floor plans than for residences with symmetrical design. Split level residences, however, may be designed to mitigate landslide damage, and therefore, should only be encouraged when landslide mitigation is an issue.
2)	Torsional racking of the foundation and wall elements of irregularly shaped houses may cause concentration of damage between wings of houses. Wall panels of all frame houses may be thrown out of plum.
3)	Collapse of interior and exterior nonstructural components of houses and buildings will cause the greatest share of injuries.
4)	Disaster planning scenarios should consider the fact that utility services may be out for as much as 72 hours and that transportation into the City may be impeded by rock falls, soil slides, and fallen utilities. Transportation will also be impeded across many bridge crossings and major freeways in liquefaction areas, as identified on County of Los Angeles Seismic Hazard maps.
5)	The potential for hazardous materials accidents in adjacent jurisdictions must be addressed in disaster planning scenarios for the City of Hidden Hills.
Hidden Hilts General Plan
SA-6
Safety Element
Geologic Hazards
Landslide Hazards and Corrective Analysis
Landslide rupture surfaces are common along seams within clayey shale or siltstone units. These units experience a reduction in strength and move downslope in response to mass distribution within the slide, disequilibrium caused by movement on adjacent slides, or the added weight of incident rainfall and consequent increases in pore water pressures along the slide plane. Secondary slumps and shallow surficial failure styles are often observed on the larger landslide masses, particularly where landslide debris is actively filling canyon bottoms. Potentially active landslides can be reactivated by natural processes, such as rainfall, or through the influence of man. Water can be introduced into the landslide by way of landscape irrigation and percolation of sewage effluent from septic tanks. Building or loading at the head of a slide can decrease the bedrock strength along an existing or potential rupture surface and "drive" the landslide down slope. Improper grading practices can also trigger existing landslides. For example, if the toe of a landslide or the lower, down slope support of dipping beds is removed, movement can be reactivated.
The major pressures on hillslope development in the City of Hidden Hills are caused by intensification of existing development on residential lots throughout the City and the resultant expansion into currently undeveloped areas. Intensification consists of additional construction and modification of existing construction or the complete demolition and redevelopment of a residential lot. Intensification expands the developed pad area into previously "natural" hillslope areas and often involves a corresponding increase in the size and volume of the onsite sewage disposal systems. The potential consequences of such development suggest that appropriate retroactive and proactive measures that govern the long-tenn stability of potentially active landslides should be part of a comprehensive hillslope management program, a program that recognizes the concern for future property damages incurred by residents.
Issues and Opportunities - Geologic Hazards
1)	Active landslides and reactivation of potentially active landslides are the most serious geologic hazards facing the residential community of Hidden Hills, and are believed to be the result of many factors including the combined influence of years of heavy precipitation and development (effectiveness of drainage systems, over use of surface irrigation beyond the capability of the hillslope).
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-7
Safety Element
2)	The major development pressures today come from intensified redevelopment of residential lots and expansion of new development into currently undeveloped areas, some of which are on potentially active landslides.
3)	Remedial measures to stabilize active landslides, including installation of sewage and dewatering measures, are economically costly to the City and residential community, but with increasing housing and land costs, retroactive and proactive comprehensive stabilization strategies may become viable due to changes in cost/benefit ratios.
4)	Potential solutions for the control of retroactive and proactive landslides include regulating all artificial recharge, low irrigation vegetation, installation of monitoring and dewatering wells, effective drainage and sewer systems, removal or regrading of a slide in certain instances, or complete avoidance of extremely critical active landslides. Land use measures must be applied as early as possible, as hazardous area management becomes less effective with increasing development.
5)	Several options are at the City’s disposal to reduce the economic, and potentially life-threatening impact of landslide reactivation. Tax credits, property acquisition/purchase development rights, landslide overlay zones, assessment districts, or any combination of these measures, are potentially feasible solutions to the landslide dilemma. Any method requires the approval of the majority of the community. Any of the following measures may be appropriate in Hidden Hills:
o Tax Credits: Reduce the property’s tax liability as long as land is left undeveloped at a very low density. Tax credit programs take a variety of forms including current use value, deferred use, or a restrictive agreement. This method provides incentive to limit development, although high property values reduce the effectiveness of the program.
° Property Acquisition: The landslide areas can be managed to protect public safety, while meeting other community objectives, such as providing open space for recreation or low intensity uses. Appropriate financing options open to the City are grants, donations, or formation of an assessment district.
° Landslide Overlay: An ordinance could be tied to a landslide inventory or a graduated landslide risk zone (e.g. high, moderate, low). Open space requirements, construction standards, effective slope maintenance, low irrigation
Hidden HiUs General Plan
SA-8
Safety Element
vegetation, sewage disposal options, or density of development are relevant measures that can be tied to a landslide overlay. If nonconforming uses within designated areas continue unchecked, zone variances are more likely. If tied to economic incentives or developer liability (impact on adjacent properties from accelerated movement caused by variance development), then program compliance and effectiveness of implementation are more likely.
° Assessment District: A plan can be formulated to provide funding for alternative landslide mitigation methods, open space or density restrictions, and financing for acquisition of landslide areas.
Fire Hazards
The City of Hidden Hills is vulnerable to small wildland fire hazards. Brush fires pose the primary threat due to the terrain and natural vegetation of the undeveloped areas adjacent to the City. Primary considerations for determining the severity of fire hazards in the City include fuel loading, fire weather, and topography.
Fuel loading characteristics help determine how a wildfire bums. These characteristics include the quantity of flammable vegetation and other fuels per unit of land area, moisture content, ratio of dead vegetation to live plants, distribution of size and type, and chemical content.
Dry grasslands are present within the City, and they are highly combustible. In addition, landscaped eucalyptus trees are susceptible to fires.
Fire weather elements affect fire intensity and behavior. High winds, the lack of humidity, the lack of precipitation, and heat combine to create fire weather. Fire danger in the City of Hidden Hills is most critical during late summer and fall months, especially when Santa Ana high wind conditions prevail.
"For the purposes of describing the severity of fire hazards, the County Fire Department classifies areas according to criteria established in State legislation commonly referred to as the Bates Bill. Fire zone areas are rated on a scale of I to IV, with IV representing the most severe fire hazard zone. Hidden Hills lies in Zone HI, although properties across the Ventura Freeway, to the coast, are rated Zone IV."
Topography plays an important role in determining how fires behave. Plant fuels posing the greatest threat during the fire
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-9
Safety Element
weather period will be those located on the south-facing slopes.
Fires burn more rapidly upslope than downs lope, and they bum faster on steeper slopes. In addition, steep slopes create accessibility problems, making fire fighting difficult.
Other Hazards
Electrical power lines may also pose a fire hazard, in the unlikely event that the lines are not automatically de-energized when knocked down by high winds or an earthquake. The majority of fires are caused by the accidental or deliberate actions of man.
City enforced restrictions can assist in the prevention of such fires. Such restrictions might emphasize adequate brush clearances, removal of flammable rubbish stored on the premises, or utilization of fire retardant or noncombustible roof construction, which are among the most significant factors which increase the fire hazard. An immediate fire vulnerability in the City is the prevalence of combustible roof construction.
Two other potential vulnerabilities of the City that are issues appropriate for the Safety Element are the lack of accessibility that exists in some sections of the community and the typical wooden construction used in residential development. Some residences, and particularly newer remote development taking place in the City, are more vulnerable to fire damage than others because of their relative seclusion. In some instances, road width requirements may be inadequate for maneuvering fire prevention equipment, including trucks and heavy equipment along narrow private roads. Road widths, although it has not yet been a problem, may impede fire prevention response activities. The residential construction of the City of Hidden Hills also exposes a vulnerability to earthquake-induced fires. Areas with wood-construction need protection from fire as much as, or more than, protection from ground shaking or faulting.
Fire Protection Services
The County of Los Angeles Fire Department provides fire protection services for the City. The primary Engine Company is stationed at Fire Station 68, located at 24130 Calabasas Road, on the southerly side of the Ventura Freeway. Equipment and personnel at Station 68 available to respond to structure fires include four engine companies, a truck company, and one rescue squad. Response time from the Station to the City averages two to three minutes.
Equipment and personnel at the station available to respond to brush fires include five engine companies, two helicopters, a bulldozer, and crew. The City and the County have a mutual aid
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-10
Safety Element
agreement with the City of Los Angeles, in the event of a need for backup.
County Fire Zone 3, a high brush fire hazard area, includes the area covered by the City of Hidden Hills.
According to the LVMWD, portions of the City’s water system have not been updated to the County 1250 gallon per minute minimum requirement to meet current fire safety requirements. (See Infrastructure Element, Water and Sanitation System Goal 2 and Policy 2.1).
Issues and Opportunities - Fire Hazards
1)	Because of the potentially hazardous situation posed by brush fires in canyon areas within the City and bordering undeveloped hillslope areas, fire retardant roofs are justified within the City of Hidden Hills.
2)	Fire retardant construction and fire buffer zones are appropriate building regulation and land-use planning options for reducing the threat of earthquake-induced fire hazards.
3)	The potential for impeded fire response because of remoteness of certain residences and narrow private roads suggests that residents should have the capacity for self reliant fire prevention strategies and fire fighting equipment, such as additional brush clearance zones, improved peak load water supply capability, high pressure hoses, and fire extinguishers and/or sprinkler systems.
4)	Neighborhood self-help groups, composed of neighborhood residents, can provide for quick notification and response to potentially disastrous brush fire incidents.
Fire Prevention Program
The City has an extensive fire prevention program. The City reviews each new development to ensure that structures are adequately separated and that fire retardant materials are used in construction. Fire retardant Class A roofs are required. In addition, the Fire Department sponsors an annual weed-abatement and brush clearance program. The program examines new fire protection technologies as they are available.
The Fire Department requires a 100-foot clearance around structures of all native brush, grass and hazardous vegetation to minimize fire hazards. In addition, the Hidden Hills Municipal
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-11
Safety Element
Code requires that property owners maintain right-of-way improvements and public works in a clean, hazard-free condition to ensure safety.
Flood Hazards
The Malibu Hydrographic Unit, located in the northwestern portion of the Los Angeles River Basin contains the City of Hidden Hills. The Malibu Hydrographic Unit occupies approximately 242 square miles in the western portion of Los Angeles County and the southeastern portion of Ventura County. The City is part of the Arroyo Calabasas Drainage Basin.
There are no year round streams or ponds within the City. Surface water runoff only occurs during and after periods of intense rainfall. The City’s topography and soil conditions subject the City to flood hazards from storm drain overflow, as well as from erosions, mudflows, and debris deposits.
Flood Control Facilities
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps indicate that the City of Hidden Hills is located in Zone C, meaning it has a low potential for flooding.
The Master Plan of Storm Drains map illustrates the existing flood control facilities. The Los Angeles County Flood Control District maintains these facilities.
Police Protection
Under the City-County Law Enforcement Services Agreement, the City contracts with the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department for general law and traffic enforcement services. The Lost Hills Sheriffs Station, located approximately 4 miles away at 27050 Agoura Road in Calabasas, serves the City.
In addition, the Public Safety Commission plans for the general safety of the City’s residents. The Commission’s responsibilities include law enforcement liaison, and public safety education. The City Council appoints the Commissioners, who meet on the last Tuesday of each month. In August, 1994, the City Council amended former Public Safety Commission Ordinances and expanded the Commission.
Emergency Response Preparedness and Recovery
The Safety Element is essentially a long-range emergency response
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-12
Safety Element
plan. The hazards analyses in this report aim to produce a safe environment, easing the task of disaster response organizations during emergencies and identifying hazards necessary for making long-term recovery decisions. Effective short-term emergency response strategies exist in the event of a disaster within the City limits of Hidden Hills or areas contiguous to City limits.
The City has a comprehensive Emergency Preparedness Plan that combines these strategies in a coordinated manner both internally and with existing regional multi-jurisdictional plans. In the County of Los Angeles, the Sheriff has primary coordinating responsibility with public and private agencies and the County Fire Department in the event of an emergency. The City also has contractual agreements with the County Sheriff and Fire Department to protect public safety and property within the City limits. Utility companies supplying services to the community, such as Southern California Edison, Las Virgenes Municipal Water District, Southern California Gas Company, and Pacific Bell, all have aggressive emergency response plans in the event of a disaster. For planning purposes, the worst-case scenario provided by major utilities emphasizes a 72 hour recoveiy period for services.
In a worst-case scenario in which earthquake-induced ground failure occurs within the City, either from fault rupture on a nearby fault or from landslides within the jurisdiction, peak load water supply could be reduced. Underground natural gas distribution lines, although composed of flexible polyvinyl plastic, could pose an additional fire hazard if displacements are large enough. Combined with the relative isolation of some segments of the community, these worst case scenarios underline the importance of alternative sources of water for fire fighting or other strategies to reduce fire spread in the event of extensive rupture or failure of the ground surface.
The most important observation related to the hazards discussed in this report, is the potential problem of lack of accessibility that exists in the City. In the event of a strong earthquake, small slides and slumps will block many of the private roads bordered by steep cut banks. This road blockage would have impact on emergency response capability, such as fire suppression at individual residences or the potential isolated fires which could be caused by malfunction of the electrical or gas utility systems. The expedient evacuation of injured residents could also be a problem, especially in the most isolated areas of the community. One shall not anticipate having helicopter evacuation access for several days after a regional disaster.
Several mountainous areas in California with similar problems have
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-13
Safety Element
turned toward developing and training self-help neighborhood groups. Individuals in the community are screened for specialized skills useful for self-reliance in an emergency, such as short-term medical care, utility damage assessment and repair, or knowledge of heavy equipment or fire suppression capability. Emergency provisions and supplies are inventoried and stockpiled, as well as necessary equipment for light rescue capability and radio communication. Chain of command is a key component of such groups. Residents are called upon to make rollcalls of neighbors and channel information back to central neighborhood commands, Some communities have designed these emergency groups around existing entities. The City of Hidden Hills is well suited for this type of organized approach, because although these activities might take place following a major disaster, a significant number of lives can be saved by preparedness and efficient trained response.
The inaccessibility problem has been referred to frequently in the fire and emergency response sections because of the impact on fire fighting and rescue functions. Primary transportation routes must also be planned in conjunction with designated neighborhood relief areas for those whose homes may be damaged. The three access and evacuation routes designated for the City are: Long Valley Road, Spring Valley Road, and Round Meadow Road. Figure SA-2 shows the Emergency Evacuation Routes for Hidden Hills. A plan to identify and mitigate potential earthquake-induced road blockages from landsliding or fallen structures will be included in the Emergency Preparedness Plan. Road maintenance priorities and road clearance activities would have priority along the primary evacuation routes.
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-14
Safety Element
1^1
E3
Gate
Evacuation Routes
City Umits
lG5Ett
tr
north 0
____I
1,600 feel
Figure SA-2 Emergency Evacuation
SA-15
Hidden Hills
General Plan
Safety
Element
Long-term recovery and reconstruction is a potential issue in the City of Hidden Hills. Appropriate procedures for rebuilding in heavily damaged areas is imperative. In the worst-case scenario for Hidden Hills, damage would most likely be confined to reactivated landslides. Because residential owners may wish to rebuild in these areas, appropriate policies must address decision making-processes and pre-selected alternatives for such instances. Hastily made decisions on temporary rebuilding may rule out certain alternatives for reconstruction. Changes in land-use, such as open space, or additional building regulations might be appropriate in some instances.
Plans for rebuilding depend heavily upon surveys and analyses of geologic effects, as well as structural conditions of the damaged residences. While air photo teams can assist in this process, site investigations of moderately to severely damaged areas is a critical prerequisite to land use planning and rebuilding after an earthquake or other disaster. Once damaged areas are identified, this information may be incorporated with existing knowledge of seismic and geologic hazards and post-disaster recovery procedures. Zoning and subdivision and building regulations are key devices for implementing changes during the redevelopment process.
Effective disaster preparedness will require the concerted efforts of City, County and State agencies and residents. Not only must effective plans and procedures be in effect, but those plans should be tested and improved through frequent disaster exercises.
Issues and Opportunities - Emergency Preparedness
1)	In the aftermath of a large earthquake or other disaster, some areas of the community may be relatively isolated. Designated disaster control groups would improve the effectiveness of shortterm emergency response.
2)	Primary transportation routes and disaster response routes are an integral part of a local emergency response plan.
3)	Appropriate land use and building regulations alternatives provide the greatest degree of flexibility during the reconstruction and rebuilding in the aftermath of a disaster.
4)	Existing emergency response plans involving various governmental agencies and private entities should be periodically reviewed to account for new information on seismic or geologic hazards within the community.
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-16
Safety Element
5)	The General Plan update process provides the City an ideal opportunity to prepare its own comprehensive Emergency Preparedness Plan.
GOALS AND POLICIES
The following goals were developed as part of the General Plan Update, and policies provide the framework for reducing the social and economic disruptions caused by the effects of natural hazards.
GOAL 1:	Protect life and property from geologic and seismic
hazards in the City.
Policy 1.1: Require that all new buildings in Hidden Hills comply to the current building standards.
Policy 1.2: Protect areas of potential slope instability from future residential developments.
Policy 1.3: Require a ’’slope stability assessment" to be conducted prior to taking action on future single family residential subdivisions which are located in areas of potential slope instability.
GOAL 2:	Protect natural resources, life, and property from fire
hazards in the City.
Policy 2.1: In all areas, maintain around and adjacent to all
structures a cleared firebreak for a distance not less than 100 feet.
Policy 22: Permit future residential development only within areas of minimal slope.
Policy 2.3: Require minimum road standards in all new
subdivisions in order that fire equipment will have access to all properties and that there is a safe means for people to evacuate fire areas. This shall include private drives over 100 feet in length.
Policy 2.4: Fire hydrants must be within 600 road feet of a given building site.
Policy 2.5: Establish and enforce minimum standards of fire protection for new developments.
Policy 2.6: Conduct a study on the adequacy of the City’s water system for fire protection.
Hidden Hills General Plan
SA-17
Safety Element
NOISE
ELEMENT
City of Hidden Hills
NOISE ELEMENT
TABLE OE CONTENTS
Page
Introduction...................................................................NO-1
Inventory of Current and Forecast Conditions.................................  NO-2
Summary of Findings ...........................................................NO-6
Issues Summary ..............................................................  NO-7
Goals and Policies ............................................................NO-8

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure	Page
NO-1 Noise	Contours....................................................NO-4
LIST OF TABLES
Table	Page
NO-1 Noise	Measurements in the City ..................................NO-5

NOISE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Noise Element of a General Plan is a comprehensive program for including noise control in the planning process. It is a tool for local planners to use in achieving and maintaining compatible land use with environmental noise levels. The Noise Element identifies noise sensitive land uses and noise sources, and defines areas of noise impact for the purpose of developing programs to ensure that Hidden Hills residents will be protected from excessive noise intrusion.
The Noise Element follows the revised State guidelines in the State Government Code Section 65302(f) and Section 46050.1 of the Health and Safety Code. The element quantifies the community noise environment in terms of noise exposure contours for both near and long-term levels of growth and traffic activity. The information will become a guideline for the development of land use policies to achieve compatible land uses and provide baseline levels and noise source identification for local noise ordinance enforcement.
Purpose of the Element
The purpose of the Noise Element is to outline methods to reduce and control noise, in order to maintain and enhance Hidden Hills as a quiet residential community. Although the primary emphasis is on transportation noise, this element will also consider noise generated from non-transportation sources, including construction and various domestic origins.
This element embodies three major considerations:
° To provide a guide for the development of the Land Use Element by determining noise compatible land uses.
° To identify noise problems and noise sources in the community.
° To mitigate, regulate and propose alternatives to noise problems within the City.
Relationship to Other Elements
The Noise Element is closely related to the Infrastructure, Land Use and Housing Elements. The primary noise sources in the City are roadway corridors, with noise levels varying depending on the
Hidden Hills General Plan
NO-1
Noise Element
number of vehicles in operation. Roadway location and classification, as defined by the Infrastructure Element, will determine the intensity and location of noise in the City. Inseparable from circulation considerations are the locations and types of land uses throughout the City, The location of circulation routes in relation to different land uses is a major determining factor of noise exposure. The high quality residential environment that the Housing Element seeks to maintain could be significantly impacted by noise, requiring close coordination between these elements.
INVENTORY OF CURRENT AND FORECAST CONDITIONS
This section of the Noise Element contains a detailed description of the current and projected noise environment within Hidden Hills. This description of the noise environment is based on an identification of noise sources and noise sensitive land uses, a community noise measurement survey and noise contour maps.
To define noise exposure, the major sources of noise in the community must be identified. The sources of noise in Hidden Hills include: roadways, aircraft overflights, and stationary equipment. To completely assess the noise environment in the City, noise sensitive receptors must also be identified. As mandated by the State, noise sensitive receptors include, but are not limited to, areas containing schools, hospitals, rest homes, longterm medical or mental care facilities, or any other land use area deemed noise sensitive by the local jurisdiction.
Based upon the identification of the major noise sources and the location of sensitive receptors, a noise measurement survey was conducted. The function of the survey is threefold. The first is to determine the existing noise levels at noise sensitive land uses. The second function is to provide empirical data for the correlation and calibration of the computer modeled noise environment. A third important aspect of the survey is to obtain an accurate description of the ambient noise levels in various areas throughout the City.
Noise contours for all of the major noise sources in Hidden Hills were developed based upon current and future traffic conditions. These contours were determined from the traffic levels for these sources. The contours are expressed in terms of the day-night noise level (Ldn). The existing conditions scenario is derived from traffic levels and environmental conditions. The future conditions scenario is based upon future traffic levels.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NO-2
Noise Element
Sources of Noise
The most common sources of noise in urban areas are
transportation related noise sources. These include automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and aircraft. Motor vehicle noise is of concern because it is characterized by a high number of individual events which often create a sustained noise level and because of its proximity to areas sensitive to noise exposure. Aircraft operations, though less frequent, may generate high noise levels that can be disruptive to human activity.
The City of Hidden Hills has a very quiet environment with very few sources of noise. Noise sources in Hidden Hills fall into four basic categories. These are: the 101 Freeway, minor arterial and collector roadways; aircraft overflights; and stationary sources.
Each of these sources and their impacts on the noise environment of Hidden Hills are summarized in the following paragraphs.
Numerous other noises related to human and animal activity can disrupt the quietness of an area. Stationary noise sources in Hidden Hills include pool equipment, air conditioners, music, leaf blowers, tennis courts, paddle tennis courts and various other types of private recreational and athletic facilities. Noise generated by these facilities, e.g., bouncing balls, tennis ball machines and motor noises, have a more pronounced effect on the audible atmosphere in a city like Hidden Hills with a low ambient noise environment Another source of nuisance noise in the community stems from the outdoor keeping of animals, such as dogs and horses. Such activities can usually be controlled through municipal noise standards.
Noise Sensitive Receptors
As an entirely residential community, all of Hidden Hills can be considered noise sensitive. The public elementary school located in the southwest comer of the City is a sensitive receptor.
Community Noise Measurement Survey
A community survey measured the existing noise levels in the City of Hidden Hills. Surveyors selected measurement sites in order to determine noise impacts on residential areas. The following measurements define the overall noise environment in the City.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NO-3
Noise Element
Projected Noise Level
Projected noise levels will depend on the height ol a Mure noise barrier watt. The height ol this wall has not been detem'med; noise levels at various height options are os follows:
wj 10’barrier wall	66	db
w/12' barrier wall	64	db
w/14‘barrier wall	63	db
S3
Noise Contours
City Limits
lSxi>
-lT
north
L
0
1,600 feel
Figure NO-1
Existing and Projected Noise Contours
Hidden Hilb
General Plan
NO-4
Noise Element
TABLE NO-1
NOISE MEASUREMENTS IN THE CITY OF HIDDEN HILLS
NOISE SOURCE	RANGE OF NOISE LEVELS
Light Aircraft Fly Over	50-75 dB (A)
Trash Pick-up at 100 feet	75-95 dB fA)
Motorcycles at SO feet	65-90 dB (A)
Sports Cars at 50 feet	65-85 dB (A)
Traffic on Main Streets at 50 feet	65-75 dB (A)
Traffic on Freeway	80-85 dB (A)
Note: Because these noise sources were measured at various locations throughout the City, they are not indicative of any specific point within the City.
A major source of noise impacting the City is from traffic on the adjacent Ventura Freeway (U.S. 101). The noise impacts the southeastern portion of the City most significantly.
Community Noise Contours
The day-night sound level (Ldn) is the measurement of noise exposure preferred by government agencies responsible for establishing noise standards and criteria. The Ldn represents an average of the A-weighted noise levels occurring in a 24-hour period, weighting noise that occurs at night (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.) to account for the greater sensitivity that people have to noise at night.
The noise environment for Hidden Hills can he described using noise contours developed for the major noise sources in the City. The Ventura Freeway is the only major noise source impacting Hidden Hills. Locally generated traffic is not great enough to cause potentially adverse noise conditions or require the preparation of noise contours. The freeway noise contours are presented in Figure NO-1. Noise contours represent lines of equal noise exposure, just as the contour lines on a topographic map are lines of equal elevation. The contours shown on the map are the 55 Ldn noise level. The noise contours presented should be used as guide for land use planning. The 55 Ldn contour defines the Noise Referral Zone. This is the noise level for which noise considerations should be included when making land use policy decisions.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NO-5
Noise Element
The contours presented in this report are a graphic representation of the noise environment Topography and intervening buildings or barriers have a very complex effect on the propagation of noise.
To present a worst case estimate, the topographic effect is not included in these contours.
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
The sound levels in Hidden Hills are generally low, indicative of the rural environment. The predominate sources of noise in Hidden Hills, as in most other communities, come from mobile noise sources including motor vehicles. The major vehicular noise source to the City is the Ventura Freeway. Minor arterial roadways adj'acent to the City and collector roadways within the City expose portions of the City to traffic noise levels. General aviation aircraft operations from Burbank and Los Angeles Airports also contribute to the noise environment. The noise impact due to aircraft are considered minimal but do result in occasional single event disturbance. Other sources of noise within the City are from non-transportation sources including mechanical equipment or construction noise. The primary source of equipment noise is from pool pumps/filters, air conditioners, music and leaf blowers. The noise environment in Hidden Hills is typical of a rural setting, except at locations directly affected by these transportation and non-transportation noise sources. In most locations around the City, noise is limited to the sounds of nature.
Noise affects all types of land uses and activities, although some are more sensitive to high noise levels than others. Land uses identified as noise sensitive include residences of all types, hospitals, rest homes, convalescent hospitals, places of worship and schools. As an almost entirely residential community, all of Hidden Hills can be considered noise sensitive.
The sources of noise in Hidden Hills can be divided into two basic categories: transportation sources and non-transportation sources.
A local government has little direct control of transportation noise at the source. State and Federal agencies have the responsibility to control the noise from the source, such as vehicle noise emission levels. The most effective method the City has to mitigate transportation noise is through noise barriers and building design controls and through reducing the level of traffic or speeds wherever possible.
The most effective method to limit noise from non-transportation noise sources is through application of a Community Noise Ordinance.
Hidden Hills General Plan
NO-6
Noise Element
ISSUES SUMMARY
The following issues have been identified as part of the General Plan Update and will be addressed in the Noise Element goals and policies.
Transportation Noise Control - The noise environment in Hidden Hills is indicative of a quiet residential environment without any significant noise sources. Within and adjacent to the City of Hidden Hills are some transportation related noise sources including the 101 Freeway (adjacent to the City), Valley Circle Boulevard, collector roadways within the City, and occasional aircraft overflights. These sources are contributors of noise in Hidden Hills. Strategies to reduce their influence on the community noise environment are part of the Noise Element.
Noise and Land Use Planning Integration - Information relative to the existing and forecast noise environment within Hidden Hills should be integrated into future land use planning decisions. The Element presents the noise environment in order that the City may include noise considerations in development programs. The control of the noise in the commercial area is important to the overall noise environment in the City.
The Ventura Freeway (State Route 101) represents the primary transportation noise source in Hidden Hills, exposing properties near the freeway to noise levels in excess of 65 dB(A) Leq. The California Department of Transporation (Caltrans) has established a sound wall program to address noise/land use compatibility concerns throughout the State. Caltrans’ program provides for a 14- to 16-foot sound wall to be constructed along Route 101 adjacent to Hidden Hills, with completion scheduled for 1995. The wall will extend westward from Long Valley Road. Although at one time Caltrans considered extending the wall farther east, to begin at just west of the Valley Circle Drive interchange, Caltrans determined that ambient noise levels at nearby residences in Hidden Hills were below Caltrans’ 67 dB(A) Leq standard for noise mitigation. Also, the extended wall would obstruct adjacent commercial uses, contrary to Caltrans policy.
Community Noise Control for Non-Transportation Noise Sources -Residential land uses and areas identified as noise sensitive must be protected from excessive noise from non-transportation sources including mechanical equipment and construction. These impacts are most effectively controlled through the application of a City Noise Ordinance.
Hidden Hills General Flan
NO-7
Noise Element
GOALS AND POLICIES
The following goals and policies were prepared to ensure noise abatement in Hidden Hills.
GOAL 1:	The City will consider planning guidelines which
include noise control for the interior and exterior living spaces of all new residential developments within noise impacted areas.
Policy 1.1: The City will adopt guidelines which consider noise as an important factor in planning future residential developments.
GOAL 2:	The City will enforce planning guidelines which buffer
existing residences from noise associated with new commercial development.
Policy 2.1: Developers of new commercial uses shall be required to install noise attenuation devices adjacent to existing residential homesites and such commercial uses shall be subject to operating controls which help prevent excessive or unauthorized noise events.
GOAL 3:	The City will implement a review process concerning
its policies and regulations affecting noise.
Policy 3.1: A review of ongoing policies and ordinances will be developed every five years or as new technological developments warrant.
Hidden Hills' General Plan
NO-8
Noise Element
City of Hidden Hills
2013-2021 Housing Element
January 27,2014

City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Contents
I.	Introduction...........................................................................1-1
A.	Purpose of the Housing Element...................................................I-1
B.	Public Participation.................................................................1-2
C.	Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan..............................1-2
II.	Housing Needs Assessment...............................................................II-l
A.	Population Characteristics........................................................ II-1
1.	Population Growth Trends....................................................11-1
2.	Age.....................................................................    II-l
3.	Race and Ethnicity..........................................................II-2
B.	Household Characteristics.....................................................    II-3
1.	Household Composition and Size.............................................11 -3
2.	Housing Tenure and Vacancy..................................................11-4
3.	Overcrowding............................................................    II-5
4.	Household Income........................................................    II-6
5.	Overpayment................................................................11-6
C.	Employment....................................................................    II-7
1.	Current Employment........................................................  II-7
2.	Projected Job Growth....................................................    11-8
D.	Housing Stock Characteristics....................................................11-9
1.	Housing Type and Growth Trends........................................      II-9
2.	Housing Age and Conditions...............................................  11-10
3.	Housing Cost...........................................................    II-ll
E.	Special Needs....................................................................II-13
1.	Persons with Disabilities................................................  11-13
2.	Elderly....................................................................11-15
3.	Large Households.......................................................    11-16
4.	Female-Headed Households...................................................11-16
5.	Farmworkers..............................................................  11-17
6.	Homeless Persons.........................................................  11-17
F.	Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion.......................................    11-18
G.	Housing Growth Needs.........................................................    11-18
1.	Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment..........................11-18
2.	2014-2021 Hidden Hills Growth Needs........................................11-18
III.	Resources and Opportunities..........................................................  III-l
A.	Land Resources.................................................................  III-l
B.	Financial and Administrative Resources............................................. II1-2
C.	Energy Conservation Opportunities................................................II1-2
IV.	Constraints...........................................................................IV-1
A.	Governmental Constraints........................................................  IV-I
1.	Land Use Plans and Regulations..............................................IV-1
2.	Development Processing Procedures..........................................IV-7
3.	Development Fees and Improvement Requirements...........................    IV-8
B.	Non-Governmental Constraints....................................................IV-10
1.	Codes, Covenants, and Restrictions (CC&Rs)................................IV-I 0
2.	Environmental Constraints.................................................IV-10
3.	Infrastructure Constraints................................................IV-11
i	January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
4.	Land Costs..............................................................IV-11
5.	Construction Costs......................................................IV-11
6.	Cost and Availability of Financing......................................IV-12
C.	Fair Housing..................................................................IV-12
V.	Housing Plan..........................................................................V-l
A.	Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs.....................................V-l
B.	Quantified Objectives...........................................................V-6
Appendices
Appendix A Evaluation of the Prior Housing Element
Appendix B	Residential Land Inventory
Appendix C	Public Participation Summary
ii	January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
List of Tables
Table 11-1	Population Trends, 1990-2012.................................................      Il-l
Table 11-2	Age Distribution...............................................................    11-2
Table 11-3	Race/Ethnicity.................................................................    11-3
Table II-4	Household Composition......................................................        11-4
Table II-5	Household Tenure...........................................................        11-5
Table II-6	Overcrowding.................................................................      11-5
Table 11-7	Overpayment by Income Category...................................................  11-6
Table 11-8	Labor Force Status...........................................................      11-7
Table II-9	Employment by Occupation......................................................     II-8
Table 11-10	2010-2020 Industry Employment Projections - Los Angeles County....................II-9
Table 11-11	Housing by Type...................................................................II-10
Table 11-12	Age of Housing Stock by Tenure...................................................II-11
Table 11-13	Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs - Los Angeles County...............11-12
Table 11-14	Persons with Disabilities by Age............................................    ...H-15
Table 11-15 Elderly Households by Tenure.........................................................Il-l 5
Table 11-16	Household Size by Tenure........................................................  11-16
Table 11-17	Household Type by Tenure..........................................................II-16
Table 11-18	Regional Housing Growth Needs.....................................................11-19
Table III-1	Land Inventory Summary........................................................    III-l
Table 1V-I	Residential Land Use Categories - Hidden Hills General Plan....................    IV-1
Table 1V-2	Residential Zones..............................................................    IV-2
Table IV-3	Permitted Residential Development by Zone....................................      1V-3
Table IV-4	Development Fee Summary........................................................    1V-9
Table V-l	Quantified Objectives (2014-2021).................................................  V-6
iii	January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
This page intentionally left blank.
iv
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
I. Introduction
I.	Introduction
State law requires the preparation of a Housing Element as part of a jurisdiction’s General Plan {Government Code §65302(c)). The Element is to consist of an identification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs, and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement and development of housing. It is also required to identify adequate sites for housing and to make adequate provision for the existing and projected needs of all economic segments of the community (§65583).
Guidelines adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) are also to be considered in the preparation of the Element (§65585). Periodic review of the Element is required to evaluate (1) the appropriateness of its goals, objectives and policies in contributing to the attainment of the state housing goals, (2) its effectiveness in attaining the City's housing goals and objectives and (3) the progress of its implementation (§65588).
A.	Purpose of the Housing Element
State law recognizes the vital role local governments play in the supply and affordability of housing. Each local government in California is required to adopt a comprehensive, long-term General Plan for the physical development of the city or county. The Housing Element is one of the seven mandated elements of the General Plan. Housing Element law, first enacted in 1969, mandates that local governments plan to meet the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the community. The law recognizes that, in order for the private market to adequately address housing needs, local governments must adopt land use plans and regulatory systems that provide opportunities for, and do not unduly constrain, housing development. As a result, housing policy in California rests largely upon the effective implementation of local General Plans and, in particular, local Housing Elements. Housing Element law also requires the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) to review local housing elements for compliance with state law and to report its written findings to the local government.
As mandated by state law, the planning period for this Housing Element extends from 2013 to 2021'. This Element identifies strategies and programs that focus on: 1) providing diversity in housing opportunities and 2) maintenance and preservation of the housing stock.
The Housing Element consists of the following major components:
•	An analysis of the City’s demographic and housing characteristics and trends (Chapter II);
•	An evaluation of land, financial, and administrative resources available to address the City’s housing goals (Chapter III);
•	A review of potential constraints, both governmental and non-governmental, to meeting the City’s housing needs (Chapter IV); and
As discussed elsewhere in this Housing Element, the planning timeframe for the Regional Housing Needs Assessment process is from January 2014 through October 2021.
1-1
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
I. Introduction
A Housing Plan for the 2013-2021 planning period, including housing goals, policies and programs (Chapter V).
A review of the City’s accomplishments and progress in implementing the previous Housing Element (Appendix A).
B.	Public Participation
Section 65583(c)(5) of the Government Code states that “The local government shall make diligent effort to achieve public participation of all the economic segments of the community in the development of the housing element, and the program shall describe this effort.” Public participation played an important role in the formulation and refinement of the City’s housing goals and policies and in the development of a Land Use Plan which determines the extent and density of future residential development in the community.
City residents had several opportunities to recommend strategies, review, and comment on the Housing Element. All meeting notices were posted at four locations within the City, and meeting agendas were posted on the City’s website and cable channel in advance of the meetings. In addition, meeting notices were sent by direct mail to the list of interested parties (see Appendix C). Copies of the draft element were made available for review at City Hall and were posted on the City’s website. Please refer to Appendix C for a complete listing of opportunities for public involvement in the preparation of this Housing Element update, as well as a summary of comments received and how those comments have been addressed.
C.	Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan
The City’s General Plan sets forth broad policy guidance in the areas of land use, housing, transportation, conservation, open space and recreation, noise and public safety. The various General Plan elements provide a consistent set of policies and programs intended to preserve and enhance the quality of life, while accommodating growth and change in a proactive manner. For example, residential development capacities established in the Land Use Element and constraints to development identified in the Conservation, Public Safety, and Noise Elements are reflected in the Housing Element. This Housing Element builds upon the other General Plan elements and is consistent with the policies and proposals set forth by the Plan. As the General Plan is amended from time to time, the City will review the Housing Element for internal consistency, and make any necessary revisions.
Senate Bill (SB) 1087 of 2005 requires cities to provide a copy of their Housing Elements to local water and sewer providers, and also requires that these agencies provide priority hookups for developments with lower-income housing. The Housing Element will be provided to these agencies immediately upon adoption.
1-2
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
II.	Housing Needs Assessment
This chapter examines general population and household characteristics and trends, such as age, race and ethnicity, employment, household composition and size, household income, and special needs. Characteristics of the existing housing stock (e.g., number of units and type, tenure, age and condition, costs) are also addressed. Finally, the city’s projected housing growth needs based on the 2014-2021 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) are examined.
The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes the most recent available data from the U.S. Census, California Department of Finance (DOF), California Employment Development Department (EDD), Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG), and other relevant sources. Supplemental data were also obtained through field surveys or private sources.
Note regarding data consistency: Census data used in this Housing Element come from two sources, the 2010 Decennial Census, which is a 100% count, and the American Community Survey (ACS), which is an ongoing sample survey. Because this chapter cites data from both sources, there may be some inconsistencies in population or housing unit totals. The Census Bureau does not attempt to reconcile inconsistencies in these sources.
A.	Population Characteristics
1.	Population Growth Trends
The City of Hidden Hills grew by only 146 residents in the 1990s and the population has been stable between 2000 and 2013 (Table II-1). This contrasts dramatically with Los Angeles County, which grew by over 7% between 1990 and 2000, and nearly 5% between 2000 and 2013. As a nearly built-out city, there have been few opportunities for growth in Hidden Hills in recent years.
Table II-1
Population Trends, 1990-2012
Jurisdiction	1990	2000 1		( Growth | 1990-2000	Growth 2000-2013
Hidden Hills	1,729	1,875	1,887	8.4%	0.6%
Los Angeles County	8,863,164	9,519,330	9,958,091	7.4%	4.6%
Source US Census, California Dept of Finance Tabic 12-5 (2013 J
2.	Age
Housing needs are influenced by the age characteristics of the population. Different age groups have different housing needs based on lifestyles, family types, income levels, and housing preference. Table II-2 provides a comparison of the city’s and county’s population by age group in 2010. This table shows that the age distribution of the city’s population is significantly older than Los Angeles County as a whole with a median age of 45.8 years compared to 34.8 years for the county as a whole.
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
H. Housing Needs Assessment
Age Distribution
Table 11-2
Age Group	Hidden Hills _		: Los Aneelcs County 1	
	[^Persons	.. %	L_ Persons 1	L ■
Under 5 years	57	3%	645,793	7%
5 to 9 years	139	7%	633,690	6%
10 to 14 years	205	11%	678,845	7%
15 to 19 years	183	10%	753,630	8%
20 to 24 years	72	4%	752,788	8%
25 to 29 years	36	2%	759,602	8%
30 to 34 years	27	1%	716,129	7%
35 to 39 years	49	3%	715,635	7%
40 to 44 years	133	7%	714,691	7%
45 to 49 years	187	10%	706,742	7%
50 to 54 years	195	11%	662,205	7%
55 to 59 years	156	8%	560,920	6%
60 to 64 years	122	7%	452,236	5%
65 to 69 years	102	5%	323,287	3%
70 to 74 years	77	4%	245,183	2%
75 to 79 years	46	2%	192,881	2%
80 to 84 years	36	2%	152,722	2%
85 years and over	34	2%	151,626	2%
Total	1,856	100%	9,818,605	100%
Median age	45.8		34.8	
Source 2010 Census. Table DP-1
3.	Race and Ethnicity
The racial and ethnic composition of the city differs significantly from the county in that a much lower proportion of city residents are Hispanic/Latino or other minorities. Approximately 87% of city residents are non-Hispanic white, contrasted with about 28% for the county as a whole (Table II-3).
11-2
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
Table H-3 Race/Ethnicity
Racial/Ethnic Group	Hidden Hills		Los Angeles County	
	Persons.	%	f Persons	,	
Not Hispanic or Latino	1,733	93.4%	5,130,716	52.3%
-White	1,622	87.4%	2,728,321	27.8%
-Black or African American	36	1.9%	815,086	8.3%
-American Indian'Alaska Native	3	0.2%	18,886	0.2%
-Asian	39	2.1%	1,325,671	13.5%
-Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander	1	0.1%	22,464	0.2%
-Other races or 2+ races	32	1.7%	220,288	2.2%
Hispanic or Latino (any race)	123	6.6%	4,687,889	47.7%
Total	1,856	100.0%	9,818,605	100.0%
Source 2010 Census, Table DP-1
B.	Household Characteristics
1.	Household Composition and Size
Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size of housing needed in a city. The Census defines a “household” as all persons occupying a housing unit, which may include single persons living alone, families related through marriage or blood, or unrelated persons sharing a single unit. Persons in group quarters such as dormitories, retirement or convalescent homes, or other group living situations are included in population totals, but are not considered households.
According to recent Census data, Hidden Hills had 593 households. Table 11-4 provides a comparison of households by type for the city and Los Angeles County as a whole. Family households in 2010 comprised approximately 87% of all households in the city, 19 percentage points higher than the county. The city’s average household size is higher than Los Angeles County as a whole (3.13 persons per household city vs. 2.98 persons per household county).
11-3
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
11. Housing Needs Assessment
Table II-4
Household Composition
Household Typc_,			'	- Hidden			 ; Hills	udBBHtgaaE	
	_ Households	_ %		
			: Households :	
Family households:	517	87%	2,194,080	68%
Husband-wife family	453	76%	1,480,665	46%
With own children under 18 years	223	38%	721,804	22%
Male householder, no wife present	24	4%	216,368	7%
With own children under 18 years	9	2%	92,161	3%
Female householder, no husband present	40	7%	497,047	15%
With own children under 18 years	24	4%	239,012	7%
Non-family households:	76	13%	1,047,124	32%
Householder living alone	61	10%	784,928	24%
Households with individuals under 18 years	269	45%	1,220,021	38%
Households with individuals 65 years and over	200	34%	790,386	24%
Total households	593	100%	3,241,204	100%
Average household size	3-13		2.98	
Source 2010 Census, Tah!c DP* I
2.	Housing Tenure and Vacancy
Housing tenure (owner vs. renter) is an important indicator of the housing market. Generally, communities should have an adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in order to accommodate a range of households with varying incomes, family sizes and composition, and lifestyles. However, in some jurisdictions like Hidden Hills, housing tenure is significantly different than in most areas. Table II-5 provides a comparison of the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units in the city in 2010 as compared to the county as a whole. It reveals a far higher level of homeownership in the city, almost double the county’s proportion of homeownership. This is due to the rural nature of the community that was established when the community was first developed. The vacancy rate for homeowner units was reported to be 1.4% while the rental vacancy rate was 4.7%.
11-4
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
Table II-5 Household Tenure
	Hidden Hills	1 1 .. LA County.		
HousingTvnea	BMW Ml Units Jl %	1	i__Units	I	%
Occupied housing units
Owner-occupied housing units
Average household size of owner-occupied units
Renter-occupied housing units
Average household size of renter-occupied units
593
552
3.16
41
2.76
94.7%
88.2%
3,241,204
1,544,749
3.16
1,696,455
2.81
94.1%
44.8%
Vacant housing units For rent
Rented, not occupied For sale only Sold, not occupied
For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use All other vacants
Homeowner vacancy rate (%)
Rental vacancy rate (%)
Total housing units
Source 2010 Census. Table DP-1
33
2
0
8
2
5
16
1.4
4.7
626
5.3%
0.3%
0.0%
1.3%
0.3%
0.8%
2.6%
203,872
104,960
4,994
26,808
6,726
19,099
41,285
1.7
5.8
5.9%
3.0%
0.1%
0,8%
0.2%
0.6%
1.2%
,445,076
=4
3.	Overcrowding
Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing. The U.S. Census Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more than one person per room, excluding bathrooms and kitchens, with severe overcrowding when there are more than 1.5 residents per room. Overcrowded households are usually a reflection of the lack of affordable housing. Table II-6 summarizes overcrowding for Hidden Hills according to recent Census data.
Table II-6 Overcrowding
1 Occupants per Room	L _ .Hidden Hills	J		j	" 1	HLVCo u n ty.	
	I Units_J	.. % ..	|	Units . j	% ..
Owner occupied units	737	100%	1,552,091	100%
1.01 to 1.50	5	0.7%	71,920	4.6%
1.51 to 2.00	0	0.0%	17,241	1.1%
2.01 or more	0	0.0%	4,877	0.3%
Renter occupied units	15	100%	1,665,798	100%
1.01 to 1.50	0	0.0%	163,166	9.8%
1.51 to 2.00	0	0.0%	86,760	5.2%
2.01 or more	0	0.0%	43,489	2.6%
Source Census2006-2010 ACS, Table BIJA14
11-5
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
tl. Housing Needs Assessment
Based on U.S. Census standards, Hidden Hills residents live in significantly less crowded housing conditions than the rest of Los Angeles County. According to recent Census data, less than 1% of all occupied units in the city were considered overcrowded.
4.	Household Income
Household income is a primary factor affecting housing needs in a community - the ability of residents to afford housing is directly related to household income. According to recent Census data, the median household income in Hidden Hills was reported to be over $250,000 compared to $55,476 for Los Angeles County as a whole.
5.	Overpayment
According to state housing policy, overpaying occurs when housing costs exceed 30% of gross household income. Table II-7 displays estimates for overpayment in 1999 by lower-income households in Hidden Hills (more recent data was not available). According to SCAG, there were only 53 lower-income households in the city in 2000. Among owners, 83% of lower-income households were reported to be overpaying for housing while 67% of renters reported overpayment.
Although homeowners enjoy income and property tax deductions and other benefits that help to compensate for high housing costs, lower-income homeowners may need to defer maintenance or repairs due to limited funds, which can lead to deterioration. For lower-income renters, severe cost burden can require families to double up resulting in overcrowding and related problems.
Table II-7
Overpayment by Income Category
1 Income Category1	Renters		Owners	
	Households	Percent	r-	r-r	 Households	Percent
Extremely Ion households2	8	-	14	—
Households overpaying	4	50%	10	71%
Very low households3	0	—	0	—
Households overpaying	0	--	0	-
Low households4	4	—	27	—
Households overpaying	4	100%	24	89%
All lower-income households	12	—	41	—
Households overpaying	8	67%	34	83%
Moderate households	4	-	8	—
Households overpaying	4	100%	4	50%
Above-moderate households"	8	-	511	—
Households overpaying	4	50%	200	39%
Source: SCAG 2006 based on 2000 Census
1	See Table II-13 for detailed description of these categories
2	Extremely Low: Up to 30% of the Los Angeles County median household income
3	Very Low 30% to 50% of the Los Angeles County median household income
4	Low: 50% to 80% of the Los Angeles County median household income
5	Moderate: 60% to 95% of the Los Angeles County median household income
6	Above Moderate: Over 95% of the Los Angeles County median household income
11-6
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
Extremely Low Income Households
State law requires quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-income (ELI) households. Extremely low-income is defined as households with income less than 30% of area median income. The 2013 area median income for Los Angeles County was $64,800 (see Table 11-13). For extremely low-income households, this results in an income of $25,600 or less for a four-person household according to HCD. Households with extremely-low-income have a variety of housing situations and needs, such as overpayment and overcrowding.
In 2000, approximately 22 extremely-low-income households (8 renters and 14 owners) were reported in Hidden Hills, representing less than 4% of the total households. Of these, 14 were found to be overpaying and 2 were reported as overcrowded2.
The projected housing need for extremely low income households is assumed to be 50% of the very-low-income regional housing need of nine units. As a result, the City has a projected need for three extremely-low-income units (see Table 11-18, page II-19). The resources and programs to address this need are the same as for low-income housing in general and are discussed throughout the Housing Element, and particularly Chapter V, Housing Plan. The needs of extremely-low-income households overlap extensively with other special needs groups, and further analysis and discussion of resources and programs for extremely-low-income households can also be found in Chapter IV, Constraints, Section A.l.c. Special Needs Housing.
C.	Employment
Employment is an important factor affecting housing needs within a community. Jobs available in each employment sector and the wages for these jobs affect the type of housing residents can afford.
1.	Current Employment
Current employment and projected job growth have a significant influence on housing needs during this planning period. Table 11-8 shows that the city had a workforce of 1,013 persons, or 53% of the working-age population, according to recent Census data.
Table II-8
Labor Force Status 3
Labor Force Status
Hidden Hills
_ LA Cou ntyj|___
Population 16 years and over	1,906	100%	7,602,252	100%
In labor force	1,013	53.1%	4,959,167	65.2%
Civilian labor force	1,013	53.1%	4,953,791	65.2%
Employed	989	51.9%	4,522,917	59.5%
Unemployed	24	1.3%	430,874	5.7%
Armed Forces	0	0.0%	5,376	0.1%
Not in labor force	893	46.9%	2,643,085	34.8%
Source Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP3
3 2000 Census, Table H20
11-7
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
11. Housing Needs Assessment
According to recent Census data, approximately 66% of the city’s working residents were employed in management and professional occupations, while 25% were in sales or related fields (Table II-9). A relatively low percentage of workers (5.2%) were employed in sales and office-related occupations such as waiters, waitresses, and beauticians. Blue collar occupations such as machine operators, assemblers, farming, transportation, handlers and laborers constituted only 4 percent of the work force.
Table II-9
Employment by Occupation
Civilian employed population 16 years and over
Management, business, science, and arts occupations Service occupations
Sales and office occupations
Natural resources, construction, and maintenance occupations Production, transportation, and material moving occupations
Persons
989	100%
651	65.8%
51	5.2%
247	25.0%
4	0.4%
36	3.6%
Source US Census 2006-2010 ACS, Tabic DP3
2.	Projected Job Growth
Table II-10 shows projected employment growth by industry for Los Angeles County for the period 2010-2020. The greatest number of new jobs projected to be produced in Los Angeles County over this 10-year period is expected to be in Trade, Transportation and Utilities, Educational Services, Health Care and Social Assistance, and Professional and Business Services.
II-8
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
Table II-10
2010-2020 Industry Employment Projections — Los Angeles County
NAICS i Code	Industry Title	Annual Average 'Emblovnient		Employment Change	
		1 2010 1	I 2020 I	I Numerical I	[Percent
	Total Employment	4,246,700	4,904,300	657,600	15 5
	Self Employment (A)	337,500	366,900	29,400	87
	Unpaid Family Workers (6)	3,300	3,400	100	30
	Private Household Workers (C)	126,600	163,300	36,700	290
	Total Farm	6,200	5,800	-100	-65
	Total Nonfarm	3,773,100	4,364,900	591,800	15.7
1133,21	Mining and Logging	4,100	4,500	400	98
23	Construction	104,500	129,600	25,100	240
31-33	Manufacturing	373,200	362,500	-10,700	-29
22,42-49	Trade, Transportation, and Utilities	739,600	887,700	147,900	200
51	Information	191,500	211,700	20,200	105
52-53	Financial Activities	209,500	231,300	21,600	104
54-5S	Professional and Business Services	527,500	640.600	113,100	21.4
61-62	Educational Services, Health Care and Social Assistance	522,000	660,000	138,000	264
71-72	Leisure and Hospitality	384,800	460,000	95,200	24 7
81	Other Services (excludes 814-Private Household Workers)	136,700	150,700	14,000	102
	Government	579,600	606,300	26,700	46
	Federal Government (D)	51,600	43,900	-7,700	-14.9
	State and Local Government	528,000	562,400	34,400	65
	State Government	80,700	68,100	7,400	9.2
	Local Government	447,300	474,300	27,000	60
Data sources. U S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' Current Employment Statistics (CES, March 2011 benchmark and Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW] industry employment
Industry detail may not add up to totals due to independent rounding
Notes
(A)	Self-Employed persons work for profit or fees in their own business, profession, trade, or farm Only the unincorporated self-employed are included in this category. The estimated and projected employment numbers include all workers who are primarily self-employed and wage and salary workers who hold a secondary job as a self-employed worker.
(B)	Unpaid family workers are those persons who work without pay for 1S or more hours per week on a farm or in a business operated by a member of the household to whom they are related by birth or marriage
(C)	Private household workers are employed as domestic workers whose primary activities are to maintain the household Industry employment is based on QCEW.
(D)	Temporary U.S Census workers are included in (he base and projected year employment numbers.
D.	Housing Stock Characteristics
This section reviews the characteristics of the community’s housing stock and helps in identifying and prioritizing needs. The factors evaluated include the number and type of housing units, recent growth trends, age and condition, tenure, vacancy, housing costs, affordability, and assisted affordable units at-risk of loss due to conversion to market-rate. A housing unit is defined as a house, apartment, mobile home, or group of rooms, occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.
1.	Housing Type and Growth Trends
The housing stock in Hidden Hills is comprised entirely of single-family detached homes and second units. Table II-11 provides a breakdown of the housing stock by type along with growth trends for the
11-9
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
It. Housing Needs Assessment
city compared to the county as a whole for the period 2000-2013. Between 2000 and 2013, there were only 39 new housing units built in the City compared to 192,476 units in the county as a whole.
Table II-11 Housing by Type
Structure Type	2000		2013		Growth	
	Units	r	—’ %	Units '	%	Units	%
Hidden Hilts						
Single-family	592	100%	631	100%	39	100.0%
Multi-family	0	0%	0	0%	0	0.0%
Mobile homes	0	0.0%	0	0.0%	0	0.0%
Total units	592	100%	631	100%	39	100%
Los Angeles County
Single-family	1,835,024	56%	1,948,879	56%	113,855	59.2%
Multi-family	1,379,277	42%	1,456,213	42%	76,936	40.0%
Mobile homes	56,605	2%	58,290	2%	1,685	0.9%
Total units	3,270,906	100%	3,463,382	100%	192,476	100%
Source Cal Dcpl of Finance, Tables E-5 & E-S, 2013
2.	Housing Age and Conditions
Housing age is often an important indicator of housing condition. Housing units built prior to 1978 before stringent limits on the amount of lead in paint were imposed, may have interior or exterior building components coated with lead-based paint. Housing units built before 1970 are the most likely to need rehabilitation and to have lead-based paint in deteriorated condition. Lead-based paint becomes hazardous to children under age six and to pregnant women when it peels off walls or is scraped off by windows and doors opening and closing. Table II-12 shows the age distribution of the housing stock in Hidden Hills compared to Los Angeles County as a whole according to recent Census data.
11-10
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
Table II-12
Age of Housing Stock by Tenure
	,	 _Ycar	Hidden Hills		LA County	
	Units	%	Units	0/ /o
Built 2005 or later	12	2%	54,241	2%
Built 2000 to 2004	35	4%	109,255	3%
Built 1990 to 1999	150	19%	208,791	6%
Built 1980 to 1989	125	16%	403,248	12%
Built 1970 to 1979	73	9%	496,376	14%
Built I960 to 1969	124	16%	518,500	15%
Built 1950 to 1959	239	31%	722,473	21%
Built 1940 to 1949	7	1%	396,035	12%
Built 1939 or earlier	13	2%	516,817	15%
Total units	778	100%	3,425,736	100%
Source Census 2006-2010 ACS. Table DP-4
This table shows that 50% of the housing units in Hidden Hills were constructed prior to 1970. Statistics indicating that a significant portion of the housing stock is more than 30 years old would often indicate a growing need for maintenance and rehabilitation. However, the high housing values and household incomes in Hidden Hills results in few properties actually falling into disrepair, and therefore the need for public assistance with maintenance and rehabilitation is considered to be very low.
3.	Housing Cost
a.	Housing Affordability Criteria
State law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on the area (i.e., county) median income (“AMI”): extremely-low (30% or less of AMI), very-low (31-50% of AMI), low (51-80% of AMI), moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above moderate (over 120% of AMI). Housing affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing expenses. According to HUD and the California Department of Housing and Community Development3, housing is considered “affordable” if the monthly payment is no more than 30% of a household’s gross income. In some areas, these income limits may be increased to adjust for high housing costs.
Table 11-13 shows affordable rent levels and estimated affordable purchase prices for housing in Los Angeles County in 2013 by income category. Based on state-adopted standards, the maximum affordable monthly rent for extremely-low-income households is $640, while the maximum affordable rent for very-low-income households is $1,068. The maximum affordable rent for low-income households is $1,708, while the maximum for moderate-income households is $1,944.
HCD memo of4fl8/07 (http;.',Avwv.hcd.ca.gov,,'hpd/hrLi'rep/state,''inc2k7.pdf)
11-11
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest rates and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association fees, property insurance rates, etc. With this caveat, the maximum home purchase prices by income category shown in Table 11-13 have been estimated based on typical conditions.
Table 11-13
Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs -Los Angeles County
2013 County Median Income = 564,800	Income Limits	Affordable Rent	Affordable Price (est.)
Extremely Low (<30%)	525,600	$640	-
Very Low (31-50%)	542,700	$1,068	$140,000
Low (51-80%)	568,300	$1,708	$235,000
Moderate (81 -120%)	577,750	$1,944	$280,000
Above moderate (120% t)	577,750+	$1,944+	5280,000*
Assumptions
-Based on a family of 4
-30% of gross income for rent or PITI
-10% down payment. 4 5% interest, 1.25% taxes & inKurance, S20Q HOA dues Source. Cal. IiCD, J.H. Douglas & Associates
b.	For-Sale Housing
Due to the unusual nature of Hidden Hills, real estate market data is not readily available. DQ News, one of the most frequently-cited sources of sales data in California, reported no sales in the city for the entire calendar year 2012. A recent review ofZillow.com found a number of sales listings ranging in price from SI.8 million to $20 million. Clearly Hidden Hills is a high-end luxury market with no for-sale housing available in the affordable price categories.
c.	Rental Housing
As noted previously (Table II-11, page 11-10), there are no multi-family units in Hidden Hills. Only a small number of single-family homes are rented, and few are expected to be available for rent at any given time. An Internet search4 for rental units found no listings in Hidden Hills. Given the rural, single-family nature of the community it is clear that lower- and moderate-income households have a difficult time finding housing without overpaying. The only option for lower-income households wishing to rent in Hidden Hills would be second units; however, in most areas of the city private CC&Rs prohibit renting of second units and guest houses and restrict their occupancy to up to two household employees or guests.
Notwithstanding, second units do provide housing in the City for those extremely-low-, very-low- and low-income households. In the last planning period, two second units with kitchens were built.
4 Rent.com, 10/27/2013
11-12
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
E.	Special Needs
Certain groups have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing due to special circumstances. Such circumstances may be related to one’s employment and income, family characteristics, disability, or other conditions.
State Housing Element law defines “special needs” groups to include persons with disabilities, the elderly, large households, female-headed households with children, homeless people, and farm workers. This section contains a discussion of the housing needs facing each of these groups.
1.	Persons with Disabilities
In 2000, approximately 40 people between 16 and 64 years of age, or 4% of the working age population, reported a work-related disability (see Table 11-14). Of those aged 65 and over, reported disabilities include hindered ability to go outside the home (13%) and various physical disabilities (22%). (More recent data is not available.) Housing opportunities for the handicapped can be maximized through housing assistance programs and providing universal design features such as widened doorways, ramps, lowered countertops, single-level units and ground floor units.
Develop mentally Disabled
As defined by federal law, “developmental disability” means a severe, chronic disability of an individual that:
•	Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical impairments;
•	Is manifested before the individual attains age 22;
•	Is likely to continue indefinitely;
•	Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of major life activity: a) self-care; b) receptive and expressive language; c) learning; d) mobility; e) self-direction; f) capacity for independent living; or g) economic self-sufficiency;
•	Reflects the individual’s need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or generic services, individualized supports, or other forms of assistance that are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated.
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According to the U.S. Administration on Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can be defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
11-13
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. Hidden Hills is served by the North Los Angeles County Regional Center5 (NLACRC) in Van Nuys. Any resident who has a developmental disability that originated before age 18 is eligible for services. Services are offered to people with developmental disabilities based on Individual Program Plans and may include: Adult day programs; advocacy; assessment/consultation; behavior management programs; diagnosis and evaluation; independent living services; infant development programs; information and referrals; mobility training; prenatal diagnosis; residential care; respite care; physical and occupational therapy; transportation; consumer, family vendor training; and vocational training. RCOC also coordinates the state-mandated Early Start program, which provides services for children under age three who have or are at substantial risk of having a developmental disability. NLACRC reports that it currently serves 149 clients in zip code 91302, however this zip code includes other areas in addition to the City of Hidden Hills. Based on 2010 Census data, the population in zip code 91302 was 25,709 and Hidden Hills (2010 population of 1,887} represents approximately 7% of the total population in this zip code. Therefore, assuming disabled persons are distributed proportionately to total population within this zip code, it is estimated that there are approximately 11 persons with developmental disabilities living in Hidden Hills who are receiving services from NLACRC.
In addition, City housing programs that respond to the needs of this population include Id (Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing) and 3a (Section 8 Rental Assistance).
s www.nlacrc.org
11-14
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
11. Housing Needs Assessment
Table II-14
Persons with Disabilities by Age
Disability by Age	Persons	Percent
Age 5 to 15 - total persons	HE* 2i	
Sensory disability	2	0.5%
Physical disability	0	-
Mental disability	15	4%
Self-care disability	0	-
Age 16 in 64^ total persons^	^..1-142™'	
Sensory disability	6	0.5%
Physical disability	32	3%
Mental disability	15	1%
Self-care disability	6	0.5%
Go-outside-the-home disability	21	2%
Employment disability	40	4%
Age 65 and m er* - total persons	tsa	
Sensory disability	3	2%
Physical disability	41	22%
Mental disability	18	10%
Self-care disability	20	11%
Go-outside-the-home disability	24	13%
Source 2000 Census, SF3 Tables P8 and P41
Note Tolals may exceed 100% due to multiple disabilities per person
2.	Elderly
According to recent Census data there were 111 owner households (15%) in Hidden Hills where the householder was 65 or older (Table II-15). There were no elderly renter households. These statistics are significantly different than the population at large due to the unique nature of the community.
Table 11-15
Elderly Households by Tenure
_Householder Age	J	Owitcr		_	Renter		
	[	■ ^Householdsj	[	%	Lllouseholds	k' 				 	 %
Under 65 years	626	85%	15	100%
65 to 74 years	64	9%	0	0%
75 to 84 years	39	5%	0	0%
85 years and over	8	1%	0	0%
Total Households	737	100%	15	100%
Source US Census2006-2010ACS.TableB2SCHJ7
11-15
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
11. Housing Needs Assessment
3.	Large Households
Household size is an indicator of need for large units. Large households are defined as those with five or more members. Among owners, 81% all households had four or fewer members. About 20% of owner households had five or six members, while 80% of renter households had five or six members (Table 11-16). Considering the nature of the housing stock in Hidden Hills (predominantly larger single-family homes) this data suggests that there is not likely to be a shortage of large homes compared to the number of larger households. This conclusion is supported by the very low incidence of overcrowding (see Table 11-7).
Table II-16
Household Size by Tenure
	Householder Agc_	L —	Owner	J		-Renter	
	[HquseholdsJ		[.Households-	
1 person	49	7%	0	0%
2 persons	227	31%	3	20%
3 persons	137	19%	0	0%
4 persons	178	24%	0	0%
5 persons	137	19%	3	20%
6 persons	9	1%	9	60%
7 persons or more	0	0%	0	0%
Total Households	737	100%	15	100%
Source US Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25009
4.	Female-Headed Households
Of the 737 owner households in the city, about 7% were headed by a female (Table 11-17). No femaleheaded renter households were reported. In many areas, female-headed households have a disproportionately high housing cost burden. However, the availability of lower-priced housing in surrounding communities provides feasible options for this segment of households with modest financial resources.
Table 11-17
Household Type by Tenure
Household Type	Owner				|		 .. Renter		
	„ FlouschotdT]	[		I Households .	_%_ll
Married couple family	601	82%	15	100%
Male householder, no wife present	23	3%	0	0%
Female householder, no husband present	52	7%	0	0%
Non-family households	61	8%	0	0%
Total Households	737	100%	15	100%
11-16
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IL Housing Needs Assessment
5.	Farm Workers
Farm worker households are considered a special needs group due to their transient nature and the lower incomes typically earned by these households. Migrant workers, and their places of residence, are generally located in close proximity to agricultural areas providing employment. Although agriculture produces a total annual value of approximately $278 million per year in Los Angeles County, no significant agricultural production is found in Hidden Hills or the immediately surrounding communities.6 In addition, recent Census estimates did not identify any farm workers residing permanently in the city. Therefore, farm worker housing is not considered to be an issue for this jurisdiction.
6.	Homeless Persons
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) defines the term “homeless” as the state of a person who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate night-time residence, or a person who has a primary night time residency that is:
•	A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations;
•	An institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized; or
•	A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.7
Although there are myriad causes of homelessness, among the most common are:
•	Substance abuse and	alcohol
•	Domestic violence
•	Mental illness
According to the 2013 Homeless Count Report by the Los Angeles Homeless Services Agency, the estimated homeless population for the entire County of Los Angeles is 53,798 persons on any given day. Of this population, 24% were in shelter facilities, 42% were unsheltered, and 34% were estimated to be “hidden homeless.”
Although the 2013 Homeless Count did not specifically record homeless persons in the City of Hidden Hills, it did count homeless in the San Fernando Valley Service Planning Area (SPA 2), of which Hidden Hills is a part. The 2013 point-in-time homeless estimate for SPA 2 was 7,790 persons.
Senate Bill (SB) 2 of 2007 requires that jurisdictions quantify the need for emergency shelters and determine whether existing facilities are adequate to serve the need. If adequate existing facilities are not available, the law requires jurisdictions to identify areas where new facilities are permitted “byright” (i.e., without requiring discretionary approval such as a use permit), or enter into a multi-party agreement with up to two other jurisdictions to accommodate the need.
6	2005 Crop and Livestock Report, Los Angeles County Agricultural Commissioner
7	Stewart B. McKinney Act, 42 U.S.C. §11301, et seq. (1994)
11-17
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
It. Housing Needs Assessment
The 2010 Census reported no homeless persons in Hidden Hills. Due to the rural, guard-gated nature of Hidden Hills, it is unlikely that any homeless persons are in the city. While there are no known homeless persons in the city, the Municipal Code has been amended to comply with zoning requirements for emergency shelters under SB 2.
F.	Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion
There are no residential units within the City of Hidden Hills that participate in a federal, state or local program that provide some form of assistance, either through financial subsidy or a control measure. Therefore, there are no units at risk of conversion8.
G.	Housing Growth Needs
1.	Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for anticipated growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing within each jurisdiction for the period from January 2014 to October 2021. Communities then determine how they will address this need through the process of updating the Housing Elements of their General Plans.
The current RHNA was adopted by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) in October 2012. The future need for housing is determined primarily by the forecasted growth in households in a community. Each new household, created by a child moving out of a parent's home, by a family moving to a community for employment, and so forth, creates the need for a housing unit. The housing need for new households is then adjusted to maintain a desirable level of vacancy to promote housing choice and mobility. An adjustment is also made to account for units expected to be lost due to demolition, natural disaster, or conversion to non-housing uses. The sum of these factors -household growth, vacancy need, and replacement need - determines the construction need for a community. Total housing need is then distributed among four income categories on the basis of the county’s income distribution, with adjustments to avoid an over-concentration of lower-income households in any community.
2.	2014-2021 Hidden Hills Growth Needs
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) determined the RHNA growth needs for each city within the SCAG region, plus the unincorporated areas. The total housing growth need for the City of Hidden Hills during the 2014-2021 projection period is 18 units. This total is distributed by income category as shown in Table 11-18.
8	Sources: SCAG/Califomia Housing Partnership Corp; City of Hidden Hills, 2013
11-18
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
Table 11-18
Regional Housing Growth Needs
Very Low*	Low	Moderate	Above Moderate	Total
				
Source SC AG 2012
* The Extremely-Low need is assumed lo be 3 units, or 50% of the Very-Low need per state law .
It should be noted that SCAG did not identify growth needs for the extremely-low-income category in the adopted RHNA. As provided in Assembly Bill (AB) 2634 of 2006, jurisdictions may determine their extremely-low-income need as one-half the need in the very-low category.
A discussion of the city’s land resources to accommodate its growth need is provided in the land inventory section of Chapter III.
11-19
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
II. Housing Needs Assessment
This page intentionally left blank.
11-20
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
111. Resources and Opportunities
III.	Resources and Opportunities
A.	Land Resources
Section 65583(a)(3) of the Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an “inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to these sites.” A detailed analysis of vacant land and potential redevelopment opportunities has been prepared (see Appendix B, Table B-2) and the results of this analysis are summarized in Table III-l below. This analysis demonstrates that the City’s capacity for new housing can accommodate the R.HNA in all income categories.
Table III-1
Land Inventory Summary
	Income t’ntegory		
	Lower	Mod	Alioxe
Vacant land	-	-	32
Affordable Housing Overlay	17	-	-
Second units	2	-	
Total sites	19		32
RHNA	8	3	7
Adequate Capacity?	Yes	Yes*	Yes
Source City ofHiddcn Hills, 2013 •Reflects the surplus of lower-income sites
Affordability Assumptions - In 2004 state Housing Element law was amended9 to clarify the requirements for the land inventory analysis, and established a “default density” for each jurisdiction. The default density is the density that is assumed to be sufficient to facilitate the production of lower-income housing. If a jurisdiction allows development at the default density, then no further analysis is necessary to demonstrate that those sites are suitable for lower-income housing development. The default density for Hidden Hills is 20 units/acre. During the 4th planning cycle the City adopted the Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO), which provide opportunities for lower-income affordable housing in the Commercial-Restricted zone at a density of 20 units/acre, excluding density bonus. In addition to the AHO, second units can also provide affordable housing. Since existing Hidden Hills Community Association regulations prohibit owners from renting second units, it can be assumed that they will be occupied by family members or household employees with no rent charged, and therefore would qualify as lower-income units.
Infrastructure Capacity - No major problems currently exist due to inadequate water and sewer capacity for day to day needs. However, all infrastructure was planned by the Las Virgenes Municipal Water District to serve only the levels of development contemplated under the existing deed restrictions, and intensification of development beyond that provided under current planning and zoning policies in this area could be a problem.
* HCD memo of June 9, 2005 on AB 2348
III-l
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
III. Resources and Opportunities
Until recently, adequate water pressure could not be provided in some areas of the City due to lack of sufficient water infrastructure in those areas. Some upgrades have been installed, improving flows in deficient areas. However, water systems generally consist of four inch and, in some cases, two inch mains which are not looped, creating a challenge in maintaining adequate fire flows. Thus, new homes are equipped with fire sprinkler systems, where necessary.
B.	Financial and Administrative Resources
Due to the rural, single-family nature of Hidden Hills, the City does not participate in any state or federal housing assistance programs and has no local resources for housing assistance.
C.	Energy Conservation Opportunities
California Government Code §65583(a)(7) requires an analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to residential development. As in most of Southern California, weather in Hidden Hills is generally mild and sunny, a characteristic which is conducive to use of solar power. Income tax credits are offered for use of solar energy and other energy conservation devices. Due to the generally affluent demographic of Hidden Hills, it might be anticipated that a significant number of households could benefit from this tax credit. In addition, the Southern California Gas Company, which serves the area, maintains home weatherization programs to conserve energy, including insulation and use of double paned or other high energy rated windows. Also, passive measures such as home orientation and use of vegetation for shade and shelter may also save energy. The City of Hidden Hills has made information on energy conservation measures available at City Hall.
State law requires all new construction to comply with “energy budget” standards that establish maximum allowable energy use from depletable sources (Title 24 of the California Administrative Code). These requirements apply to such design components as structural insulation, air infiltration and leakage control, setback features on thermostats, water heating system insulation (tanks and pipes) and swimming pool covers if a pool is equipped with a fossil fuel or electric heater. State law also requires that a tentative tract map provide for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision, including designing the lot sizes and configurations to permit orienting structures to take advantage of a southern exposure, shade or prevailing breezes.
Southern California Edison (SCE) and the Southern California Gas Company offer energy conservation programs to residents including audits of home energy use to reduce electricity consumption, refrigerator rebates, solar energy equipment rebates, appliance repair and weatherization assistance to qualified low-income households, buyer’s guides for appliances and incentives, by the Gas Company, to switch from electric to gas appliances. Direct assistance to low-income households is provided by the Gas Company through the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program and by SCE through its Energy Management Assistance Program.
Both companies have programs to encourage energy conservation in new construction. SCE’s energy rebate program applies to residential developers as well as individual customers. SCE also offers an Energy STAR new home program, and Sustainable Communities Program offering design assistance and financial incentives for sustainable housing development projects. The Gas Company’s Energy
I1I-2
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
III, Resources and Opportunities
Advanced Home Program is offered to residential developers who install energy-efficient gas appliances that exceed California energy standards by at least 15%.
tll-3
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
III, Resources and Opportunities
This page intentionally left blank.
III-4
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
IV.	Constraints
A.	Governmental Constraints
1.	Land Use Plans and Regulations
a.	Genera] Plan
Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General Plan to guide its future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic land uses and density of development within the various areas of the city. Under state law, the General Plan elements must be internally consistent and the city’s zoning must be consistent with the General Plan. Thus, the land use plan must provide suitable locations and densities to implement the policies of the Housing Element.
The City of Hidden Hills General Plan Land Use Element provides for three residential land use designations, as shown in Table IV-1.
Table IV-1
Residential Land Use Categories -Hidden Hills General Plan
..Designation	Maximum ' Density1 ■		 Description	j Acreage2
Residential Agricultural, Suburban (RA-I)	1 du/ac	Single-family detached homes on minimum l-acrc lots; second unit permitted without kitchen facilities.	821.46
Residential Agricultural, Suburban (RA-2)	1 du/ac	Single-family detached homes on minimum l-acrc lots; second unit permitted with kitchen facilities.	88.45
Single Family Residential (R-SF)	2.2 du/ac	Single-family detached homes on minimum 20,000 SF lots	1.97
Total			
Source City of Hidden Hills General Plan
1	Density expressed in dwelling units per gross acre
2	Total acreage including developed and vacant land
It should be noted that the minimum lot sizes required by the General Plan are reflective of, and in some areas, less restrictive than, lot sizes required under the Hidden Hills Protective Restrictions included in the Hidden Hills Community Association Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs) which preceded the establishment of the City of Hidden Hills. Additional information on the CC&Rs can be found in Section IV.B. Non-Governmental Constraints.
The City of Hidden Hills General Plan is not considered a constraint to the goals and policies of the Housing Element as the City’s zoning is consistent with the General Plan and sufficient capacity for new housing has been identified to accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA.
b.	Zoning Designations and Development Standards
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development through the Municipal Code. Zoning regulations serve to implement the General Plan and are designed to protect
IV-1
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents. The Municipal Code also helps to preserve the character and integrity of existing neighborhoods. For example, the City adopted an ordinance amending the standards regarding development on ridgelines. The Municipal Code sets forth residential development standards for each zone district.
The zones that allow residential subdivisions, single-family houses, or second units as a permitted use are as follows:
R-A-S	Residential Agricultural Suburban (one acre minimum lot area)
R-A-S-2	Residential Agricultural Suburban-2 (one acre minimum lot area)
R-I	Residential (20,000 square feet minimum lot area)
A summary of the development standards for the three zones permitting residential development is provided in Table IV-2. For single-family homes, the smallest allowable lot size is 20,000 square feet (in the R-l zone); however, there are only five parcels in the R-l district and most parcels in the city are a minimum of one acre in size. While the lots are large by current urban standards in Southern California, it should be recognized that Hidden Hills was planned as a rural single-family residential community in the 1950s with CC&Rs to protect its equestrian character. Further, the city was mostly developed more than 30 years ago when land costs were much lower and the pressures for higher density did not exist. As a result, the potential for new residential development is extremely limited. The City’s development standards continue to be viewed as necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and maintain the quality of life as envisioned by the CC&Rs, and are not considered to be unreasonable constraints on the development of housing.
Table IV-2 Residential Zones
Development Standard	Zoning Designations	j		
	R-A-S	R-A-S-2^	R-l	i
Maximum Density (DU)	1 du/ac	1 du/ac	2.2 du/ac.
Maximum Bldg. Coverage (% of lot)	30%	30%	30%
Minimum Front Yard (ft.)	50	50	35
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)	25	25	5:
Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)	50	50	is!
Maximum Building Envelope Height (ft.)	264	30*	26*
Source Hidden Hills Zoning Code
Notes.
1.	Density expressed in dwelling units per net acre.
2.	Minimum yard setback is 25 feet if adjacent to R-A-S zone
3	Rear yard may be reduced to 5 feet when abutting (he C-R zone
4	Four additional feel allowed for building height cap
IV-2
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
The R-A-S Zone differs from the R-A-S-2 Zone primarily in that the R-A-S-2 Zone allows additional building height and additional accessory units, including provision of a kitchen in a second unit. Building height is regulated through the building height envelope and building height cap.
The building height envelope is defined as: The vertical dimension of the building as measured from each point in the pre-existing grade to the directly vertical point of the finished roof (excluding chimneys).
The building height cap is defined as: The greatest vertical dimension of a building as measured from the lowest point where the foundation adjoins the finished exterior grade to the top of the highest portion of the finished rood (excluding chimneys).
All height, lot coverage, and setback requirements are consistent with Hidden Hills Community Association requirements. The overall intent of the City's residential zoning standards is to preserve the community’s rural equestrian character and privacy through large lots, low maximum coverage requirements and ample setbacks. Relaxation of the standards by the City would have little or no effect on development due to the separate Association requirements that apply to all parcels in the city, but for a few.
Table IV-3
Permitted Residential Development by Zone
Housing Type Permitted	R-A-S	R-A-S 2	R-l
Single-Family Detached	P	P	P
Single-Family Attached			
Multi-Family			
Transitional & Supportive Housing	P	P	P
Res. Care Facilities (6 or fewer clients)	C	C	C
Manufactured Housing*	P	P	P
Mobile Home*	P	P	P
Second Units	P	P	
Source Midden Hills Zoning Code P - permitted use C - conditional use *On a permanent foundation
In addition to the permitted residential uses shown in Table IV-3, lower-income multi-family housing is permitted by-right in the Commercial Restricted (CR) zone subject to the Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) regulations.
c.	Special Needs Housing
Persons with special needs include those in residential care facilities, persons with disabilities, farm workers, persons needing emergency shelter or transitional living arrangements, and single room occupancy units. Many of these groups also fall under the category of extremely-low-income households. The City’s provisions for these housing types are discussed below.
IV-3
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
Extremely Low-Income Households
Many of the persons and households discussed in this section under the topic of special needs fall within the extremely-low-income category, which is defined as 30% or less of area median income, or up to $25,600 per year for a 4-person household in Los Angeles County as of 2013. As discussed in Chapter II, the 2000 Census reported that 4 renters (50%) and 10 owners (71%) in this income range were overpaying for housing. Given the demographics and housing conditions in Hidden Hills, the accuracy of these statistics may be questionable, however. There are no multi-family units in the city, and single-family homes are clearly not affordable to extremely-low-income households. It is possible that households shown as overpaying lived in second units, although CC&Rs prohibit the renting of second units.
As discussed in the land inventory analysis (Appendix B), the needs of extremely-low-income households are addressed through AHO sites and second units.
Residential Care Facilities
Residential care facilities refer to any family home, group home, or rehabilitation facility that provides non-medical care to persons in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for daily living. Residential care facilities that serve six or fewer persons are currently allowed by conditional use permit in all residential zones. Facilities serving more than six persons are not currently permitted within the city. State law requires that licensed group homes serving six or fewer persons be treated the same as single-family residential uses, and the Municipal Code is in conformance with this requirement of state law.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose an affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. modifications or exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The Building Codes adopted by the City of Hidden Hills incorporate accessibility standards contained in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
In addition, cities can adopt “reasonable accommodation” procedures to streamline the approval process for adjustments to regulations and standards where necessary to improve accessibility for persons with disabilities. In 2012 the City Council adopted a reasonable accommodation ordinance in conformance with state law. The ordinance allows the Planning Director to approve reasonable accommodation requests administratively (i.e., without a public hearing). There is no fee for filing a reasonable accommodation request, and if the request is associated with a discretionary permit the applications are processed concurrently. This simplified reasonable accommodation process helps to address the needs of persons with all types of disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
Farm Worker Housing
As discussed in Chapter 2, (Needs Assessment), the City of Hidden Hills is not located within or near a major agricultural area and has no need for farm worker housing. However, in conformance with
IV-4
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
state law10, a Municipal Code amendment was approved in 2013 to allow agricultural employee housing for up to six persons as a single-family residential use in residential zones.
Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing
As discussed in Chapter II, no homeless persons have been observed in Hidden Hills, and there is no demand for a shelter in the city. However, in conformance with state law (SB 2 of 2007) the Municipal Code allows emergency shelters by-right in the Commercial-Restricted (C-R) zone subject to appropriate development standards. The C-R zone encompasses 1.5 acres and can accommodate an emergency shelter. Standards for emergency shelters include the following:
•	Submittal of a Management and Operations plan;
•	Maximum of 6 beds;
•	Minimum distance of 300 feet between emergency shelters;
•	Maximum length of stay of 180 days in any 365-day period;
•	Minimum of one employee, in addition to security personnel, on duty during operational hours;
•	Security personnel shall be provided during operational hours;
•	Exterior lighting;
•	Minimum parking of one space per 4 beds plus one for each employee or volunteer on duty, plus a bicycle rack.
To ensure that the current standards do not pose an unreasonable constraint to emergency shelters, the City will consult with shelter operators and consider their recommendations in 2014 (Program 7b in the Housing Plan).
“Transitional housing"' means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance (Government Code Sec 655 82[h]).
“Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. “Target population" means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
Transitional or supportive housing facilities are permitted subject to the same standards and procedures as apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone in compliance with state law.
1 Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5
IV-5
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
Single Room Occupancy
Single room occupancy facilities are small studio-type multi-family units, typically reserved for lower-income residents or senior citizens. The City’s Zoning Code currently does not permit any type of multi-family housing (including SROs) due to the established single-family residential character and the provisions contained in existing CC&Rs that cover all of the city except for a few lots (see Non-Govemmental Constraints.)
d.	Off-Street Parking Requirements
The Zoning Code requires a minimum of two parking spaces in a fully enclosed garage for every home, regardless of the number of bedrooms. Since the City does not have multi-family or mixed-use zoning, there are no parking requirements for those uses. The City’s minimum parking requirements are modest compared to other suburban Southern California cities and should have no significant impact on the cost of housing.
e.	Accessory Units
The City adopted second unit regulations in 2003 to implement changes made to state law as part of AB 1866. The regulations allow second dwelling units of up to 1,200 square feet in the R-A-S zone and up to 1,500 square feet in the R-A-S-2 zone subject only to non-discretionary plan check. Either the primary unit or the second unit must be occupied by the property owner, and second units may be rented but not sold separately from the main residence. One parking space per bedroom is required, which may be in a garage or uncovered in the rear yard setback. Second units must comply with the development standards that apply to the zone.
Hidden Hills Community Association restrictions imposed by the CC&Rs do not allow the rental of second dwelling units. However, based on U.S. Census data, Hidden Hills appears to have some dwelling units that are being rented at affordable rates. It is likely that these units are guest units provided to household employees that serve the occupants of the main residence.
Given that domestic service is a significant source of employment within Hidden Hills, the accessory units directly address jobs-housing balance, as well as provide affordable housing for low-income residents. Accessory units also serve to augment resources for senior housing, or other segments of the population. The Housing Plan (Chapter V) contains Program 5b to continue to encourage the development of additional second units as a key component of the City’s strategy for meeting its share of regional housing needs for lower-income persons.
f.	Density Bonus
SB 1818 was adopted in 2004 to encourage and provide incentives to developers to include low- and moderate-income housing units in their developments. SB 1818 is known as the “Density Bonus Law” and it provides density bonuses up to 35% based on the percentage of affordable units in a development. The Municipal Code includes provisions for density bonus in conformance with state law.
IV-6
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
g.	Mobile Homes/Manufactured Housing
There is often an economy of scale in manufacturing homes in a plant rather than on site, thereby reducing cost. State law precludes local governments from prohibiting the installation of mobile homes on permanent foundations on single-family lots. It also declares a mobile home park to be a permitted land use on any land planned and zoned for residential use, and prohibits requiring the average density in a new mobile home park to be less than that permitted by the Municipal Code. The City’s Zoning Code currently allows mobile homes or manufactured housing on a permanent foundation in all residential zones.
h.	Building Codes
State law prohibits the imposition of building standards that are not necessitated by local geographic, climatic or topographic conditions. Further, state law requires that local governments making changes or modifications in building standards must report such charges to the Department of Housing and Community Development and file an expressed finding that the change is needed.
The City's building codes are based upon the California Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fire and Electrical Codes. These are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
In only minor cases do City standards differ from the state Building Code. City amendments have been adopted in the areas of soil and erosion, pool barriers, fire, architectural, and structural requirements. While some of these may add to building costs, they are deemed reasonable and necessary to protect public health and safety.
2.	Development Processing Procedures a. Residential Permit Processing
State Planning and Zoning Law provides permit processing requirements for residential development. Within the framework of state requirements, the City has structured its development review process in order to minimize the time required to obtain permits while ensuring that projects meet applicable requirements. It should be noted that nearly all projects require approval of the Hidden Hills Association’s Architectural Committee, which adds to project review time. However, projects that obtain Association approval are exempt from City site plan review. If required, the City’s site plan review process focuses on the physical design of buildings to ensure that they are compatible with adjacent properties in terms of building height, scale, and privacy (e.g., building separation and placement of windows, decks and balconies), and that topographic features are preserved to the extent feasible. Site plan review applications are reviewed by the Planning Commission at a public hearing.
Plan check for processing of building permits is generally one to two weeks, which is less time than in most communities.
For discretionary permits such as conditional uses permits or variances for project not meeting basic standards, processing takes 90 days from the time an application is determined to be complete, including mandated public review and noticing periods.
IV-7
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
b. Environmental Review
Environmental review is required for all development projects under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Most residential projects in Hidden Hills are either Categorically Exempt or require an Initial Study and a Mitigated Negative Declaration. Developments that have the potential of creating significant impacts that cannot be mitigated require the preparation of an Environmental Impact Report. Once deemed complete, most residential projects that require a Mitigated Negative Declaration take two to three months to complete, inclusive of mandatory public review periods. Categorically Exempt developments such as second residential units require a minimal amount of time. As a result, state-mandated environmental review does not pose a significant constraint to housing development.
3.	Development Fees and Improvement Requirements
State law limits fees charged for development permit processing to the reasonable cost of providing the service for which the fee is charged. Various fees and assessments are charged by the City and other public agencies to cover the costs of processing permit applications and providing services and facilities such as schools, parks and infrastructure. Almost all of these fees are assessed through a pro rata share system, based on the magnitude of the project's impact or on the extent of the benefit that will be derived.
Table IV-4 shows the development fees the City charges for new, single-family residential development. Development fees are estimated at approximately $20,000 to $80,000 per unit which is modest in comparison to property values. Unlike many urban and suburban jurisdictions, Hidden Hills has no traffic impact fee.
The City periodically evaluates the actual cost of processing the development permits when revising its fee schedule.
Roadways in Hidden Hills are typically narrow and winding. The Circulation Element identifies three collector streets (Long Valley Road, Round Meadow Road, and Spring Valley Road) and no arterials. Long Valley Road, the major collector for the City is 26 feet wide, including 3-foot concrete swales. The remaining roadways are all local streets. All streets are owned and maintained by the Community Association except outside the security gates. The General Plan requires new private roads to have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet. Another policy requires that all streets be designed to keep the rural, equestrian character of the community. Typically, local streets are minimally improved with paving, rolled gutters and equestrian trails. These policies preclude excessive improvement standards that could act as an unreasonable constraint to housing development in Hidden Hills.
After the passage of Proposition 13 and its limitation on local governments’ property tax revenues, cities and counties have faced increasing difficulty in providing public services and facilities to serve their residents. One of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has been the shift in funding of new infrastructure from general tax revenues to development impact fees and improvement requirements on land developers. The City requires developers to provide on-site and off-site improvements necessary to serve their projects. Such improvements may include water, sewer and other utility extensions, street construction and traffic control device installation that are reasonably related to the project.
1V-8
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
Dedication of land or in-lieu fees may also be required of a project for rights-of-way, transit facilities, recreational facilities and school sites, consistent with the Subdivision Map Act.
Table IV-4
Development Fee Summary
Fee Category	Fee or Deposit Amount
Planning and Application Fees	
Conditional Use Permit	$5,309
Minor Accommodation	$499
Variance	$2,426
Tentative Tract Map	$9,982+ $36l/lot
Site Plan Review	$499
Minor Site Plan Review	$138
Lot Line Adjustment	$859
Environmental	
Environmental Review/Initial Study	$950 + Actual cost of document preparation
Public Works	
Curb and Gutter	Actual cost
Sidewalks	Actual cost
Curb Drains	Actual cost
Residential Driveways	Actual cost
City Engineering	
Grading Plan Check & Permit	Dependent on quantities. 50 cu.yd.: $268 plan check + $653 permit 500,000 cu.yd.: $16,000 plan check + $22,000 permit
Plan Check	$998 + 7,20% of first $50,000 of improvement cost JE 5.75% of next $100,000 of improvement cost + 4.30% of improvement cost thereafter
Construction Permit	$104 Issuance fee+ 11.50% of first $1000,000 of improvement cost+ 10% of next $100,000 of improvement cost *■ 8.6% of improvement cost thereafter
Residential Inspection (where no other fee exists)	$114.00/hr.
Las Virgenes Municipal Water District Fees	
Water Hookup	$8,820
Sewer Hookup	$7000
Typical Cost for One Single-Family Unit	$20,000-80,000
Source Cily ofHidden Hills Planning Department and Public Works Department, 2013
Although development fees and improvement requirements increase the cost of housing, cities have little choice in establishing such requirements due to the limitations on property taxes and other revenue sources needed to fund public improvements and maintain community standards. Compared to most other jurisdictions in the region, development fees in Hidden Hills are very low in relation to property values.
IV-9
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
B.	Non-Governmental Constraints
1.	Codes, Covenants, and Restrictions (CC&Rs)
All residential land in the City, except for a few lots, is subject to the Hidden Hills Community Association CC&Rs, which were adopted at the time of the original subdivisions forming the bulk of the city. Eighteen separate sets of deed restrictions were recorded between 1950 and the present. The CC&Rs are comprehensive and apply to everything from land use to architectural review.
The Hidden Hills Community Association, a private homeowner’s association, currently oversees compliance with the CC&Rs. The Association has an independently elected board, outside the control of the City of Hidden Hills. The City has no authority to modify or remove the restrictions. Amendment of the CC&Rs requires an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the membership of the Association as well as approval of their lenders.
The CC&Rs are reflected in the City’s General Plan and Zoning Code, which establish the basic land uses, densities, and development requirements for the city. However, new housing within the Association is subject to the Association’s Architectural Standards and requires approval of the Association’s Architectural Commission. Any subdivision of property also requires the Association’s approval. The timeframe for Architectural Review can vary considerably and is not under City control.
Additionally, all City residents must pay an annual assessment for maintenance, improvements and other Association expenses. These assessments are typically several thousand dollars per year, adding to the cost of home ownership in the city.
2.	Environmental Constraints
Environmental constraints include physical features such as steep slopes, fault zones, floodplains, sensitive biological habitat, agricultural lands, and areas located within very high fire hazard zones. In many cases, development of these areas is constrained by state and federal laws (e.g., FEMA floodplain regulations, the Clean Water Act and the Endangered Species Act, the state Fish and Game Code, and the Alquist-Priolo Act).
The City of Hidden Hills is characterized by rolling to rugged terrain which presents significant constraints to the development of the remaining vacant land.
Hidden Hills is located in County Fire Zone 3, a high brush fire hazard area. The City’s building code requires fire retardant roofs for all residential structures.
Significant geologic constraints are also imposed by active landslides and potentially active landslides within the city. Geologic risks are addressed by Public Safety Element policies, and through the building permit review process.
The City’s land use plans have been designed to protect sensitive areas from development, and protect public safety by avoiding development in hazardous areas. While these policies constrain residential development to some extent, they are necessary to support other public policies and promote public safety.
IV-10
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
3.	Infrastructure Constraints
Wastewater Treatment. The Las Virgenes Municipal Water District (LVMWD) provides sanitary sewer service for the city through local collector sewers operated by the Los Angeles County Consolidated Sewer Maintenance District. Sewage collected in the city is discharged for treatment in the City of Los Angeles’ wastewater facilities at their Tillman and Hyperion Treatment plants, in accordance with an agreement between the LVMWD and the City of Los Angeles. City staff has confirmed that the wastewater treatment system has the capacity to serve all present and projected future water needs, and therefore is not a constraint to housing production.
Water Supply. Water for City residents is supplied by LVMWD. The LVMWD obtains all of its water supply from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD), part of the State Water Project. According to the LVMWD, portions of the City’s water system have not been updated to the 1,250 gallon-per-minute minimum requirements currently required by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. While the County has not indicated a need to upgrade the older lines, new development must meet the 1,250 gallon standard. City staff has confirmed with LVMWD that domestic water supply is not expected to limit development during the planning period.
Storm Water Drainage. Storm water runoff is handled by a flood control system owned maintained Los Angeles County Department of Public Works. According to Federal Emergency Management Agency maps, the City of Hidden Hills has a low potential for flooding, and therefore storm water drainage is not expected to act as a constraint to housing development.
4.	Land Costs
Land represents one of the most significant components of the cost of new housing. Land values fluctuate with market conditions, and have been steadily increasing since 2000. The recent downturn in the housing market is expected to affect land values negatively, however. Changes in land prices reflect the cyclical nature of the residential real estate market. It appears as though we are in a downturn similar to the early 1980s and early 1990s, which was characterized by relatively sharp declines in property values and extended periods of minimal appreciation before prices recovered.
In Hidden Hills land costs represent a relatively high proportion of total housing costs, due in part to large minimum lot sizes. As the remaining developable land has become scarcer, the price of land in the City has risen. In addition, the land which has not yet been developed tends to have more environmental constraints, such as topographical features that require extensive grading, and is thus more costly to develop. Typical 2013 land cost is $2 million for a one-acre parcel in the residential zones."
5.	Construction Costs
Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor, development standards and general market conditions. The City has no influence over materials and labor costs, and the building codes and development standards in Hidden Hills are not substantially different than most other cities in Los Angeles County and the state of California. However, difficult site topography, high land costs,
11 City of Hidden Hills Planning Department, October 2013
IV-ll
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
IV. Constraints
restrictive CC&Rs, and the lack of large sites suitable for subdivision, all favor individually built, custom homes. As a result, these homes are associated with much higher per-square-foot construction costs than tract-type production housing.
6.	Cost and Availability of Financing
Hidden Hills is similar to most other communities with regard to private sector home financing programs. The recent crisis in the mortgage industry will affect the availability and cost of real estate loans, although the long-term effects are unpredictable. One of the most significant changes has been a tightening of mortgage underwriting standards, which has had greater impacts on low-income families than other segments of the community. For those with good credit ratings, interest rates have been at historic lows, resulting in increased affordability.
C.	Fair Housing
State law prohibits discrimination in the development process or in real property transactions, and it is the City’s policy to uphold the law in this regard. Fair housing issues are addressed in Hidden Hills through the Fair Housing Foundation, a nonprofit corporation formed to promote the enforcement of fair housing laws and to encourage an atmosphere of open housing. The Planning Department distributes information at City Hall and makes referrals to the Fair Housing Foundation as needed.
IV-I2
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
V. Housing Plan
V.	Housing Plan
The primary focus of the Housing Element is to meet existing and anticipated housing needs and to protect existing residential neighborhoods in Hidden Hills. The policies and implementation measures of the Housing Element are aimed at preserving the quality of the living environment, protecting the lower density character of the area, conserving the existing housing stock, addressing local and regional housing needs, providing for the City's share of housing for all economic groups, providing housing assistance to residents, and ensuring fair housing practices.
A. Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs
GOAL I. Preserve the quality of existing neighborhoods to provide a safe and healthful living environment for all residents.
Policy 1. Preserve the scale of development in existing residential neighborhoods.
Program I. Zoning and Development Standards. Continue to enforce the Zoning Code, which regulates height, lot coverage, setbacks, open space, etc.
Funding source:	General Fund;	plan check/permit fees
Implementation schedule:	Continuous
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Policy 2. Encourage the maintenance of existing dwellings in order to maintain public health and safety.
Program 2. Property Maintenance. Pursue pro-active code enforcement and work cooperatively with the Hidden Hills Community Association to encourage property maintenance, including sharing information regarding problem properties to the extent permitted consistent with preservation of privacy of the homeowner.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Continuous
Responsibility:	Planning and Building staff
GOAL IL Provide housing opportunities for all segments of the community, including various economic segments and special needs groups.
Policy 3. Provide adequate sites for new housing consistent with the capacity of infrastructure to handle increased growth.
Program 3. Infill Residential Development. Encourage development of existing vacant residential infill sites and second units (see also Program 5b).
Funding source:	General Fund and permit revenue
Implementation schedule:	Continuous
V-l
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
V, Housing Plan
Responsibility:	Planning and Building staff
Policy 4. Preserve existing affordable housing stock.
Program 4a. Reverse Mortgages. Encourage the provision of reverse mortgages by local lending institutions and increase community awareness of such alternatives by posting information in City Hall and on the City’s website.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Post information	on reverse mortgages throughout
the planning period
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Program 4b. Reduced Association Fees. Continue to work cooperatively with the Hidden Hills Community Association to waive or reduce Association fees for low* and moderate-income households.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Throughout the planning period.
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Policy S. Facilitate the development of additional extremely-low-, very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing, as well as housing for persons with developmental disabilities.
Program 5a. Development Streamlining. Continue efforts to reduce housing costs by streamlining the development review process to the extent feasible for projects that include extremely-low-income units and supportive housing for persons with developmental disabilities. Provide concurrent processing of all discretionary applications for a project. Maintain current plan check efficiencies.
Funding source:	General Fund and development fee revenues
Implementation schedule:	Continuous
Responsibility:	Planning, Engineering and Building staff
Program 5b. Second Units. Provide incentives for development of additional second units as a component of the City’s strategy to facilitate production of low- and moderate-income housing, including extremely-low-income units and supportive housing for persons with developmental disabilities. These incentives will include the following:
■	Modification of development standards (e.g., setbacks), if necessary to accommodate second units
■	Fast-track plan review and permit processing for second units
■	Marketing and promotion of second units to applicants for new construction or substantial remodels when applications are received
V-2
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
V. Housing Plan
Program 5c.
Program 5d.
■	Provide direct mail flyers to all households in the city promoting second units
■	Pursue discussions with the Hidden Hills Community Association regarding the potential for relaxation of private second unit deed restrictions
■	Monitor the results of this program and report to the City Council and HCD annually on program accomplishments. If the program’s incentives are found not to be effective in facilitating additional second unit development, revised program actions will be initiated.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Provide fast track processing for second units
throughout the planning period;
Offer modified development standards for second units, if necessary, throughout the planning period;
Make second unit information materials available throughout the planning period;
Biannual discussions with the Community Association.
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Density Bonus Ordinance. The City will continue to implement the Density Bonus Ordinance consistent with current state law.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Throughout the planning period
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Affordable Housing Overlay. Continue to implement the Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) zoning regulations and facilitate development of qualifying affordable owner-occupied or multi-family rental developments in the Commercial-Restricted (CR) zone. The AHO regulations include the following provisions:
•	Qualifying projects shall have a minimum density of 20 units/acre, excluding density bonus.
•	Qualifying projects shall restrict all units in the development, except for a manager’s unit, for occupancy by lower-income households for a period of not less than 30 years.
•	Qualifying projects shall have a minimum of 16 units per site
•	Qualifying projects shall be permitted by-right (i.e., limited to non-discretionary design review).
V-3
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
V. Housing Plan
■	Development other than a qualifying affordable housing project within the AHO shall require approval of a conditional use permit, with the exception of the continuation, modification or change of an existing use in an existing structure provided the modification or change of use does not require a discretionary planning permit. Approval of a CUP shall require a finding that the development will not reduce the capacity of available land in the AHO below the amount necessary to accommodate the remaining lower-income RHNA for the planning period.
• To address the housing needs of extremely-low-income households and persons with special needs, including developmental disabilities, the City will:
>	Biennially contact developers, including non-profit, to assist with seeking or supporting State and Federal monies, as funding becomes available for support of housing construction and/or rehabilitation;
>	Provide regulatory incentives, such as expedited permit processing and fee waivers and deferrals (see Programs 4.b and 5.a); and
>	The City shall work with the North Los Angeles County Regional Center to implement an outreach program informing families within the City of housing and services available for persons with developmental disabilities. Information will be made available on the City’s website.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Throughout the	planning period
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Policy 6. Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status or disability.
Program 6. Fair Housing. The City will continue to promote fair housing policies through the following actions:
■	Post State regulations regarding housing discrimination together with the appropriate phone numbers to contact regarding housing discrimination problems at City Hall.
■	Provide a referral process for any persons who believe they have been denied access to housing because of their race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status or disability. The City will refer complainants to appropriate agencies, legal service organizations, and/or nonprofit housing groups that specifically handle housing discrimination issues such as the Fair Housing Congress of Southern California and the Fair Housing
V-4
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
V. Housing Plan
Council of San Fernando Valley. The City will publicize fair housing information on the City’s website and in the City’s newsletter.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Publicize fair	housing information throughout the
planning period
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Policy 7.	Accommodate the housing needs of special population groups.
Program 7a. Accessible Housing. The City will continue to enforce the current Zoning Code and the state provisions (Title 24) for handicapped access, and allow residential care facilities consistent with state law. Through the continued implementation of the Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance, the City will facilitate the streamlined approval of modifications to zoning and building regulations needed to accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Throughout the planning period
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Program 7b. Emergency Shelters. Emergency shelters shall be permitted by-right in the C-R zone subject to appropriate development standards consistent with SB 2. The C-R zone contains approximately 1.5 acres, has the capacity for at least one shelter, and is within walking distance of public transit. To ensure that the current standards do not pose an unreasonable constraint to emergency shelters, the City will consult with shelter operators and consider their recommendations in 2014.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Consult with shelter operators in	2014.
Responsibility:	Planning staff
Program 7c. Transitional and Supportive Housing. SB 2 of 2007 requires that transitional and supportive housing be considered a residential use subject to the same requirements and procedures that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same district. The City will continue to enforce the Code in conformance with this requirement.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Throughout the	planning period.
Responsibility:	Planning staff
V-5
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
V. Housing Plan
Program 7d. Agricultural Employee Housing. The City will continue to permit employee housing for up to six persons as a single-family residential use in residential zoning districts in conformance with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5.
Funding source:	General Fund
Implementation schedule:	Throughout the planning period.
Responsibility:	Planning staff
GOAL in. Encourage the conservation of energy in housing.
Policy 8. Reduce energy loss due to inferior construction techniques.
Program 8. Residential Energy Conservation. Continue to require all new projects to conform to the requirements of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. Title 24 contains specific requirements for energy conservation which result in energy savings of approximately 50 percent when compared to standard construction techniques utilized prior to enactment of current standards. In addition, local utility companies regularly circulate information regarding energy conservation to their residential customers. To support such programs, the City will allow posting of energy conservation materials on public bulletin boards in order to publicize conservation efforts.
Funding source: Implementation schedule: Responsibility:
General Fund
Ongoing throughout the planning period Planning staff
B. Quantified Objectives
The City’s quantified objectives for new construction, rehabilitation and conservation are presented in Table V-l. Since the City has no source of housing funds, no rehabilitation or conservation objectives are established.
Table V-l
Quantified Objectives (2014-2021)
	Income Category					r Totals
	j Em, Low	V. Low	Low	_ M°d_	Above Mod	
New construction*	3	2	3	3	7	IS
Rehabilitation	0	0	0	0	0	0
Conservation	0	0	0	0	0	0
*Quantified objective Tor new construction is for the period 2014 - 2021 per the RHNA.
V-6
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix A - Evaluation
Appendix A
Evaluation of the Prior Housing Element
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the effectiveness of the existing Housing Element, the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies, and the progress in implementing programs for the previous planning period. This appendix contains a review of the housing goals, policies, and programs of the previous Housing Element, and evaluates the degree to which these programs have been implemented during the previous planning period, 2008 through 2013. This analysis also concluded that the goals and policies of the prior element continue to be appropriate. The findings from this evaluation have been instrumental in determining the City’s 2013-2021 Housing Plan.
Table A-l summarizes the programs contained in the previous Housing Element along with the source of funding, program objectives, accomplishments, and implications for future policies and actions. Table A-2 summarizes residential development in the city during 2006-2013.
Table A-3 presents the City’s progress in meeting the quantified objectives from the previous Housing Element.
A-l
January 27,2014
Cily of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element_____________________________________________________________________Appendix A - Evaluation
Table A-l
Housing Element Program Evaluation (2008-2013) City of Hidden Hills
Policy/Progr.im		Implementation	ArcotnplnltmenU		future Policies and Actions
Policy 1.	Preserve the scale of development in exisltii" residential ncigl		ibnrhnods.	■■■		
Program I Zoning and Development Standards Continue Io enforce the Zoning Code, which regulates height, lot coverage, setbacks, open space, etc.	Continuous. Planning personnel, funded through General Fund and permit fees.			The Cily conlinued Io enforce zoning regulations.	Continue program
Policy 2.	t ncourugc the nuinicnuncc of evistinn dw citings ir	i order to maintain public health and safety.				
Prouram 2 Proneilv Maintenance. Pursue nro-active code enforcement and work cooperatively with die Hidden Hills Community Association Io encourage property- maintenance, including sltaring information regarding problem properties to the extent permitted consistent with preservation of privacy of the ItomeDwncr	Continuous. Planning and Building personnel, funded tlirough the General Fund.			The City continued code enforcement activities.	Continue program
I Policy J.	Provide adequate sites fur new housing consistent with the capacity of infrastructure Io handle increased growth.					
Program 3 Infill Residential Development, Encourage development of existing vacant residential infill sites and second units (see also Program 5b).	Continuous. Planning and Building personnel, funded tlirough the General Fund and permit revenue.			Tlie City encouraged infill development by making information regarding second units available to homeowners.	Continue program
Policy 4,	Preserve existing aftiinlahlc housing stock.					
Proirram 4a: Reverse Mortiraues. Encounute the nrovision of reverse mortgages by local lending institutions and increase community awareness of such alternatives by posting information in City Hall and on the City’s website.	Post information on rcverse mortgages by January 2010			Reverse mortgage information was posted in City Hall and on the City website	Continue program
Proatam 4b. Reduced Association Fees Work with the Hidden Hills Community Association to waive or reduce Association fees for low- and moderate-income households,	Initiate discussions with the Community Association immediately upon Housing Element certification.			City slafTcontacted the Community Association and requested that fees be reduced or waived for low- and moderate-income households.	Continue program
Policy 5. Facilitalc the dcs chip nwnt i>f additional serydow*, lint-anil miHJcraliMncontr Itnuun
Program 5a Development Sticamlininii. Continue efforts to reduce bousing costs by streamlining the development review process Io the extent feasible Provide concurrent processing Df all discretionary appl ications for a project. Maintain current plan check efficiencies.
Continuous. Planning and Building personnel, funded tlirough the General Fund.
The City continued to process permit applications in an efficient manner
Continue program
A-2
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element______________________________________________________________________Appendix A - Evaluation
Policy/Program
Implementation	Accomplishments
Future Policies and Actions
Program 5b. Second Units Create incentives far development of add il io nal second units commensurate with tire City’s RHNA for low* and moderate* income housing. These incentives will include the following
•	Modification of development standards (eg., setbacks}, if necessary Id accommodate second units
•	Fast-track plan review and permit processing for second units
•	Marketing and promotion of second units id applicants for new construction or substantial remodels when applications ore received
•	Provide direct mail dyers io all households in the city promoting second units
■ Initiate discussions with the Hidden Hills Community Association regarding the potential for relaxation of private second unit deed restrictions
• Monitor the results of this program and report to the City Council and HCD annually on program accomplishments. If the program’s incentives arc found not to be effective in facilitating additional second unit development, revised program actions will be initiated.
Program 5c Density Bonus Ordinance. The City will study implementation of state density bonus law and consider adoption of a Density Bonus Ordinance consistent with current state law
City staff funded through General Fund revenue.
City staff funded by General Fund revenue
Fast-track permit processing for second units was initialed.
Modified development standards were made available for second units deed-restricted Tor lower-income housclialds.
A flyer promoting second units and incentives was posted at City Flail and on the City website, and mailed to all households in the city
The City initialed discussions with the Community Association regarding regulations for second units.
A Density Bonus Ordinance consistent with state law was adopted in June 2013
Continue program
Revise program to monitor stale density bonus law* and initiate amendments as necessary'
A-3
January 27 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element_____________________________________________________________________Appendix A - Evaluation
Pwlicy/I’rogram	Implementation	Accomplishments	future Policies and Actions
Program 5d. Affordable Housitw Ovcrlav. An amendment to the Municipal Code and Zoning Map will be processed to establish Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) zoning regulations dial permit qualifying affordable owner-occupied or multifamily rental developments in the Commercial-Restricted (CR) zone The Zoning Map revision will apply the AHO to a parcel or parcels selected from Appendix B, Table B-3 liaving sufficient developable acreage to accommodate the City’s unmet lower-income need as identified in the Regional Housing Needs Assessment and the Housing Element for the cunent planning period The AHO regulations will include die following provisions. •	Qualifying projects shall have a minimum density of 20 units/acre, excluding density bonus. •	Qualifying projects sliall restrict all units in the development, except for a manager’s unit, for occupancy by lower-income households for a period of not Jess tlian 30 years. •	Qualifying projects sliall have a minimum of 16 units per site ■ Qualifying projects sliall be permitted by-riglil (i.c. limited to non-discretionary design review). •	Development other than a qualifying affordable housing project within the AHO shall require approval of a conditional use permit, with die exception of the continuation, modification or diange of on existing use in on existing structure provided the modification or change of use docs not require a discretionary planning permit. Approval of a CUP shall require a finding that tite development will not reduce the capacity of available land in the AHO below the amount necessary to accommodate the remaining lower-income RHNA for the	Ordinance processed by City staff with General Fund revenue	The Affordable Housing Overlay ordinance was approved in June 2013	This program was accomplished and has been revised to continue implementation of the AHO ordinance The City continues to encourage the production of affordable housing when feasible
	A--4					January 27.20.14
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix A - Evaluation
Policy/Program	Implementation	AecomplMimvnt*	Future Politic* und Action*
Policy 6. Promote housing op|mrtnmlics for all [tersuns rrgurdlcss of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, niitinnul origin, color, ftiinilial status or disability.
Program 6
Fair Housing. The City will continue to promote fair housing policies through the following actions.
• Post State regulations regarding housing discrimination togetlier with the appropriate phone numbers to contact regarding housing discrimination problems at City Hall
City staff wilh General Fund revenues
Fair housing information was posted in City Hall No fair housing complaints were filed during die planning period
Continue program
• Provide a referral process for any persons who believe I hey have been denied access to housing because of their race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status or disability The City will refer complainants to appropriate agencies. Legal service organizations, and, or non-profit housing groups that specifically handle housing discrimination issues such as ihe Fair Housing Congress of Southern California and the Fair Housing Council of San Fernando Volley Tile City will publicize fair housing information on the City’s website and in the City’s newsletter
Policy 7, Acenmniodutc the houwnu needs of	iMijiulatinn croup*.
Prouram 7a. Accessible Housint! The Citv will conimuc to enforce the current Zoning Code and the state provisions (Title 24) for handicapped access. In addition, Ihc City will amend the Code to allow residential care facilities consistent with state law	City staff supported by General Fund revenue	A Code amend men! was approved in June 2013 allowing residential care facilities consistent with state law	Continue to monitor state law and implement requirements regarding accessibility
Prouram 7b Emcrucncv Shelters. An amendment to Ihe Municipal Code will be processed Io pcmiit emergency shelters os requited by Senate Dill 2 of 2007 Emergency shelters shall be permitted byright in the C-R zone subject to appropriate development standards consistent with SB 2. The C-R zone contains approximately 1.5 acres, has the capacity for at least one shelter, and is within walking distance of publ ic transit	City staff supported by General Fund revenue	A Code amendment was approved in June 2013 allowing emergency shelters by-right consistent with slale law	This program was completed and has been revised Io continue implementation of Ihc ordinance
A-5
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element___________________________________________________________________Appendix A - Evaluation
Policy/Program	Implementation	\evomplhh men tv	Future Policies and Action*
Prouram 7c Transitional and Sumwrtive Housimz. SB 2 of 2007 requires that transitional and supportive housing be considered a residential use subject Id the same requirements and procedures Hut apply la other residential uses of the same type in the same district. The City will amend the Code within one year of Housing Element adoption to clarify the Code's conformance with this requirement.	City staffsupported by General Fund revenue.	A Code amendment was approved in June 2013 allowing transitional and supportive housing consistent with state law	This program was completed and has been revised Id continue implementation or the ordinance.
Program 7d. Agricultural Employee Housing. The City will process on amendment to the Code to permit employee housing for up to six persons os a single-family residential use in residential zoning districts in con fo nuance with Health and Safely Code Section 17021.5.	City stuff supported by General Fund revenue	A Code amendment was approved in June 2013 allowing agricultural employee housing consistent with state law	This program was completed and has been revised to continue implementation of the ordinance
Policy H,	Reduce cncrqy Iiks due to inferior construction techniques.			
Program fill Residefflipl .Energy Conservation. Continue id require all new projects to conform to the requirements of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. Title 24 contains specific requirements for energy conservation which result in energy savings of approximately 50 percent when compared to standanl construction techniques utilized prior to enactment of current standanls. In addition, local utility companies regularly circulate information regarding energy conservation to their residential customers. To support such programs, the City will allow posting of energy conservation materials on public bulletin boards in order to publicize conservation efforts	City staff supported by General Fund revenue.	The City continued to require new developments to conform to energy conservation requirements and publicized energy conservation information.	Continue program
A-6
January 27, 201J
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix A - Evaluation
Tabic A-2
Residential Development by Income Category (2006-2013)
l'nit Type	Income (		"ulegory		Total j
	VI.	I ,otv	Mod	Above	
SFD homes				23	23
Second units*	2				2
Guest houses**					(7)
Totals	2	-	-	23	25
Mole Reflect! Ihe 4“ cycle RHNA period of let,'2006 10/15/2013
•Second units include separate kitchen and badiroom facilities.
• ’Guest houses do not have kitchen facilities and therefore are not counted as duelling units.
Source City of Hidden Hills, 10/2013
A-7
January 27 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix A - Evaluation
Table A-3
Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives (2008-2013)
Program Category	Quantified Objectives	Progress
New Construction*		
Very Low	9	2
Low	6	-
Moderate	6	-
Above Moderate	13	23
Total	34	25
Rehabilitation		
Very Low	0	0
Low	0	0
Moderate	0	0
Above Moderate	0	0
Total	0	0
Conservation		
Very Low	0	0
Low	0	0
Moderate	0	0
Above Moderate	0	0
Total	0	0
•New construction covers the period 2006-2013 consistent with the RHNA
A-8
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix B - Residential Land Inventory
Appendix B
Residential Land Inventory
Section 65583(a)(3) of the Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an "inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to these sites. " A detailed analysis of residential development opportunities is provided below while the results are summarized in Tables B-l and B-2.
Vacant Sites
The land inventory (Table B-2 and Figure B-l) shows that there are currently vacant sites for 32 single-family residential units in the city. Based on real estate market trends, all new single-family homes would be expected to be in the above-moderate income category. This inventory of 32 lots exceeds the City’s identified need of 7 units in the Above Moderate category.
Second Units
Due to the rural character of Hidden Hills, second units represent the most realistic opportunity for new affordable housing. As noted in the constraints analysis (Chapter IV), the City’s regulations regarding second units are consistent with state law. However, private CC&Rs limit occupancy of second units to domestic employees or guests, and also preclude kitchen facilities in the R-A-S zone (kitchens are permitted in the R-A-S-2 zone). While this private deed restriction limits the range of lower-income households who are eligible to occupy second units, it must be recognized that domestic employees represent a very large portion of the lower-income persons working in the city. As such, targeting second units to these employees squarely addresses the need for lower-income housing in Hidden Hills.
State law12 provides that “...a city or county [may] identify sites for second units based on the number of second units developed in the prior housing element planning period whether or not the units are permitted by right, the need for these units in the community, the resources or incentives available for their development, and any other relevant factors, as determined by the department. ” The following analysis addresses each of these criteria that are to be used by the City and HCD in determining the potential number of second units during this planning period.
•	Second units developed in the prior planning period. City records indicate that there have been two complete second units (i.e,, with kitchen facilities) built during the prior planning period. If the same pace were to continue, approximately two new second units would be anticipated during the 2013-2021 period.
•	Need for second units in the community. In communities such as Hidden Hills many residents employ full-time household cooks, maids, groundskeepers or child care workers. Since there is very little commercial development in the City, these household employees represent the vast majority of all residents employed in low-wage jobs. Additional second units would be the best option for addressing the housing needs of these low-wage workers and their families.
12 California Government Code §65583.1
B-l
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix B - Residential Land Inventory
• Resources or incentives for second units. Due to the importance of second units in the overall strategy for addressing its RHNA allocation, the City is committed to a program of actions to encourage and facilitate the development of second units commensurate with the need for low-and moderate-income housing in the current planning period (see Program 5b in the Housing Plan). This program contains these key components:
o Modification of development standards (e.g., setbacks), if necessary to accommodate second units
o Fast-track plan review and permit processing
o Marketing and promotion of second units to applicants for new construction or substantial remodels when applications are received
o Direct mail flyer to all households in the city promoting second units o Outreach to the Hidden Hills Community Association regarding the relaxation of
second unit deed restrictions
In consideration of these factors a potential for two new second units has been identified for the new planning period, consistent with the recent rate of second unit development.
Table 8-1
Land Inventory Summary
Income Calegory_
Lower Mod Above ■■■■■■■■■ ■■■■■■■
Vacant land (Table B-2) Affordable Housing Overlay (Table B-3) Second units	17 2	-	32
Total sites	19		32
RHNA	8	3	7
Adequate Capacity?	Yes	Yes*	Yes
Source City of Hidden Hills, 2013 •Reflects the surplus of lower-income sites
Affordable Housing Overlay
In order to provide additional capacity for affordable housing, in the prior planning period the Municipal Code was amended to establish an Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) Zone on parcels within the Commercial-Restricted (C-R) zone (see Table B-3 and Figure B-2). These parcels represent the best opportunities for multi-family development since they are located outside the gated community association and are close to major transportation routes. Other vacant parcels are either within the association or not readily accessible to public transportation. This AHO Zone and opportunities for second units as described above provide adequate capacity to accommodate the City’s assigned share of regional housing need during the planning period.
B-2
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element________________________________________________________________Appendix B - Residential Land Inventory
Tabic B-2
Vacant Residential Sites Inventory
	Silt		Ljfainlnp J				 ~ l>esc rip I ion	.Vcm	t flafis	■ HUH H		AiMH? Mod
					Lower		
South of Lasher Road, adjacent to the Clly'S Southerly boundary*	R-A-S	1 Steeply sloped, access taken via □ narrow pn\ ate drive.	20	I du/acre			10
5349 Lasher Road*	R-A-S		I 44	1 du/acre			1
APN 2049-022-029* *•	R-A-S	Slopes steeply upward from Lasher Road	2 22	1 du/acre			1
24227 Bridle Trail	R-A-S	Flat m front to steep slope in rear	22	1 du/acre			1
24247 Bndie Trail	R-A-S	Flat in front to steep slope in rear	2 1	1 du/ncre			1
24251 Bndie Trail	R-A-S	Flat in front to gentle slo|nr in rear and side	20	1 du/acre			1
24255 Bndie Trail	R-A-S	Flal pad at front with down slope in rear	28	1 du/acre	—		1
24261 Bndie Trail	R-A-S	Steep slope up to potential pad area, 6.000 Id B 000 s.f brush and trees.	1 10	1 du/ncre	—		1
5480 Dixon Trail	R-A-S	Gradual slope upward to top of hill	2 12	t du/acre			1
5485 Dixan Trail	R-A-S	Gradual slope upward to iop of hill	2 57	I du/ncre	—		1
25176 Eldorado Meadow	R-A-S	Steep slope from Eldorado, access only from John Muir, from of lot relatively flat with gentle slope, rear 20% more steeply slD|icd.	0 95	I du/acre			1
25210 Jim Bridger	R-A-S-2	Flat to gently sloped on front third of lot. sleep slope al rear	2 60	I du/acre			1
25211 Jim Bridger	R-A-S-2	Triangular lot, with point at street, widening at rear flat on from fifty feet of lot. then steeply sloped	2.25	I du/acre			1
25212 Jim Bridger	R-A-S-2	Flat lot with Steep lull at rear	7 88	I du/acre			1
24936 John Fremont	R-A-S	Almost straight vertical up from road, brushy	1 00	I du/acre			1
5521 Paradise Valley	R-A-S	Slopes up to a hill approx, 60 high with building pad on top	7 07	I du/acre			1
5200 Saddle Creek	R-A-S	Large flag; lot. slopes downward	3 76	I du/acre			1
5202 Scott Robertson	R-A-S	Gentl) sloprj up Io a Utitt hill	2 98	1 du/acre			1
5206 Scolt Robertson	R-A-S	Gently slopes up to a large hill	3 15	I du/acre			1
6097 Spnng Valle)'	R-A-S	Slopes steeply down from road and then steeply up no fiat or gently sloped areas	3.70	1 du/acre			1
5320 Whitman	R-A-S	Steeply slopes from street, difficult access, brushy	1 50	1 du/acre			1
5330 Whitman	R-A-S	Steeply slopes from street, difficult access, brushy	2.75	1 du/acre			1
5340 Whitman	R-A-S	Small flat triangle, about 2,000-3.000 sf remainder steeply sloped	2.60	1 du/acre			1
TOTALS					0	0	32
•These two parcels are part of a proposed subdivision (V esling Tentative Map 540WJ and will be combined with a total of 11 homes to be built on the two properties 5349 Lasher Road will contain the new
access road and a portion of a building pad
••Outside Eiidden Kills Community Association
B-3
January 27.2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix B ■ Residential Land Inventory
Figure B-l
Vacant Residential Sites Map
HIDDEN HILLS ZONING MAP
		1 i
	II
B-4
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix B ■■ Residential Land Inventory
Table B-3
Affordable Housing Overlay Sites
		lasting Zoning	■ssi
I	Site	Parcel Si/e		
			
23501 Long Valley Road APN 2049-018-045	0.52 ac	CR(AHO)	Vacant
APN 2049-018-046	0 12 ac	CR(AHO)	Vacant
23500 Long Valley Road APN 2O49-O18-O49	0.85 ac	CR(AHO)	Real estate office (approx, h of site is vacant)
B-5
January 27.2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix B - Residential Land Inventory
Figure B-2 C-R Zone Sites Map
B-6
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix C - Public Participation Summary
Appendix C
Public Participation Summary
Section 65583(c)(5) of the Government Code states that “The local government shall make diligent effort to achieve public participation of all the economic segments of the community in the development of the housing element, and the program shall describe this effort.” Public participation played an important role in the formulation and refinement of the City’s housing goals and policies and in the development of a Land Use Plan which determines the extent and density of future residential development in the community.
City residents and interested persons had several opportunities to recommend strategies, review, and comment on the draft Housing Element during its preparation and adoption. An initial public study session was held by the City on November 4, 2013, which was attended by two residents. The draft Housing Element was submitted to HCD for review on November 5, 2013.
After receiving comments from HCD on January 6, 2014, a revised draft element was prepared and made available for public review. The City Council held a noticed public hearing on January 27, 2014 to review the draft element, which was adopted and submitted to HCD for review. Public notice for all meetings was distributed to the interested parties listed in Table C-l. Table C-2 summarizes public comments that were received on the draft Housing Element.
C-l
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix C - Public Participation Summary
Table C-l
Public Notice Interest List
Hasan Ikhrata, Exec. Director SCAG
818 W Seventh St, 12th Floor Los Angeles, CA 90017
County of Los Angeles Regional Planning Dept. 320 West Temple Street Los Angeles, CA 90012
Hidden Hills Community Assoc. 24549 Long Valley Road Hidden Hills, CA 91302
City oFMalibu
Joyce Parker-Bozylinski, AICP Planning Director 23825 Stuart Ranch Road Malibu, CA 90265
City of Calabasas Maureen Temuri, AICP 100 Civic Center Way Calabasas, CA 91302
City of Westlake Village Scott Wolfe, Planning Director 31200 Oak Crest Drive Westlake Village, CA9I361
City of Agoura Hills Planning Dept.
30001 Ladyfacc Court Agoura Hills, CA 91301
City of Los Angeles Department of City Planning 200 N. Spring Street Rm. 525 Los Angeles, CA 90012
So Cal Association of Non-Profit Housing
3345 Wilshire Blvd, Suite 1005 Los Angeles, CA 90010
AMCAL Multi-Housing, Inc. 30141 Agoura Rd, Suite 100 Agoura Hills, CA 91301
LINC Housing 110 Pine Ave, Suite 500 Long Beach, CA 90802
So Cal Housing Dev. Corp 9065 Haven Ave, Suite 100 Rancho Cucamonga, CA 91730
Habitat for Humanity 32904 Denver Springs Dr Westlake Village, CA 91361
Area Housing Authority 1400 W Hillcrest Dr Thousand Oaks, CA 91362
Jamboree Housing Corp. 17701 Cowan Ave, Suite 270 Irvine, CA 92614
Many Mansions
1459 Thousand Oaks Blvd #D
Thousand Oaks, CA 91362
Las Virgcnes Unified School Dist. 4111 N. Las Virgenes Road Calabasas, CA 91302
Las Virgenes MWD Attn: Development Review 4232 Las Virgenes Road Calabasas, CA 91302
Meta Housing
1640 S Sepulveda Blvd, Suite 425 Los Angeles, CA 90025
C-2
January 27,2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix C - Public Participation Summary
Table C-2
Summary of Public Comments
Comment	Response
Why is the City updating the Housing Element again?	State law requires cities in the SCAG region to prepare an update for the 2013-2021 planning period. The Housing Element that was adopted in June 2013 covered the 2008-2013 planning period.
Are there any policy changes in the new Housing Element?	The Housing Element has been extensively revised to reflect new demographic data regarding housing needs, as well as the City’s accomplishments in the previous planning period. No changes to land use policy or regulations are proposed in the new Housing Element.
Are any changes to the affordable housing overlay proposed?	No changes are proposed in the affordable housing overlay regulations.
C-3
January 27, 2014
City of Hidden Hills 2013-2021 Housing Element
Appendix C - Public Participation Summary
This page intentionally left blank.
C-4
January 27,2014