2.       LAND USE ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Land Use Element is the heart of the Coastal General Plan since it has the broadest scope
of the required elements and provides an overview of the long-term development and
conservation goals and policies of the City. Map LU-1: Land Use Designations describes the
desired types and intensity of land use for the City and its Sphere of Influence. The goals,
policies, and programs in this element should be considered in relation to this map.
This Element covers the following policy areas:
        Sphere of Influence and Annexation
        Redevelopment
        Land Use Designations
        Residential Land Uses
        Commercial Land Uses
        Recreation & Visitor-Serving Facilities
        Industrial Land Uses
        Commercial & Recreational Fishing and Boating
        Aquaculture Development
The Land Use Element establishes policies and programs to maintain the existing pattern of
land uses within the City while anticipating and providing for future growth and development. It
is expected that growth will continue to occur at a slow but regular pace (i.e., one to two percent
per year) as experienced in the last decade.
Commercial land uses in the City are located along the Highway One and Franklin Street
corridors. The central business district, located between Oak and Pine Streets, is the historic,
civic, and cultural core of the community. Industrial lands are located on the Georgia-Pacific
timber mill property west of Highway One, on North Franklin Street immediately north of the
central business district, and on Highway One north of Pudding Creek.                    Residential
neighborhoods are located east of the commercial core and in the west Fort Bragg
neighborhood.
Land Use Element policies support a concentrated development pattern by encouraging infill
development on vacant and underutilized sites throughout the City.
The most significant policy change in the Land Use Element is the reclassification of the
Industrial Lands which lie west of Highway One between Noyo River and Elm Street. The
newly-created Timber Resource Industrial land use designation is intended to support the
continued use of this area for timber processing activities and to establish a clear planning
process for the transition of this land to other uses, as initiated by the property owners.
2 – Land Use Element                            2-1                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

B.       The Sphere of Influence and Annexation
The Coastal General Plan applies to both publicly and privately owned land within the City’s
boundaries and its broader Planning Area. State law permits the City to plan for areas outside
of its boundaries if the City determines those areas have a relationship to the City’s planning
needs. The Planning Area is defined in this Plan as lands within the City and the City’s
designated Sphere of Influence (as approved by the Mendocino County Local Agency
Formation Commission or LAFCO) which represents areas that may be annexed to the City and
for which urban services may be provided. The purpose of a Sphere of Influence is twofold: to
ensure that urban development takes place in an orderly manner, and to allow for land use and
development policies of a city to be recognized in areas that will eventually be part of the City.
The Coastal General Plan establishes policies for the Sphere of Influence which ensure that
development requiring annexation can be adequately served by infrastructure and that the costs
associated with annexations are fairly allocated. It provides for the orderly development and
extension of City services within the Sphere of Influence. Map LU-2 indicates the boundaries of
the City and its Sphere of Influence. Map LU-3 indicates the Annexation Areas within the
Sphere of Influence, as defined by the City Council.
Areas within the Sphere of Influence are currently under County jurisdiction and are regulated
by the Mendocino County General Plan and Zoning Ordinance. Although the County is not
bound by Fort Bragg’s Coastal General Plan, the City will work with the County to assure that
County land use decisions in Fort Bragg’s Sphere of Influence are compatible with this Coastal
General Plan. Furthermore, if and when lands within the City’s designated Sphere of Influence
are annexed to the City, the land use designations assigned by the City’s Coastal General Plan
provide guidance for future development densities, and the policies and land use designations
established by the Coastal General Plan become effective upon annexation to the City.
C.       Redevelopment
The California Community Redevelopment Law enables local jurisdictions to establish a
Redevelopment Agency to eliminate blighted areas, stabilize the tax base, and improve the local
economy. Redevelopment plans must be consistent with local General Plans.
The City adopted the Fort Bragg Redevelopment Project in 1987 which provides a framework
for redeveloping about 1,130 acres of the City. The Project was established to address a
number of adverse conditions and to achieve the following goals:
•    Promote the economic health of the City;
•    Renovate and/or redevelop the residential, commercial, and industrial properties
     characterized by blight;
•    Improve the City’s infrastructure such as roads, parking facilities, storm drainage, water and
     sewer capacity, pedestrian paths, and parks;
•    Carry out improvements to enhance the functioning, appearance, and economic strength of
     the Central Business District; and
•    Implement the City’s housing policies described in the Housing Element.
The Redevelopment Agency can fund improvements through its ability to collect a portion of the
increase in property tax revenues within the Redevelopment Area above the 1987 base figure
established by the County (i.e., the tax increment), rather than sharing this tax growth with other
agencies.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-2                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

D.       Land Use Designations
The Coastal General Plan establishes land use designations shown on Map LU-1: Land Use
Designations. Each land use designation is described relative to the development density or
intensity, and the types of activities or land uses permitted. Residential density is defined by
dwelling units per net acre.
E.       Applying Land Use Designations to Specific Properties
The Land Use Element provides the primary basis for City decisions on development
applications. Privately and publicly-sponsored projects must be consistent with all parts of the
Coastal General Plan, but the Land Use Element is the first place to find out what type of
development would be appropriate in a specific location, or what location would be suitable for a
particular development type.
Densities described under the applicable land use designations are maximums; maximum
densities can only be achieved after meeting all of the other policies and goals of the Coastal
General Plan. The City does not guarantee that an individual project will attain the maximum
density indicated by the Coastal General Plan land use designations. The Coastal General
Plan includes maps identifying hazards and constraints, floodplains, street systems, parkland,
and trails which are an integral part of the Coastal General Plan and which must be consulted in
order to obtain a complete interpretation of Coastal General Plan policies and goals applicable
in a given area or parcel of land. Other elements of the Coastal General Plan contain specific
policies to preserve Fort Bragg's character and appearance, and to protect sensitive
environmental resources.
F.       Residential Land Use Designations
Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings on the northern fringe of the City where
the existing development pattern is comprised of one- to two-acre parcels and where
infrastructure is inadequate to support higher development densities. The maximum allowable
density is 1 unit per 2 acres.
Rural Residential (RR1)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings in a semi-rural environment. The RR1
designation is located primarily on the eastern edge of the City, where larger lots serve as a
transition between the RL neighborhoods of the City and the rural lands in the unincorporated
areas. The RR1 designation in the Todd Point and Noyo Heights neighborhoods acknowledges
the existing pattern of parcelization. The maximum allowable density is 1 unit per acre.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-3                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Suburban Residential (RS)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings and is assigned to areas where
infrastructure limitations and/or environmental constraints inhibit the establishment of urban
development densities. The allowable density range is 1 to 3 units per acre.
Low Density Residential (RL)
This designation is intended for single-family residences on standard City lots in residential
neighborhoods surrounding the more densely developed core of the City. With issuance of a
conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as
convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small
clusters of retail establishments. The allowable density range is 3 to 6 units per acre.
Medium Density Residential (RM)
This designation is intended for a variety of housing types, including duplexes, triplexes,
townhouses, and apartment units located in proximity to parks, schools, and public services.
With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are
permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual
parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments. The allowable density range is 6 to 12 units
per acre.
High Density Residential (RH)
This designation is intended to allow a variety of higher density housing types, including
townhouses, apartments, and mobile home parks on sites that are large and provide important
open space or large properties where the City wishes to see creative planning and design. It is
assigned primarily to larger parcels where innovative site design can provide for a mix of
housing types, aesthetic and functional open space areas, and other features that enhance the
development and the neighborhood. With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited
neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés and
restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments.
The allowable density range is 10 to 15 units per acre. Residential densities above 6 units per
acre may only be permitted for projects which include open space, provide affordable housing,
clustered housing, energy conservation, and/or aesthetically pleasing design features.
Very High Density Residential (RVH)
This designation is intended to allow high density multi-family housing on sites that are close to
commercial areas and public services. Apartments, mobile home parks, and similar types of
residential uses are allowed in this designation. With issuance of a conditional use permit,
limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores,
cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail
establishments. The allowable density range is 12 to 24 units per acre.
2 – Land Use Element                            2-4                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

G.       Commercial and Industrial Land Use Designations
Central Business District (CBD)
This designation applies to the core of the downtown which is the civic, cultural, and commercial
center of the community. Uses and site development patterns in the Central Business District
are typically pedestrian-oriented. This designation is intended to accommodate government
and professional offices, retail stores, theaters, and other similar uses. Residential uses on
upper floors or on the ground floor at the rear of buildings are encouraged at a density of up to
40 units per net acre.
Neighborhood Commercial (CN)
This designation provides small-scale, convenience shopping and services for surrounding
residential neighborhoods. Retail and service businesses such as grocery stores, laundromats,
restaurants, beauty salons, and similar types of uses are allowed in this designation.
General Commercial (CG)
The General Commercial designation is intended for a less compact and intensive type of
development than found in the Central Business District. Typical land uses in this designation
depend more on vehicular than pedestrian access and include automotive and service-related
outlets, retail sales, home improvement, paint or carpeting sales, offices, apparel stores, and
food stores. Shopping centers are allowed with approval of a conditional use permit.
Residential uses are permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear of
buildings at a maximum density of up to 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)
This land use designation applies to land uses serving residents and visitors on sites which are
located along Highway One and arterials at the entry points to the community. Typical uses
allowed in this designation include motels and other lodging enterprises, restaurants, and retail
outlets. Residential uses are permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear
of buildings at a maximum density of up to 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Office Commercial (CO)
This designation is intended to serve the office and institutional needs of the community and
permits such uses as professional offices, hospitals, medical clinics, and banks. Commercial
uses supportive of the office and institutional uses, such as blueprint and copy shops, cafés and
restaurants, pharmacies, and similar retail establishments are permitted. Residential uses are
permitted at a maximum density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Heavy Industrial (IH)
This designation is intended for a range of heavy industrial uses including manufacturing,
assembly and processing, and the storage and distribution of raw materials, aggregate plants,
and related heavy industrial uses which are generally incompatible with and require locations
removed from residential and visitor serving uses.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-5                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Timber Resources Industrial (IT)
   This designation is intended primarily for timber resource and forest products related
   manufacturing. It allows a variety of industrial uses relating to forest products processing such
   as log yards, manufacturing wood products, planing mills, storage of forest by-products,
   commercial seedling nurseries, and related support activities including railroad lines, truck
   shipping facilities, boiler and powerhouse operations, and related uses. In addition, it allows
   aquaculture with issuance of a conditional use permit. Open space, public parks, and
   recreation use types and public facilities are also permitted in this district.
   The uses listed below are examples of the types of uses which may be allowed in this
   designation. Refer to the Coastal LUDC for a more precise definition of permitted and
   conditional uses.
   •        Log Yard Activities - unloading, loading, and storage of logs.
   •        Storage and Inventory of finished product and forest by-products, and storage of finished
            goods inventory, including chips, bark, and hog fuel. Storage includes indoor and
            outdoor storage.
   •        Manufacturing and Remanufacturing: sawmills, studmills, veneer plants, plywood and/or
            layup plants, fence plants, planing mills, portable or fixed wood chip or hog fuel
            manufacture, dry kilns, and air dry yards.
   •        Product Shipping Operations: includes trucking, rail shipping, and maritime operations,
            wholesale distribution, re-loading facilities and operations.
   •        Remanufacturing and Secondary, Value-Added Manufacturing of forest products:
            includes, but not limited to, finger jointing, molding and pattern plants, sash and door
            plants, window plants, gluelam beams, truss and joint fabrication, engineered forest
            products such as laminated veneer lumber, particleboard or oriented strand board and
            pallet plants.
   •        Commercial Seedling Nursery Operations.
   •        Related Support Facilities and Activities Required to Maintain Manufacturing Operations
            including: railroad lines that include areas for car storage, boiler and powerhouse
            operations for timber product manufacture, warehousing of products produced on site,
            maritime docks, shops for maintenance, fabrication and fueling, water collection,
            storage, transport, and treatment, fire alarm and control systems, security systems,
            areas for storage of salvage and/or recycling of metals, wood, wire, rubber and other
            materials, and buffer areas or screening used for industrial purposes but which enable
            the operation to comply with noise, air quality, water quality, and other environmental
            standards.
   •        Aquaculture with a conditional use permit.
   •        Public parks and recreation facilities, open space and conservation uses, and public
            facilities such as stormwater retention ponds and wetland treatment systems.
   2 – Land Use Element                            2-6                                       July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Light Industrial (IL)
   This designation is intended for a variety of commercial, manufacturing, wholesale and
   distribution, and industrial uses which do not generate a significant amount of on-site customer
   traffic or high levels of noise, dust, odors, or other potential off-site nuisance characteristics.
   Manufacturing uses are permitted provided they occur within an enclosed structure. Other uses
   permitted in this designation include offices ancillary to permitted uses, agricultural product
   sales and services, construction yards, and automobile repair shops.
   Harbor District (HD)
   This designation is intended for land uses that support Noyo Harbor’s functioning as a
   commercial fishing center with a mix of commercial and industrial activities. Typical uses
   include activities that support Noyo Harbor’s function as a commercial fishing village and which
   protect and preserve parcels on, or adjacent to, the sea for coastal-dependent and coastal-
   related uses, such as: fish processing, aquaculture, boat sales, construction and service, boat
   chartering, restaurants, gift shops, marine hardware, and retail fish sales.
   H.       Other Land Uses
   Parks and Recreation (PR)
   This land use designation is intended for public parks and recreational facilities. Typical uses
   include passive and active recreational facilities, including trails, playgrounds, parking lots,
   interpretive facilities, restrooms, storage sheds, and other structures needed to accommodate
   public use or provide for maintenance of the land and recreational facilities.
   Agriculture (A)
   This land use designation is assigned to land in the Sphere of Influence which is similarly
   designated by the Mendocino County General Plan. The lands which are designated
   Agriculture are within the floodplain of the Noyo River and are well-suited and appropriately
   retained for the production of crops or livestock grazing. The allowable density is one unit per
   40 acres.
   Open Space (OS)
   This land use designation is intended for areas of land which are largely unimproved and used
   for the preservation of natural resources and habitats, passive outdoor recreation, scenic
   resources, or for the protection of public health and safety (e.g., preservation of floodplains).
   Allowable uses include restrooms, storage sheds, and other structures required to provide for
   maintenance of land and/or in support of recreational uses.
   Public Facilities and Services (PF)
   This land use designation is intended for existing and proposed public buildings, utility facilities,
   water and wastewater treatment plants, and related easements.
   2 – Land Use Element                          2-7                                          July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

I.       Population Density and Building Intensity
State law mandates that general plans include standards of population density and building
intensity for all of the territory covered by the plan. To satisfy this requirement, the Coastal
General Plan includes building intensity for each of the land use designations, expressed in
units per acre for residential uses.
Population densities for residential land use designations are based on an average household
size of 2.5 persons, except for Very High Density Residential which is based on an average of
2.1 persons per household. If there is a discrepancy between dwelling units per acre and
persons per acre, the dwelling units per acre measure (e.g., building intensity) shall govern.
The population densities are:
Large Lot Rural Residential (RR5)             up to 0.5 persons per acre
Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)            up to 1.25 persons per acre
Rural Residential (RR1)                       up to 2.5 persons per acre
Suburban Residential (RS)                     up to 7.5 persons per acre
Low Density Residential (RL)                  up to 15 persons per acre
Medium Density Residential (RM)               up to 30 persons per acre
High Density Residential (RH)                 up to 37.5 persons per acre
Very High Density Residential (RVH)           up to 50 persons per acre
Goals, Policies and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:        are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Map LU-3
Sphere of Influence, and Policy LU-2.1 through Policy LU-2.5.
Using the Land Use Designations and Map
Goal LU-1         Promote development and conservation of land in Fort Bragg according to
                  the pattern shown on the Land Use Designations Map.
Policy LU-1.1 Implementation of the Land Use Designations Map: Implement the Land Use
Designations Map by approving development and conservation projects consistent with the land
use designations, and ensure consistency between the Coastal General Plan and the Coastal
Land Use & Development Code.
         Program LU-1.1.1: Request that the County of Mendocino maintain or, if warranted,
         revise its General Plan in accordance with the land use designations of the Fort Bragg
         Coastal General Plan for the area within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
Policy LU-1.2: Require that development on APNs 018-440-38, -39, -49, -50, & -59 in excess
of one dwelling per existing lot obtain a Planned Development approval that minimizes access
2 – Land Use Element                          2-8                                           July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The following properties are owned by the City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                             HW
                                                                                                                               Y1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and are not contiguous to the City limits. They have been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             annexed to the City and are assigned the General Plan land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             use classification of Public Facilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             APN                                     PURPOSE
                                                                                                                                                                                              AIRPORT                                        ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            018-391-07                                               Hwy 20 Water Tank (fire station)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            019-070-01                                               Newman Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            019-460-21                                               Waterfall Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            019-470-08
       N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    020-270-48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            020-480-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Madsen Hole
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Water Treatment Plant/Corp. Yard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            020-500-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Revision date: July 200
                                                                                                     Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                     Cr                   ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                      ELM ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PERKINS
                                                                                                      SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                                   CREEK                        RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.                              BRANDON
                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PINE STREET
                                                                                                                               STREET                                                  STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P E T E R S O N L N.
                                                                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D E N N IS O N L A N E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MA L L L A N E
                                                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                             REDWOOD AVENUE
       an
                                                                                                                               FRANKLIN                                                HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ALDER STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MO N S O N W A Y
                                                                                                                    MAIN
   Oce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  MADRONE                                         ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                      WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CORRY ST.                                                                                                               WALL ST.
                                                                                                                                          HAZEL ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                              STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                          CHESTNUT ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GROVE
                                                                                                                              FRANKLIN
                                                                                                                                           WALNUT                                                     ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MI N N E S O T A
                                                                                                               MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HAU                                                                              D.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LR                                                                          LR                                                                             IV E      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D.                                                     AU                                                                            OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NO Y
    Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D O L P H IN IS L E                                                                Map LU-1
                                                                                                                                           MYR
                                                                                                                                              TLE                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R                                                                                            Residential Land Use Designations                                                                                               Industrial Land Use Designations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RI
                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR5                              Large Lot Rural Residential                                                                                          IL                   Light Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1 unit per 5 acres)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       YO
                                                                                                  HWY 1                                                                                           NO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Medium Lot Rural Residential                                                                                                              Heavy Industrial
                                                                          HARBOR AVENUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR2                              (1 unit per 2 acres)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR1                              Rural Residential                                                                                                    IT                   Timber Resources Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1 unit per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Suburban Residential
                                                     OCEAN VIEW         DRIVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SR                               (1-3 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Other Designations
                                                                                                                                                                  SOUTH HARBOR DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RL                               (3-6 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HD                   Harbor District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RM                               (6-12 units per acre)
                                                                                                  HWY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           High Density Residential                                                                                             PR                   Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                             WILLITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RH                               (6-15 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                  OLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Very High Density Residential                                                                                        PF                   Public Facilities and Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HW                                                                        RVH                              (6-24 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OS                   Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Commercial Land Use Designations                                                                                                                     A                    Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CBD                              Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CN                               Neighborhood Commercial
                                                                                          HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CG                               General Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CH                               Highway Visitor Commercial                                                                                                                Redevelopment Agency
                                                                                                      SIMPSON LANE
he boundaries of the Land Use Designations are general and schematic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CO                               Office Commercial                                                                                                                         Coastal Zone
ustrating the policies of the General Plan. Refer to the Assessor's                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        within City of Fort Bragg
arcel Maps at the Community Development Department for updated parcel
oundary maps.
                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                        HWY 1
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                          Map LU-2
                                                                                                                                                                            CITY BOUNDARY, SPHERE OF INFLUENCE,
                                                                                                                                                                                     AND COASTAL ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Coastal Zone Boandary
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
                                                                                   Y1
                                                                                  HW
                                                                                                                              AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                            Pudding
                                                                                                                   Cr   ee
                                                                                                                              k
                                                             ELM ST.
                                                             SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                              BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                              FIR STREET
                                                                                                                              PINE STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                   2
                                                                                  STREET                           STREET
                                                                                                McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                               LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                         STREET
                                                                                                                          REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                  FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CEDAR ST.
                                                                         MAIN
                                                                                                                              ALDER STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                              OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CT.
                                                                                                                              MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                             HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                       WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                             LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                        MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                  WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                CORRY ST.                                          WALL ST.
                                                                                              HAZEL ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                   STREET
                                                                                              CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                   FRANKLIN
                                                                                               WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                      MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                               5                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                     7
                                                         HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Map LU-3
                        8                                                                                                                                                                                                  ANNEXATION AREAS
                            OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #    Annexation Areas
                                                 HWY 1
                                                             SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
driveways onto Ocean View Drive and includes design and site planning features to ensure
compatibility with the surrounding single-family residential neighborhood.
Sphere of Influence
       Policy LU-2.1 through Policy 2.5 and associated Programs are not part of the certified LCP
and shall not govern the review and approval of Coastal Development Permits
Goal LU-2         Establish and maintain clear boundaries and guidelines for the future
                  expansion of Fort Bragg.
      Policy LU-2.1      Boundaries of the Sphere of Influence: Revise the existing Sphere of
Influence boundaries, as submitted to Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO).
       Policy LU-2.2 Annexations to the Municipal Improvement District Boundary: Require
annexation approval prior to permitting new connections to the sanitary sewer system operated
by the City’s Municipal Improvement District in the Sphere of Influence. Out-of-area service
agreements may be approved for new connections to the sanitary sewer system for
development proposals that comply with the policy of the Municipal Improvement District
regarding projects that provide affordable housing per Resolution No. ID 230-2003, adopted on
December 8, 2003.
      Policy LU-2.3      County Referrals: Review and comment on development projects in the
City’s Sphere of Influence which are under the jurisdiction of Mendocino County.
         Program LU-2.3.1: Establish a Memorandum of Understanding between the City and
         Mendocino County regarding procedures for project review within the Fort Bragg Sphere
         of Influence.
      Policy LU-2.4      Annexation Standards: Require annexations to the City to meet all of the
following standards:
•        Areas annexed must be able to be served by existing City facilities and by facilities
         provided by other agencies, or by environmentally and economically feasible
         improvements to these facilities. Prior to City approval of an annexation application,
         findings shall be made indicating that: necessary public and private infrastructure to
         support the development is available, or that a development plan for extending or
         upgrading the infrastructure has been adopted, and that the annexation would not result
         in a substantial reduction or deterioration of public services and facilities, including
         streets, water supply, wastewater treatment, storm drainage facilities, fire, police,
         schools, and other public services and facilities.
•        Proposed annexations must be contiguous to existing developed areas. Annexation
         proposals that “leapfrog” over vacant and undeveloped land shall not be approved.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-9                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

•        Based on a cost-revenue analysis, annexations shall have a cumulative net positive
         fiscal effect on the City within fifteen years of approval.       The fiscal analysis must
         demonstrate that annexed properties would generate sufficient City revenues to pay for
         ongoing services to the annexed area and infrastructure cost benefiting annexed area
         borne by City – such as public safety, road maintenance, street lighting, etc. To achieve
         this, property owner(s) may be required to establish Mello-Roos districts and/or other
         forms of benefit assessment districts as a condition of, and at the time of, annexation to
         the City.
•        All annexation applications shall include an environmental review document which
         provides full disclosure of any potential adverse environmental impacts. To the
         maximum extent possible, annexations that would result in significant environmental
         impacts will not be approved.
•        A development plan, including maps and text, showing how existing and proposed future
         development within the annexation area contributes to the attainment of Coastal General
         Plan goals and policies, shall be submitted with an annexation application.
•        All proposed future development within an annexation area shall be consistent with the
         land use designations shown on the Land Use Designations Map and all other
         requirements of the Coastal General Plan and the Fort Bragg Municipal Code.
•        A cost-revenue analysis is not required for parcels that are annexed by the City of Fort
         Bragg for public purposes.
         Program LU-2.4.1: Require a fiscal impact analysis of proposed annexations, at the
         applicant’s cost, as deemed appropriate by the City. The fiscal impact analysis shall
         include, at a minimum, the cost of providing City services on a per capita basis for
         residential projects, or per square foot of building for commercial and industrial projects,
         the impact on existing and future property owners, and a comparison of the potential
         revenues anticipated from the proposed annexation versus the cost to the City of
         providing services for a period of at least five years from the date of project completion.
      Policy LU-2.5      Discourage Piecemeal Annexations: Discourage annexations of small,
individual parcels of land in a piecemeal fashion.
         Program LU-2.5.1: Consider revising the Coastal LUDC to establish a minimum area for
         an annexation request or a process for pre-approval of the annexation area by the City
         Council prior to accepting an annexation application as complete.
         Program LU-2.5.2: Annexation applications should include, to the maximum feasible
         extent, the entire annexation area as shown in Map LU-3: Annexation Areas.
         Annexation applications for smaller subareas may be allowed for parcels that are
         annexed by the City of Fort Bragg for public purposes and for projects that provide
         affordable housing consistent with the criteria established in Resolution No. ID 230-
         2003, adopted on December 8, 2003.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 10                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Commercial Land
The goals and policies in this section ensure that the Central Business District remains the
historic, civic, cultural, and commercial core of the community. There are also policies
encouraging mixed use and infill development to strengthen the other commercial areas of the
City. The Circulation and the Community Design Elements provide goals and policies
addressing parking, alleyways, and the overall appearance of commercial development.
Goal LU-3         Ensure that the Central Business District remains the historic, civic,
                  cultural, and commercial core of the community.
Policy LU-3.1 Central Business District: Retain and enhance the small-scale, pedestrian-
friendly, and historic character of the Central Business District (CBD).
         Program LU-3.1.1: Develop streetscape and landscape requirements to enhance the
         pedestrian environment, encourage an active commercial setting, and reduce traffic
         congestion in the Central Business District.
         Program LU-3.1.2: Consider revisions to the Coastal Land Use & Development Code
         (LUDC) requiring buildings in the Central Business District be located adjacent to the
         sidewalk with parking to the rear or to the side of buildings.
         Program LU-3.1.3: Utilize all feasible funding sources to implement the public
         improvements and to establish organizational support for businesses in the Central
         Business District as identified in the Downtown Revitalization Plan.
         Program LU-3.1.4: Utilize City-owned land at the Guest House Museum, Town Hall, and
         City Hall for historic and cultural uses, public assembly, and entertainment.
         Program LU-3.1.5: Residential uses will be permitted only above the ground floor or at
         the rear of buildings on the ground floor.
Policy LU-3.2 Mixed Uses: Support mixed use development (i.e., a combination of residential
and commercial uses) in the Central Business District that does not conflict with the primary
retail function of this area.
Policy LU-3.3: Historic Buildings and Mixed Uses: In the Central Business District and in other
commercial areas with historic residential structures, encourage residential uses, mixed
residential, and commercial uses, and the preservation of historic structures.
Policy LU-3.4 Encourage Infill Development: Encourage infill development of vacant and
underdeveloped land in the Central Business District and adjacent commercial areas before
amending the Coastal General Plan and rezoning to obtain additional commercial land
elsewhere.
Policy LU-3.5 Re-Use of Existing Buildings: Encourage the adaptive re-use and more complete
utilization of buildings in the Central Business District and other commercial districts.
         Program LU-3.5.1 Consider establishing incentives such as low-interest loans for
         rehabilitation and installation of fire sprinklers in buildings to encourage the reuse of
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 11                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         upper floors of existing buildings in the Central Business District for housing, offices, and
         other uses.
Goal LU-4         Promote the economic vitality of the City’s existing commercial areas.
Policy LU-4.1 Formula Businesses and Big Box Retail: Regulate the establishment of formula
businesses and big box retail to ensure that their location, scale, and appearance do not detract
from the economic vitality of established commercial businesses and are consistent with the
small town, rural character of Fort Bragg.
Policy LU-4.2: Require that a fiscal and economic analysis be performed as part of the
conditional use permit process for big box retail projects. The analysis shall evaluate the
economic effects of the project for a minimum five-year time frame. A consultant selected by
the City and paid for by the project proponent shall carry out the analysis.
Policy LU-4.3 Large-Scale Commercial Development: To maintain scenic views of the coast
and to ensure that building sizes at the City’s gateways are in scale with the community, no
commercial building shall exceed the following limitations on the gross floor area:
         a)      between the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges - maximum 50,000 square
                 feet;
         b)      east of Highway One and north of Pudding Creek Bridge - maximum 30,000
                 square feet;
         c)      west of Highway One and north of Pudding Creek Bridge and south of the Noyo
                 River Bridge - maximum 15,000 square feet; and
         d)      east of Highway One and south of Noyo River Bridge – maximum 40,000 square
                 feet.
Policy LU-4.4 Standards for Commercial Uses in Residential Areas: Commercial uses in and
adjacent to residential areas shall not adversely affect the primarily residential character of the
area.
         Program LU-4.4.1: Consider revisions to the Coastal LUDC to require a conditional use
         permit for commercial uses in residential land use designations and to establish design
         standards addressing architectural design, landscaped buffers, lighting, signage, noise,
         and other features to ensure neighborhood compatibility.
         Program LU-4.4.2: Amend the Coastal LUDC to allow existing Bed & Breakfasts in R1
         neighborhoods to rebuild and expand with City approval of a conditional use permit.
Recreation and Visitor-Serving Facilities
The Coastal Act gives priority to recreational and visitor-serving uses in the Coastal Zone. The
goals established by the State for the Coastal Zone include reserving upland areas for
recreational uses, protecting an adequate amount of oceanfront land for recreational use, and
focusing recreational facilities in selected areas, rather than spreading them out along the entire
coastline.
Fort Bragg serves as the regional service center for the Mendocino coast and many support
services needed for recreation and tourist-oriented businesses on the coast are located here.
No shortage of visitor-serving land use exists in the City.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 12                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

All commercial land use designations in the City allow visitor-commercial uses, and there are
many vacant parcels available for this use.
Goal LU-5          Maximize public recreational opportunities in the Coastal Zone consistent
                   with sound resource conservation principles and the constitutionally
                   protected rights of property owners.
Policy LU-5.1 Additional Sites for Visitor-Serving Commercial: Continue to provide for and
encourage additional visitor-serving commercial facilities.
Policy LU-5.2: Ensure that there are adequate sites for visitor-serving land uses by:
         a) Maintaining existing areas designated for Highway-Visitor Commercial uses;
         b) Maintaining the Highway Visitor Commercial land use designation as one
             allowing primarily recreational and visitor-serving uses; and
         c) Reserving adequate infrastructure capacity to accommodate existing,
             authorized, and probable visitor serving uses.
Policy LU-5.3: Lower Cost Facilities: Protect, encourage, and, where feasible, provide lower-
cost visitor and recreational facilities for persons and families of low and moderate income. If
and when average annual occupancy rates at Fort Bragg visitor facilities exceed 70%, removal
or conversion of existing lower cost facilities shall be prohibited unless the use will be replaced
with another facility offering comparable visitor serving or recreational facilities.
         Program LU-5.3.1: Create an inventory and monitor lower-cost visitor recreational
         facilities in the City.
         Program LU-5.3.2: Encourage lower-cost visitor and recreational facilities during
         the project review process with private developers and work with State Parks to expand
         such facilities on State land.
Policy LU-5.4: Oceanfront land suitable for recreational use shall be protected for recreational
use and development unless present and foreseeable future demand for public or commercial
recreational activities that could be accommodated on the property is already adequately
provided for in the area.
Policy LU-5.5: Lower cost visitor and recreational facilities shall be protected, encouraged, and,
where feasible, provided. Developments providing public recreational opportunities are
preferred.
Policy LU-5.6: The use of private lands suitable for visitor-serving and commercial recreational
facilities designed to enhance public opportunities for coastal recreation shall have priority over
private residential, general industrial, or general commercial development, but not over
agriculture or coastal-dependent industry.
Policy LU-5.7: Adequate parking should be provided to serve coastal access and recreation
uses to the extent feasible. Existing parking areas serving recreational uses shall not be
displaced unless a comparable replacement area is provided.
Policy LU-5.8: Coastal areas suited for water-oriented recreational activities that cannot readily
be provided at inland water areas shall be protected for such uses.
2 – Land Use Element                            2 - 13                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Industrial Land
The lumber and fishing industries have played an important role in the formation and growth of
Fort Bragg. Both of these industries are in transition, and the local economy is evolving from a
natural resource-based economy to a more service-oriented economy. Fort Bragg is the
commercial, educational, medical, and professional service center for a large portion of the
Mendocino coast. Future growth in the local economy is projected to occur in the retail, tourism,
and service sectors.
The Coastal General Plan is intended to support the growth and vitality of existing industries
while ensuring that the community is prepared to actively participate in the decision-making
process as new industries develop in Fort Bragg and as current industrial lands transition to
other uses. This Coastal General Plan requires that specific plans be prepared when different
land uses are proposed for large areas of industrial land. This offers the community the
opportunity to: plan for its future, engage in consensus building, and develop comprehensive
land use and economic development strategies.
Goal LU-6          Support industrial development which is consistent with the
                   protection, enhancement, and restoration of coastal resources.
Policy LU-6.1: Standards for Noyo Harbor Industrial Development: Limit industrial development
in the Noyo Harbor to uses which:
         a)      are coastal-dependent uses or aquaculture, giving priority to commercial fishing
                 activities;
         b)      do not generate excessive traffic on City streets, such as South Street, North
                 Harbor Drive, and Cypress Street;
         c)      do not interfere with existing coastal-dependent industry, especially commercial
                 fishing; and
         d)      are consistent with applicable LCP policies, including but not limited to LCP
                 policies regarding the protection of public access and recreation, visual
                 resources, and environmentally sensitive habitat areas, and Coastal Act public
                 access policies.
         Program LU-6.1.1: Work with the County of Mendocino, the Noyo Harbor District and
         other agencies to develop and adopt a Noyo Harbor Plan establishing standards for
         conservation and development for the entire Noyo River drainage area.
         Program LU-6.1.2:      Offshore Oil Drilling: Support Mendocino County's LCP policy to
         request that the Federal government be requested to establish all underwater land within
         the Outer Continental Shelf as a petroleum reserve to be used only in a national
         emergency and that the Mendocino Coast be deleted from any Outer Continental Shelf
         gas development licensed by the Federal government.
Policy LU-6.2: In areas designated for industrial land uses, coastal-dependent and coastal-
related industrial uses shall have priority over other industrial uses on or near the shoreline.
Policy LU-6.3: Pipeline, Electrical, and Telecommunications Transmission Corridors:         Consoli-
date new pipeline, electrical, and telecommunications transmission corridors within existing
pipeline or electrical and telecommunications transmission corridors, wherever feasible, unless
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 14                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                              LU-4
                                                                                SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS IN THE
                                                                            TIMBER RESOURCES INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                      LAND USE DESIGNATION
  2
    1                                                 3                                                                      5
4
                                                        For planning purposes only; not intended to be accurate as regards legal parcels
     CITY OF FORT
       Lateral Public Coastal Access (Revise LCP Map)
         

there are overriding technical constraints or significant social, aesthetic, environmental, or
economic concerns.
Policy LU-6.4: Electrical and telecommunications transmission rights-of-way and pipelines shall
be routed to minimize impacts to scenic resources and to Environmentally Sensitive Habitat
Areas according to the following standards:
         a)      Require underground installation of electrical and telecommunication lines where
                 technically and economically feasible, unless it can be shown that other options
                 are less environmentally damaging.
         b)      Scarring, grading, or other vegetative removal shall be minimized and
                 construction areas shall be revegetated with plants native to the area.
         c)      Where above-ground electrical or telecommunications transmission lines are
                 necessary, the design and color of the support towers shall be compatible with
                 the surroundings to the extent feasible.              Avoid locating above-ground
                 transmission lines along the crests of hills, bluffs, and in scenic resource areas.
Goal LU-7         Support industrial development which is consistent with the protection,
                  enhancement, and restoration of coastal resources.
Policy LU-7.1 Changes in Industrial Land Use: Require that any Local Coastal Program (LCP)
amendments and rezoning of lands which are designated Timber Resources Industrial be
subject to a specific plan process. The portions of a Specific Plan that meet the definition of
“Land Use Plan” as defined by Coastal Act Section 30108.5 and “Implementing Actions” as
defined by Coastal Act Section 30108.4 shall be submitted to, and effectively certified by, the
Coastal Commission as an LCP amendment before those portions of the Specific Plan become
effective.
Policy LU-7.2: In order for LCP amendments and rezoning of lands designated Timber
Resources Industrial to be considered, a specific plan shall be prepared which addresses, at a
minimum, an area approximating one or more of the subareas as shown on Map LU-4: Specific
Plan Areas in the Timber Resources Industrial Land Use Designation. Specific plans shall meet
the following minimum criteria:
         a)      The specific plan shall make provisions for existing and future infrastructure
                 connections such as roads, utilities, and coastal access to surrounding
                 developed and undeveloped areas.
         b)      The specific plan shall contain financing methods to provide infrastructure and
                 public amenities based on a nexus between development exactions being
                 imposed and the development-induced needs being met by those exactions,
                 establish an orderly phasing of development, and include other measures as
                 needed to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the community.
         c)      The specific plan, and environmental studies required for that plan, shall be paid
                 for by the applicant who may be repaid by future developers of other portions of
                 the specific plan area on a pro rata basis.
         d)      The specific plan shall be consistent with the Chapter 3 policies of the Coastal
                 Act.
Policy LU-7.3 Siting New Industrial Development: Site new industrial development so that it is
contiguous with, or in close proximity to, existing developed areas able to accommodate it, or
where such areas are not able to accommodate it, in other areas with adequate public services
and where it will not have significant adverse effects on coastal resources, either individually or
cumulatively.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 15                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy LU-7.4: Where feasible, locate new hazardous industrial development away from
existing developed areas.
Policy LU-7.5 Industrial Land Use Standards: Require that industrial development avoid or
minimize creating substantial pollution, noise, glare, dust, odor, or other significant adverse
impacts.
         Program LU-7.5.1: Continue to enforce, and revise as needed, Coastal LUDC standards
         with regard to noise, glare, dust, odor, and other potentially adverse impacts of industrial
         activity.
Commercial & Recreational Fishing and Boating
Commercial fishing and recreational boating and fishing are located in Noyo Harbor. It is an all-
weather port and the most active and important harbor between Bodega Bay and Eureka. The
Noyo Harbor District has constructed 256 berths since 1968. Those berths are nearly always
occupied, and approximately 43 percent of the boats moored there are commercial craft. The
lower harbor area also contains parking and ship building areas, boat launching and repair
facilities, fish processing plants, and marine supply stores. Commercial outlets, including
visitor-oriented restaurants, are clustered on the north bank of the harbor. About a half-mile
upriver, on the south side of the river, the Dolphin Cove private commercial marina provides
berths for about 150 boats, most of which are recreational.
Several jurisdictions share responsibility for the Noyo Harbor, which is largely located in the
County's jurisdiction but is within the City's Sphere of Influence. The U. S. Army Corps of
Engineers is responsible for maintaining the channel. The Noyo Harbor District operates the
harbor, docks, and related facilities and prepares long-term plans for facilities expansion. The
State Department of Fish and Game, the State Department of Boating and Waterways, the
California Coastal Commission, the County of Mendocino, and the City of Fort Bragg have
partial responsibility and jurisdiction in the area.
The Coastal Act gives priority to coastal-dependent development such as commercial fishing
and recreational boating over other types of land use on or near the shoreline.
Goal LU-8          Encourage a mixture of commercial fishing, recreational boating and
                   fishing, mixed commercial and visitor-serving uses consistent with
                   coastal access policies.
Policy LU.8.1: Annexation of Noyo Harbor: Consider annexation of the Noyo Harbor.
         Program LU-8.1.1: Encourage the preparation of a specific plan for the Noyo Harbor
         with the cooperation and involvement of the Noyo Harbor District, the County of
         Mendocino, local property owners, and appropriate State agencies. Include in the
         specific plan policies that continue to give priority to coastal-dependent land uses such
         as commercial fishing, recreational boating, and related commercial uses, while
         increasing the range of visitor-serving uses on parcels not located directly on the coast
         or the Noyo River.
         Program LU-8.1.2: Work with the County of Mendocino to improve emergency vehicle
         access and to establish a secondary access route to Noyo Harbor.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 16                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy LU-8.2: Facilities serving the commercial fishing and recreational boating industries shall
be protected and, where feasible, upgraded. Existing commercial fishing and recreational
boating harbor space shall not be reduced and shall be protected unless written findings are
made that present and foreseeable future demand for the facilities that could be accommodated
on the property is already adequately provided for in the area. Proposed recreational boating
facilities shall, where feasible, be designed and located in such a fashion as not to interfere with
the needs of the commercial fishing industry.
Policy LU-8.3: Increased recreational boating use of coastal waters shall be encouraged, in
accordance with this division, by developing dry storage areas, increasing public launching
facilities, providing additional berthing space in existing harbors, limiting non-water-dependent
land uses that congest access corridors and preclude boating support facilities, providing
harbors of refuge, and by providing for new boating facilities in natural harbors, new protected
water areas, and in areas dredged from dry land.
Policy LU-8.4: The economic, commercial, and recreational importance of fishing activities shall
be recognized and protected.
Aquaculture Development
Goal LU-9         Minimize impacts of aquaculture development on coastal resources.
Policy LU-9.1: Aquaculture Development. All aquaculture development or facilities shall require
a coastal development permit and shall be consistent with all policies and standards of the
certified LCP, including but not limited to policies regarding the protection of public access,
water and marine resources, environmentally sensitive habitat areas, hazards, water quality,
archaeological resources, and visual resources.
Policy LU-9.2: No intake or discharge lines shall be placed above ground in the Timber
Resources Industrial District in any Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas as defined in Policy
OS-1.2 and Section 30107.5 of the Coastal Act, including but not limited to, along portions of
any coastal bluff that constitute ESHA, or within any rocky intertidal habitat area.
Policy LU-9.3: No intake or discharge lines shall be placed above ground within the Harbor
District, the adjoining tidelands and submerged lands of the Noyo River, or on the face of
coastal bluffs within the Timber Resources Industrial district, unless all other alternatives have
been demonstrated to be infeasible or more environmentally damaging. Alternatives to be
evaluated shall include, but not be limited to, (1) placing lines underground through use of
directional drilling or trenching, (2) using closed-loop aquaculture systems that do not require
offshore intake and discharge lines, and (3) connecting discharge lines to the existing sanitary
sewer system. If all other alternatives have been demonstrated to be infeasible or more
environmentally damaging and intake or discharge lines must be placed above ground within
the Harbor District and the adjoining tidelands and submerged lands of the Noyo River, or on
the face of coastal bluffs within the Timber Resources Industrial district, the lines shall be placed
in the least environmentally damaging feasible location and in a manner that will not interfere
with Noyo River navigation, existing recreational boating facilities, and coastal dependent
industry, especially commercial fishing facilities.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 17                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy LU-9.4: Any intake or discharge lines allowed to be placed above ground within the
Harbor District and the adjoining tidelands and submerged lands of the Noyo River shall be
removed upon abandonment of the aquaculture development or facility it was installed to serve.
Policy LU-9.5: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to be
visually compatible with the character of surrounding areas, and shoreline facilities shall be
screened.
Policy LU-9.6: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to prevent
impacts which would significantly degrade environmentally sensitive habitat areas, as defined in
Policy OS-1.1 and section 30107.5 of the Coastal Act, and shall be compatible with the
continuance of biological and ecological values in those habitat areas.
Policy LU-9.7: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to avoid
encroachment of aquaculture operations into adjacent recreational areas.
Policy LU-9,8: No aquaculture development or facilities shall interfere with the public’s right of
access to the sea. All aquaculture development or facilities shall ensure adequate provision of
lateral and vertical access.
Policy LU-9.9: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to: (1)
minimize risks to life and property from geologic and flood hazards, including but not limited to
bluff erosion, slope stability, seismic events, liquefaction, tsunamis, floods, and wave attack;
and (2) assure stability and structural integrity, and neither create nor contribute significantly to
erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of the site or surrounding area or in any way require
the construction of protective devices that would substantially alter natural landforms along
bluffs and cliffs.
Policy LU-9.10: Availability of adequate water to serve all aquaculture development or facilities
shall be demonstrated prior to approval of such aquaculture development or facilities.
Policy LU-9.11: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to minimize
the chances for release of non-native species, pathogens, and parasites into the aquatic
environment.
Policy LU-9.12: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to ensure
that waste discharges will comply with all applicable water quality regulations, including, but not
limited to, any applicable regulations contained within (1) the State Water Resources Control
Board’s “Water Quality Control Plan, Ocean Waters of California” Ocean Plan, (2) the State
Water Resources Control Board’s “Water Quality Control Plan for Control of Temperature in the
Coastal and Interstate Waters and Enclosed Bays and Estuaries of California” (Thermal Plan),
and (3) the North Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board’s (RWQCB) “Water Quality
Control Plan for the North Coast Region” (Basin Plan).
Policy LU-9.13: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to minimize
the discharge of pollutants to water, including but not limited to substances in concentrations
toxic to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
Policy LU-9.14: All aquaculture development or facilities shall implement Best Management
Practices (BMPs) to ensure the number and quantity of pollutants discharged or potentially
discharged from the facility shall be minimized to the maximum extent feasible. BMPs shall
2 – Land Use Element                            2 - 18                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

specifically address adequate cleaning, feeding, transfer and importation of species, husbandry
practices, removal of dead species, storage and handling of raw material, drugs and chemicals,
and disposal of solid waste.
Policy LU-9.15: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be carried out in a manner that
will sustain the biological productivity of coastal waters, protect human health and maintain
healthy populations of all species of marine organisms for long-term commercial, recreational,
scientific and educational purposes.
Policy LU-9.16: Aquaculture facilities sited within the Harbor District shall not interfere with
existing recreational boating facilities and existing coastal-dependent industry, including fishing.
Policy LU-9-17: Ocean front land that is suitable for coastal dependent aquaculture shall be
protected for that use, and proposals for aquaculture facilities located on those sites shall be
given priority, except over other coastal dependent developments or uses.
Residential Land
The residential neighborhoods of Fort Bragg are one of its most precious assets. Due to the
layout of the City, most residential neighborhoods are relatively separated from commercial,
retail, and industrial developments. Homes are typically located on local and collector streets,
rather than on the busier arterial streets, thereby minimizing the number of residents exposed to
heavy traffic and noise.
Many of the residences in Fort Bragg were built more than thirty years ago and ongoing repair
and renovation are required to maintain these older homes. It is a priority of this Coastal
General Plan to promote the preservation and rehabilitation of these older neighborhoods.
Other priorities include maintaining the character of existing residential areas and providing
additional areas for affordable housing, particularly for senior citizens. More detailed policies
and programs regarding housing and enhancing the quality of the City’s residential
neighborhoods are contained in the Housing and the Community Design Elements.
Goal LU-10        Provide adequate land to accommodate the housing needs of all income
                  groups.
Policy LU-10.1 : Preserve Neighborhoods: Preserve and enhance the character of the City’s
existing residential neighborhoods.
         Program LU-10.1.1: Use the minimum density indicated by the Land Use Designations
         Map as a starting point when determining specific density for a residential project.
         Densities above the minimum may be achieved only through a combination of the
         following: excellence of design, provision of affordable housing, effective mitigation of
         environmental constraints and impacts, demonstrated ability to provide services, and
         compatibility with adjacent development.
         Program LU-10.1.2: Revise the Coastal LUDC to provide more refined Design Review
         Guidelines, which address the design, size, bulk, and scale of residential development
         and ensure that new residences are compatible with and enhance the character of the
         neighborhoods in which they are located.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 19                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program LU-10.1.3: Revise the Coastal LUDC regulations for Planned Development
         (PD) to establish standards and procedures which encourage the use of the PD process
         in new residential development.
Locating New Development
Policy LU-10.2: Locating New Development. New residential, commercial, or industrial
development, except as otherwise provided in the LCP, shall be located within, contiguous with,
or in close proximity to, existing developed areas able to accommodate it or, where such areas
are not able to accommodate it, in other areas with adequate public services and where it will
not have significant adverse effects, either individually or cumulatively, on coastal resources.
Where feasible, new hazardous industrial development shall be located away from existing
developed areas.
Policy LU-10.3: The location and amount of new development shall maintain and enhance
public access to the coast by: (1) facilitating the extension of transit services where feasible; (2)
providing non-automobile circulation within the development that includes circulation
connections outside of the development; (3) assuring that the recreational needs of new
residents will be supported by onsite recreational facilities and/or off-site local park recreational
facilities to ensure that coastal recreation areas are not overloaded; and (4) utilizing smart
growth and mixed-use development concepts where feasible to improve circulation and reduce
auto use, where such auto use would impact coastal access roads.
Policy LU-10.4: Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for New Development.
Development shall only be approved when it has been demonstrated that the development will
be served with adequate water and wastewater treatment. Lack of adequate services to serve
the proposed development shall be grounds for denial of the development.
Policy LU-10.5: Minimize Impacts on Air Quality and Green House Gasses. New development
shall: 1) be consistent with requirements imposed by an air pollution control district or the State
Air Resources Control Board as to each particular development, and 2) minimize energy
consumption and vehicle miles traveled.
Policy LU-10.6: Protect Special Communities. New Development shall, where appropriate,
protect special communities and neighborhoods which, because of their unique characteristics,
are popular visitor destination points for recreational uses.
Policy LU-10.7: Priority for Coastal Dependent Uses. Coastal-dependent           developments shall
have priority over other developments on or near the shoreline. Except as        provided elsewhere
in this division, coastal-dependent developments shall not be sited in           a wetland. When
appropriate, coastal-related developments should be accommodated                  within reasonable
proximity to the coastal-dependent uses they support.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 20                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

3.       PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
This Element is intended to identify essential public facilities, buildings, and services and to describe
policies and programs that will ensure that the existing and future population of Fort Bragg is provided
the best feasible level of public services and infrastructure. Although not required as a separate
Coastal General Plan element, this element compiles the public facilities planning requirements of the
circulation, conservation, and open space elements in Government Code Section 65302.
B.       Water Supply and Distribution
The City's current water supply system consists of the Newman Reservoir, the Simpson diversion,
and a direct diversion in the Noyo River (which includes a wet well in the Noyo River, a pump station
at the Noyo River, and various conveyances to the water treatment plant).
The City currently obtains about 50 percent of its water from the Noyo River. Under its existing
temporary license, the City is entitled to draw up to 1,500 acre feet of water per year from the Noyo
River so long as withdrawals do not exceed 3.0 cubic feet per second and specified amounts are
maintained in the river to meet the needs of the fish population. The City currently uses about 36
percent of this entitlement. The City's Water Permit contains limits on how much water can be
pumped from the Noyo River. These conditions were established in the past by the State
Department of Health Services because, at the time, it was concluded that the City could not
withdraw sufficient water from the Noyo River to meet its needs while retaining the required flows
within the river necessary to support the fish population. To comply with these Permit conditions, the
City requires that new development implement measures that limit new water demand.
The City is developing new water storage facilities to ensure adequate water during years of severe
drought, including the installation of a new 45-acre foot reservoir at Newman Gulch. The City is also
seeking additional water storage capacity to meet the needs of a buildout development scenario in
the City of Fort Bragg. The City will apply for a permanent license to divert water from the Noyo River
by 2009.
In the year 2007, the City produced 291,423,000 gallons of water from its three sources, or 113.6
gallons per day per person. Buildout over the next 10 years would generate a projected 1,900
additional people which would require production of an additional 200,000 gallons of water per day.
The City will have sufficient water supply to meet this demand, though it may not have sufficient water
storage. New development in the City will be required to pay its fair share of new water system
improvements.
3 – Public Facilities Element                         3-1                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

C.       Sewer System
Sewage treatment and disposal are provided by the Fort Bragg Municipal Improvement District No. 1.
The District is larger than the City; it includes much of the proposed Sphere of Influence. The District
accepts septage from residences and businesses outside the City boundaries but within the District
boundaries. Currently, the District facility serves residences and businesses within the City plus 102
septic tanks spread throughout the District plus septage from the area north of Pudding Creek.
The treatment and disposal facility currently disposes of about 640,000 gallons of treated wastewater
per day (Average Dry Weather Flow - ADWF). The projected increase in population of about 1,900
people over the next ten years will increase wastewater flows to the plant by about 173,000 gallons
per day ADWF.
The plant has a rated capacity of 1,000,000 gallons per day ADWF which is sufficient to meet the
demand of the projected population increase. However, due to spikes in the inflow to the facility
during wet weather (caused by infiltration and inflow into the collection lines), the plant's wet weather
capacity is frequently exceeded, resulting in violations of the facility's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
The City has installed a new secondary digester at the plant and will make additional improvements
to the collection system to address infiltration and inflow problems. The new digester will allow closing
down of the primary digester to allow cleaning and maintenance of this digester. Until the necessary
improvements to the plant are fully funded and constructed, wet weather capacity at the plant will
continue to be limited. The District is able to meet projected wastewater treatment and disposal
demands. Future development will need to pay its fair share of any additional improvements that are
needed.
D.       Storm Drain System
Based on a Storm Drain Master Plan developed in 1985, the City adopted the "Drainage Facility
Improvements and Drainage Fees" chapter (Chapter 12.14) of the City's Municipal Code. This
Chapter allows the City to review new development proposals and condition those proposals to
ensure that adequate on-site and off-site drainage is included in the development.
The priority storm drain improvements in the 2004 Master Plan have been implemented, although
there are additional problems identified in that report that still need to be addressed. In addition,
much of the area north of Pudding Creek, and south of the Noyo River generally do not have
improved drainage systems in place. Drainage in these areas is generally provided by natural
channels. Additional development per the Coastal General Plan would increase the amount of
impervious surfaces in these areas, and unless adequate storm drains are provided, there will be
localized flooding. New development will be required to pay for improvements necessary to ensure
adequate capacity within the storm drain system.
3 – Public Facilities Element                          3-2                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

E.       Schools
Education in the area is provided by the Fort Bragg Unified School District. Within the Fort Bragg
Planning Area, the District operates two elementary schools (Dana Gray Elementary School and
Redwood Elementary School), one middle school (Fort Bragg Middle School), one high school (Fort
Bragg High School), one continuation high school (Noyo High School), and one adult school (Coastal
Adult School). The student capacity of the District's schools is 2,460 students. The history of student
enrollment is shown in Table PF-1 below.
                                                  TABLE PF-1
                ENROLLMENT AT FORT BRAGG UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT FACILITIES
  Type of School            1992   1993      1994   1995    1996  1997  1998    1999   2000     2001
  Elementary Schools 1,206        1,170     1,128  1,141   1,128  1,080 1,023   1,022    996     906
  Middle School               576   583       604    624      607   578   525     528    509     509
  High School                 770   792       803    731      777   750   769     746    729     721
  TOTAL                    2,552  2,545     2,535  2,496   2,512  2,408 2,317  2,296   2,234   2,136
 Source: Fort Bragg Unified School District CBEDS Enrollments
Development over the next ten years would generate 562 additional students. Given declining
enrollment, the District believes it will have capacity for these students within existing school
buildings. The 562 additional students are only 146 more students than District schools housed in
1992. Even if there is insufficient permanent classroom capacity and/or capacity at existing
relocatable classrooms, the District could add additional relocatables and/or construct new
permanent classrooms on existing campuses. In addition, there is no guarantee that District
enrollment would actually increase by 562 students. Given recent declines in enrollment, it is
possible that the student enrollment from existing residences in the District would continue to decline
so that the student population in 2011 may be less than 562 new students. The District currently
receives developer mitigation fees of $2.24 per square foot for new residential construction and $0.36
per square foot for new nonresidential construction. These fees are used to purchase and/or lease
additional portable classrooms as needed and to repair or renovate existing schools.
F.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:             are not part of the certified LCP
and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy PF-1.5 through
Program PF-1.5.2; Policy PF-2.1 through Program PF-2.1.2; Policy PF-2.7; Policy PF-2.8; and Policy
PF-2.9 through Program PF-2.9.1.
Goal PF-1            Ensure that new development is served by adequate public services and
                     infrastructure.
Policy PF-1.1: All new development proposals shall be reviewed and conditioned to ensure that
adequate public services and infrastructure can be provided to the development without substantially
reducing the services provided to existing residents and businesses.
3 – Public Facilities Element                               3-3                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program PF-1.1.1: New development shall be responsible for any improvements or
         extensions of infrastructure or the service capacity necessary to serve the development.
Policy PF-1.2: Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for New Development. No permit for
development shall be approved unless it can be demonstrated that such development will be served
upon completion with adequate services, including but not limited to potable water; wastewater
collection, treatment and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical response; police
protection; transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal; as applicable to the
proposed development.
         a. Demonstration of adequate water and sewer facilities shall include evidence that
               adequate capacity will be available within the system to serve the development and all
               other known and foreseeable development the system is committed to serving, and that
               the municipal system will provide such service for the development;
         b.   Demonstration of adequate road facilities shall include information demonstrating that (i)
               access roads connecting to a public street can be developed in locations and in a manner
               consistent with LCP policies; and (ii) that the traffic generated by the proposed
               development, and all other known and foreseeable development, will not cause Levels of
               Service (LOS) of roads, streets, and intersections within the City to reduce below LOS
               standards contained in Policy C-1.1 of the Circulation Element of the Coastal General
               Plan.
Policy PF-1.3: Ensure Adequate Service Capacity for Priority Uses.
         a. New development that increases demand for new services by more than one equivalent
               dwelling unit (EDU) shall only be permitted in the Coastal Zone if,
                     Adequate services do or will exist to serve the proposed development upon
                      completion of the proposed development, and
                     Adequate services capacity would be retained to accommodate existing, authorized,
                      and probable priority uses upon completion. Such priority uses include, but are not
                      limited to, coastal dependent industrial (including commercial fishing facilities), visitor
                      serving, and recreational uses in commercial, industrial, parks and recreation, and
                      public facilities districts. Probable priority uses are those that do not require an LCP
                      amendment or zoning variance in the Coastal Zone.
          b. Prior to approval of a coastal development permit, the Planning Commission or City
               Council shall make the finding that these criteria have been met. Such findings shall be
               based on evidence that adequate service capacity remains to accommodate the existing,
               authorized, and probable priority uses identified above.
Policy PF-1.4: New or expanded public works facilities shall be designed and limited to accommodate
needs generated by development or uses permitted consistent with the provisions of this division;
provided, however, that it is the intent of the Legislature that State Highway Route 1 in rural areas of
the coastal zone remain a scenic two-lane road. Special districts shall not be formed or expanded
except where assessment for, and provision of, the service would not induce new development
inconsistent with the certified LCP. Where existing or planned public works facilities can
accommodate only a limited amount of new development, services to coastal dependent land use,
essential public services and basic industries vital to the economic health of the region, state, or
3 – Public Facilities Element                                3-4                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

nation, public recreation, commercial recreation, and visitor-serving land uses shall not be precluded
by other development.
      Policy PF-1.5         Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for Annexations:               Review
annexation requests to ensure that the area can be served with adequate potable water; wastewater
collection, treatment, and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical response; police
protection; transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal.
         Program PF-1.5.1: Areas to be annexed must be able to be served by existing City services
         or by services provided by other districts or agencies, or by environmentally and economically
         feasible extensions of these services. Any improvements or extensions required to serve the
         annexation area shall be paid for by property owners of the annexation area. The City will
         support annexations only upon a finding that infrastructure is available or that a specific
         development plan for extending or upgrading the infrastructure has been adopted by the City
         or other appropriate public service provider.
         Program PF-1.5.2: Require that property owners requesting annexation for vacant parcels of
         land which do not propose any development and connections to City services enter into a
         recorded agreement with the City stating all annexation fees applicable for the density of the
         proposed development shall be paid in full prior to approval of any land use or building
         permits for the subject property.
Goal PF-2            Assure that the City's infrastructure is maintained and expanded to meet the
                     needs of the City's residents.
     Policy PF-2.1          Development Pays Its Share: Require that new development pay its share of
capital improvements and the cost of public services to maintain adequate levels of service.
         Program PF-2.1.1: Maintain development impact and mitigation fees at a level adequate to
         finance infrastructure costs. Periodically review the City’s fee structure to ensure that it
         accurately reflects the actual cost of providing services.
         Program PF-2.1.2: Consider revising the Coastal LUDC to require property owners seeking
         annexation approval to enter into a pre-annexation agreement stating that they will not oppose
         assessment districts, including lighting and street maintenance districts.
Policy PF-2.2: Potable Water Capacity: Develop long-term solutions regarding the supply, storage,
and distribution of potable water and develop additional supplies. In addition to providing capacity for
potential build-out under the City General Plan outside the coastal zone, any expansion of capacity of
water facilities shall be designed to serve no more than the maximum level of development in the
coastal zone allowed by the certified LCP that is consistent with all other policies of the LCP and
Coastal General Plan. The City shall identify and implement water system improvements or changes
in service areas that are designed to ensure adequate service capacity to accommodate existing,
authorized, and projected probable future coastal dependent priority uses. Such uses include, but
are not limited to, industrial (including commercial fishing facilities), visitor serving, and recreational
priority uses in commercial, industrial, parks and recreation, and public facilities districts.
3 – Public Facilities Element                           3-5                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program PF-2.2.1: Maintain and update a Water System Master Plan and identify capital
         improvements required to meet anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.2: Monitor, on an ongoing basis, the capacity of the potable water system in
         relation to the anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.3: Evaluate, and periodically adjust as appropriate, water capital
         improvement installation and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing water service and
         increasing capacity.
         Program PF-2.2.4: Pursue all available sources of revenue to fund the maintenance and
         expansion of the City’s water system.
         Program PF-2.2.5: Develop a program to encourage and allow the safe use of graywater.
         Program PF-2.2.6: Obtain a permanent license for the water rights initially permitted to the
         City by the State Division of Water Rights in 1956.
         Program PF-2.2.7: Reconstruct the Madsen Hole pump station, construct a new raw water
         line from the Madsen Hole pump station to Sherwood Road, and reconstruct water storage
         ponds.
         Program PF-2.2.8: Improve the pressure in the water system lines to meet State standards.
Policy PF-2.3 Emergency Water Supply:            Develop an emergency water supply for disaster
preparedness.
         Program PF-2.3.1: Provide a means for obtaining and treating water from Pudding Creek or
         the Noyo River for emergency disaster situations only, if allowed by the State and if deemed
         feasible.
Policy PF-2.4: Potable Water Quality: Maintain the safety of the water supply.
         Program PF-2.4.1: Continue to maintain the water collection, treatment, and distribution
         system to ensure compliance with all State requirements for a public drinking water system.
         Program PF-2.4.2: Provide security and protection for the watersheds and water storage and
         treatment facilities with monitoring, appropriate notices, physical barriers, and protective
         devices as well as land use policies and controls.
         Program PF-2.4.3: Develop long range management and improvement programs for the
         watersheds. These plans should include management practices and methods of protecting
         the water source from degradation.
         Program PF-2.4.4: Develop and secure additional water storage capacity to meet potential
         buildout water use needs for the City of Fort Bragg.
3 – Public Facilities Element                          3-6                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy PF-2.5: Wastewater Capacity: Review wastewater capacity and expansion plans as needed
when regulations change and as the treatment and disposal facility nears capacity. In addition to
providing capacity for potential build-out under the City General Plan outside the coastal zone, any
expansion of capacity of wastewater facilities shall be designed to serve no more than the maximum
level of development in the coastal zone allowed by the certified LCP that is consistent with all other
policies of the LCP and Coastal General Plan. The City shall identify and implement wastewater
system improvements or changes in service area that are designed to ensure adequate service
capacity to accommodate existing, authorized, and probable future priority uses. Such uses include,
but are not limited to, industrial (including commercial fishing facilities), visitor serving, and
recreational priority uses in commercial, industrial, parks and recreation, and public facilities districts.
         Program PF-2.5.1: Develop a Wastewater System Master Plan.
         Program PF-2.5.2: Continue to improve the wastewater treatment and disposal facility to
         comply with changing State requirements.
         Program PF-2.5.3: Upgrade wastewater collector lines in areas where there is inadequate
         capacity or where lines are subject to substantial infiltration and inflow
         Program PF-2.5.4: Evaluate and periodically adjust, as appropriate, wastewater capital
         improvement, installation, and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing wastewater
         collection, treatment, and disposal service and increasing capacity.
Policy PF-2.6 Storm Drainage: Annually review storm drain system capacity and expansion plans.
         Program PF-2.6.1: Update the Storm Drain Master Plan to comply with NPDES requirements
         and to address current efficiencies in the system.
         Program PF-2.6.2: Implement the storm drain recommendations contained in the Capital
         Improvement Plan (CIP) and update the CIP as necessary.
         Program PF-2.6.3: Continue to implement, and update as needed, the Storm Drain Master
         Plan and the improvements itemized in the Capital Improvement Plan.
         Program PF-2.6.4: Periodically adjust, as appropriate, drainage capital improvement
         installation fees to reflect the actual cost of providing drainage service and increasing
         capacity.
     Policy PF-2.7          Public Buildings:  Ensure that public buildings in the City are adequate to
provide services for the community.
         Program PF-2.7.1: Identify and map key public buildings and areas.
         Program PF-2.7.2:         Provide for relocation or upgrading of essential public buildings as
         necessary.
3 – Public Facilities Element                            3-7                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     Policy PF-2.8          Capital Improvement Plan: Continually update the Capital Improvement Plan
to ensure that it identifies capital projects necessary to maintain adequate levels of performance as
well as funding sources for all phases of intended projects.
     Policy PF-2.9          Schools: Work with the Fort Bragg Unified School District to ensure that the
District has the means to provide a high quality education to City students.
         Program PF-2.9.1: Work with the School District to address anticipated deficits between the
         cost of constructing necessary new schools or renovating existing schools and the revenues
         generated by developer fees. Where a clear nexus can be shown between the impacts of a
         new development and the need for new school facilities, the City shall consider the need for
         additional project mitigation to be provided by project developers to the degree allowed by
         State law.
3 – Public Facilities Element                          3-8                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

4. CONSERVATION, OPEN SPACE, ENERGY, AND PARKS
ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Conservation, Open Space, Energy, and Parks Element of the Coastal General Plan
combines two State-mandated elements, Conservation and Open Space. It also includes
policies and programs addressing energy conservation, Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas,
water quality, public access, and recreation.
Open space is defined by Government Code Section 65561 as “any area of land or water which
is essentially unimproved and devoted to open space use and which is designated on local,
regional or a State open space plan for the preservation of natural resources, the managed
production of resources, outdoor recreation, or for public health and safety." Fort Bragg’s open
space includes lands which are publicly-owned and operated for active or passive recreational
use and land which is in private ownership but is either undeveloped or managed for the
protection and enhancement of natural resources. Open space in Fort Bragg provides for
coastal access, recreational uses, scenic and aesthetic resources, and habitat preservation.
The City wishes to create a sustainable environment by conserving natural resources, reducing
anthropogenic greenhouse gases, and encouraging its citizens to reduce their carbon footprint.
The City also wishes to preserve as much open space as feasible to provide habitat for native
species of plants and wildlife, reduce sprawl, and maintain the aesthetic benefits of undeveloped
land, and to provide its residents with a full range of recreational opportunities. The City seeks to
conserve natural resources and provide its residents with a full range of recreational
opportunities. The goals, policies, and programs of this Element address these aims by
establishing the framework for the protection and enhancement of natural resources, reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions, protection of water quality, and enhancement of open space, and for
the provision of coastal access and recreational opportunities for Fort Bragg residents and
visitors.
The Draft EIR for the General Plan contains a full description of the natural resources, parks,
trails, and recreational facilities existing within the Planning Area. The Draft EIR also contains a
full description of natural resources occurring within the Planning Area. See Map OS-1 for a
depiction of Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas, Map OS-2 for a depiction of Special
Review Areas, Map OS-3 for a listing of existing trails, and Map OS-4 for a depiction of existing
parks and recreational facilities.
B.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:          are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy OS-7.1,
Policy OS-7.2, Policy OS-8.1, Policy OS-17.4, Policy OS-17.5, Policy OS-17.7, Policy OS-18.2,
and Policy OS-18.3,
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4-1                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas and Conservation
Goal OS-1          Preserve and Enhance the City's Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas
Policy OS-1.1: Definition of ESHA. “Environmentally sensitive habitat area" means any area in
which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their
special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by
human activities and developments.
         Protection of environmentally sensitive habitat areas is one of the essential aspects of the
         Coastal Act. Fort Bragg has several environmentally sensitive habitat areas including,
         but not limited to, portions of coastal bluffs, biologically rich tide pools, nesting grounds,
         kelp beds, wetlands, riparian habitats, and rare, threatened, or endangered plants or
         plant communities.
         Areas that may contain environmentally sensitive habitat areas include, but are not
         limited to, areas indicated by Map 0S-1: Open Space and Environmentally Sensitive
         Habitat Areas. The environmentally sensitive habitat areas shown on Map 0S-1 are
         based on the best information available at the time mapping was done. The boundaries
         of environmentally sensitive habitat areas identified in Map 0S-1 are not intended to be
         definitive, but to identify the general location of sensitive environmental resources.
         Detailed locations and boundaries of these resources shall be obtained by the
         preparation of biological reports described in Policy OS-1.7.
Policy OS-1.2: Determination of ESHA. The determination of what constitutes ESHA shall not
be limited by what is mapped and not all parcels that are mapped necessarily contain ESHA.
Map 0S-1 serves to identify those general areas known to potentially contain ESHA and for
which a biological report is required consistent with Policy OS-1.7 to substantiate the presence or
absence of ESHA on any particular parcel. Any area not designated on LUP Map OS-1 that
meets the ESHA definition is ESHA and shall be accorded all the protection provided for ESHA
in the LCP. All habitat maps shall include a note that states that “the maps may be updated as
appropriate and may not include all areas that constitute ESHA.” The following areas shall be
considered ESHA:
             • Any habitat area that is rare or especially valuable because of their special nature
                  or role in an ecosystem and is easily degraded or disturbed by human activities or
                  developments.
             • Any habitat area of plant or animal species designated as rare, threatened, or
                  endangered under State or Federal law.
             • Any habitat area of species designated as Fully Protected or Species of Special
                  Concern under State law or regulations.
             • Any habitat area of plant species for which there is compelling evidence of rarity,
                  for example, those designated 1b (Rare or endangered in California and
                  elsewhere) or 2 (rare, threatened or endangered in California but more common
                  elsewhere) by the California Native Plant Society.
         Program OS-1.2.1: Update the mapping of environmentally sensitive habitat areas as
         new information becomes available.
Policy OS-1.3: Development in ESHA Wetlands: Diking, Filling, and Dredging of open coastal
waters, wetlands, estuaries, and lakes shall be permitted where there is no feasible less
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4-2                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                        HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Map OS-1
                                                                                                                                                                                               OPEN SPACE AND
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE                                                                                                                                             ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                HABITAT AREAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Environmentally Sensitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Habitat Areas
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
environmentally damaging alternative, and where feasible mitigation measures have been
provided to minimize adverse environmental effects, and shall be limited to the following uses:
       a. New or expanded port, energy, and coastal-dependent industrial facilities, including
           commercial fishing facilities.
       b. Maintaining existing or restoring previously dredged depths in existing navigational
           channels, turning basins, vessel berthing and mooring areas, and boat launching
           ramps.
       c. New or expanded boating facilities and the placement of structural pilings for public
           recreational piers that provide public access and recreational opportunities.
       d. Incidental public service purposes, including but not limited to burying cables and pipes
           or inspection of piers and maintenance of existing intake and outfall pipelines.
       e. Restoration purposes.
       f. Nature study, aquaculture, or similar resource dependent activities.
Policy OS-1.4: The more specific permissible use provisions for wetlands identified in Policy OS-
1.3 shall control over the more general permissible use provisions for other types of ESHA
identified in Policy OS-1.5 and Policy OS-1.6.
Policy OS-1.5: Development in Rivers and Streams with ESHA. Channelizations, dams, or
other substantial alterations of rivers and streams shall incorporate the best mitigation measures
feasible, and be limited to:
       a. Necessary water supply projects,
       b. Flood control projects where no other method for protecting existing structures in the
           floodplain is feasible and where such protection is necessary for public safety or to
           protect existing development, or
       c. Developments where the primary function is the improvement of fish and wildlife
           habitat.
Policy OS-1.6: Development within Other Types of ESHA shall protect ESHA against any
significant disruption of habitat values and shall be limited to the following uses:
       a. Resource Dependent Uses. Public nature trails within riparian ESHA are considered a
           resource dependent use provided that: (1) the length of the trail within the riparian
           corridor shall be minimized; (2) the trail crosses the stream at right angles to the
           maximum extent feasible; (3) the trail is kept as far up slope from the stream as
           possible; (4) trail development involves a minimum of slope disturbance and vegetation
           clearing; and (5) the trail is the minimum width necessary. Interpretive signage may be
           used along permissible nature trails accessible to the public to provide information
           about the value and need to protect sensitive resources.
       b. Restoration projects where the primary purpose is restoration of the habitat.
       c. Invasive plant eradication projects if they are designed to protect and enhance habitat
           values.
       d. Pipelines and utility lines installed underneath the ESHA using directional drilling
           techniques designed to avoid significant disruption of habitat values.
Policy OS-1.7 Development in areas adjacent to Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas shall
be sited and designed to prevent impacts which would significantly degrade such areas, and
shall be compatible with the continuance of such habitat areas.
Policy OS-1.8:        Development adjacent to ESHA shall provide buffer areas to serve as
transitional habitat and provide distance and physical barriers to human intrusion. The purpose
of this buffer area is to provide for a sufficient area to protect environmentally sensitive habitats
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4-3                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

from significant degradation resulting from future development. Buffers shall be of a sufficient
size to ensure the biological integrity and preservation of the ESHA they are designed to protect.
The width of the buffer area shall be a minimum of 100 feet, unless an applicant can
demonstrate, after consultation with the California Department of Fish and Game, other relevant
resource agencies, and the City, that 100 feet is not necessary to protect the resources of that
particular habitat area and the adjacent upland transitional habitat function of the buffer from
possible significant disruption caused by the proposed development. The buffer area shall be
measured from the outside edge of the environmentally sensitive habitat areas and in no event
shall be less than 30 feet in width.
Policy OS-1.9: Utilize the following criteria to establish buffer areas:
       a. Biological Significance of Adjacent Lands. Lands adjacent to a wetland, stream, or
           riparian habitat area vary in the degree to which they are functionally related to these
           habitat areas. Functional relationships may exist if species associated with such areas
           spend a significant portion of their life cycle on adjacent lands. The degree of
           significance depends upon the habitat requirements of the species in the habitat area
           (e.g., nesting, feeding, breeding, or resting).
           Where a significant functional relationship exists, the land supporting this relationship
           shall also be considered to be part of the ESHA, and the buffer zone shall be measured
           from the edge of these lands and be sufficiently wide to protect these functional
           relationships. Where no significant functional relationships exist, the buffer shall be
           measured from the edge of the ESHA that is adjacent to the proposed development.
       b. Sensitivity of Species to Disturbance. The width of the buffer zone shall be based, in
           part, on the distance necessary to ensure that the most sensitive species of plants and
           animals will not be disturbed significantly by the permitted development. Such a
           determination shall be based on the following after consultation with the Department of
           Fish and Game or others with similar expertise:
                  (i) Nesting, feeding, breeding, resting, or other habitat requirements of both
                  resident and migratory fish and wildlife species;
                  (ii) An assessment of the short-term and long-term adaptability of various species
                  to human disturbance;
                  (iii) An assessment of the impact and activity levels of the proposed development
                  on the resource.
       c. Erosion susceptibility. The width of the buffer shall be based, in part, on an
           assessment of the slope, soils, impervious surface coverage, runoff characteristics,
           erosion potential, and vegetative cover of the parcel proposed for development and
           adjacent lands. A sufficient buffer to allow for the interception of any additional material
           eroded as a result of the proposed development shall be provided.
       d. Use natural topography.             Where feasible, use hills and bluffs adjacent to
           Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas, to buffer these habitat areas. Where
           otherwise permitted, locate development on the sides of hills away from
           Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas. Include bluff faces in the buffer area.
       e. Use existing man-made features. Where feasible, use man-made features such as
           roads and dikes to buffer environmentally sensitive habitat areas.
       f. Lot Configuration and Location of Existing Development. Where an existing subdivision
           or other development is largely built-out and the buildings are a uniform distance from a
           habitat area, at least that same distance shall be required as a buffer zone for any new
           development permitted. However, if that distance is less than one hundred (100) feet,
           additional mitigation measures (e.g., planting of native vegetation) shall be provided to
           ensure additional protection.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4-4                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

       g. Type and Scale of Development Proposed. The type and scale of the proposed
           development will, to a large degree, determine the size of the buffer zone necessary to
           protect the ESHA. Such evaluations shall be made on a case-by-case basis depending
           upon the resources involved, the degree to which adjacent lands are already
           developed, and the type of development already existing in the area.
       Required buffer areas shall be measured from the following points as applicable:
          The outer edge of the canopy of riparian vegetation for riparian ESHA, or from the top
             of stream bank where no riparian vegetation exists.
          The upland edge of a wetland for a wetland ESHA.
          The outer edge of the plants that comprise the rare plant community for rare plant
             community ESHA.
Policy OS-1.10: Permitted Uses within ESHA Buffers. Development within an Environmentally
Sensitive Habitat Area buffer shall be limited to the following uses:
       a. Wetland Buffer.
             i. Uses allowed within the adjacent Wetland ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-1.3.
             ii. Nature trails and interpretive signage designed to provide information about the
                  value and protection of the resources
             iii. Invasive plant eradication projects if they are designed to protect and enhance
                  habitat values.
       b. Riparian Buffer.
             i. Uses allowed within the adjacent River and Stream ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-
                  1.5.
             ii. Uses allowed within the adjacent ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-1.6.
             iii. Buried pipelines and utility lines.
             iv. Bridges.
             v. Drainage and flood control facilities.
       c. Other types of ESHA Buffer.
             i. Uses allowed within the adjacent ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-1.6.
             ii. Buried pipelines and utility lines.
             iii. Bridges.
             iv. Drainage and flood control facilities.
Policy OS-1-11: Land Divisions and ESHA. Prohibit new land divisions creating new parcels
located entirely within an environmentally sensitive habitat area or buffer area unless the parcel
to be created is restricted at the time of its creation solely for open space, public recreation, or
conservation.
Policy OS-1.12: Drainage and Erosion Control Plan. Permissible development on all properties
containing environmentally sensitive habitat, including but not limited to those areas identified as
ESHA Habitat Areas on Map OS-1, shall prepare a drainage and erosion control plan for
approval by the City. The plan shall include measures to minimize erosion during project
construction, and to minimize erosive runoff from the site after the project is completed. Any
changes in runoff volume, velocity, or duration that may affect sensitive plant and animal
populations, habitats, or buffer areas for those populations or habitats, shall be reviewed by a
qualified biologist to ensure that there will not be adverse hydrologic or, erosion, or
sedimentation impacts on sensitive species or habitats. Mitigation measures shall be identified
and adopted to minimize potential adverse runoff impacts. All projects resulting in new runoff to
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4-5                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

any streams in the City or to the ocean shall be designed to minimize the transport of pollutants
from roads, parking lots, and other impermeable surfaces of the project.
Policy OS-1.13: Landscaping Adjacent to ESHA. All development located within or adjacent to
environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall be conditioned to:
         a) Require all proposed plantings be obtained from local genetic stocks within
             Mendocino County. If documentation is provided to the review authority that
             demonstrates that native vegetation from local genetic stock is not available, native
             vegetation obtained from genetic stock outside the local area, but from within the
             adjacent region of the floristic province, may be used; and if local genetic stocks
             within the floristic province are unavailable, the Director may authorize use of a
             commercial native mix, provided it is clear of invasive seed. Director may also
             authorize use of a seed mix that is selected for rapid senescence and replacement
             with native stock; and
         b) Require an invasive plant monitoring and removal program; and
         c) Prohibit the planting of any plant species on the property that is (a) listed as
             problematic and/or invasive by the California Native Plant Society, the California
             Invasive Plant Council, and/or by the State of California, or (b) listed as a ‘noxious
             weed’ by the State of California or the U.S. Federal Government.
Policy OS-1.14: Vegetation Removal in ESHA. Prohibit vegetation removal in Environmentally
Sensitive Habitat Areas and buffer areas except for:
         a) Vegetation removal authorized through coastal development permit approval to
             accommodate permissible development,
         b) Removal of trees for disease control,
         c) Vegetation removal for public safety purposes to abate a nuisance consistent with
             Coastal Act Section 30005, or
         d) Removal of firewood for the personal use of the property owner at his or her
             residence to the extent that such removal does not constitute development pursuant
             to Coastal Act Section 30106.
Such activities shall be subject to restrictions to protect sensitive habitat values.
Policy OS-1.15: Implement the following measures when a project involves dredging, filling or
diking of open coastal waters, wetlands, estuaries, or lakes:
         a)       Dredging and spoils disposal shall be planned and carried out to avoid significant
                  disruption to marine and wildlife habitats and to water circulation to the maximum
                  extent feasible. Avoiding significant disruption means, in part, that the functional
                  capacity of the wetland is maintained to the maximum extent feasible.
         b)       Limitations may be imposed, including but not limited to, limitations on the timing
                  of the operation, the type of operation, the quantity of dredged material removed,
                  and the location of the spoils site.
         c)       Dredge spoils suitable for beach replenishment shall, where feasible, be
                  transported to appropriate beaches or into suitable longshore current systems.
         d)       Other mitigation measures may include opening areas to tidal action, removing
                  dikes, improving tidal flushing, or other restoration measures.
         Program OS-1.15.1: Consult with the Department of Fish and Game, California Coastal
         Commission, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as applicable, on the review of
         dredging, filling and diking plans in, or adjacent to wetlands or estuaries to establish
         mitigating measures.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4-6                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-1.16: Biological Report Required.
         a)       Permit applications for development within or adjacent to Environmentally
                  Sensitive Habitat Areas including areas identified in Map OS-1 or other sites
                  identified by City staff which have the possibility of containing environmentally
                  sensitive habitat shall include a biological report prepared by a qualified biologist
                  which identifies the resources and provides recommended measures to ensure
                  that the requirements of the Coastal Act and the City of Fort Bragg’s Local
                  Coastal Program are fully met. The required content of the biological report is
                  specified in the Coastal Land Use and Development Code.
         b)       Submittal of Biological Reports. These biological reports shall be reviewed by the
                  City and approving agencies. The biological reports described above shall be
                  submitted prior to filing as complete a coastal development permit application and
                  may also be submitted as a part of any environmental documentation required
                  pursuant to CEQA. The selection of the professional preparing the report shall be
                  made or approved by the City or the agency approving the permit and paid for by
                  the applicant.
         c)       Biological reports shall contain mitigating measures meeting the following
                  minimum standards:
                        i. They are specific, implementable, and, wherever feasible, quantifiable.
                        ii. They result in the maximum feasible protection, habitat restoration and
                             enhancement of sensitive environmental resources. Habitat restoration
                             and enhancement shall be required wherever feasible, in addition to the
                             applicable baseline standard of either avoiding or minimizing significant
                             habitat disruption.
                        iii. They are incorporated into a Mitigation Monitoring Program; and
                        iv. They include substantial information and analysis to support a finding
                             that there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative.
Goal OS-2          Preserve and enhance the City's other natural resources.
Policy OS-2.1 Riparian Habitat: Prevent development from destroying riparian habitat to the
maximum feasible extent. Preserve, enhance, and restore existing riparian habitat in new
development unless the preservation will prevent the establishment of all permitted uses on the
property.
         Program OS-2.1.1: To the maximum extent feasible, preserve, protect, and restore
         streams and creeks to their natural state.
         Program OS-2.1.2: Work with organizations and private property owners to enhance the
         City’s watercourses for habitat preservation and recreation.
         Program OS-2.1.3: Develop additional guidelines for the maintenance of watercourses to
         further assure that native vegetation is not unnecessarily removed and that maintenance
         minimizes disruption of wildlife breeding activities and wildlife movement. Incorporate
         these guidelines, where appropriate, into the City's maintenance procedures.
         Program OS-2.1.4: Seek Federal and State funding for the repair of streambank erosion,
         planting of riparian vegetation to stabilize creek banks, and removal of debris obstructing
         waterflow.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element      4-7                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-2.2: Protect Aquifers: Protect groundwater aquifers.
         Program OS-2.2.1: Continue to require the preparation of a hydrologic study prior to
         approving new wells for domestic use in the City.
         Program OS-2.2.2: Prior to consideration of any new development on the Todd Point
         aquifer, a project-specific hydrologic design analysis shall be prepared by the project
         applicant to recommend specific mitigation measures to minimize runoff from the site in
         order to retain existing levels of groundwater recharge. (Examples of such measures
         include establishment of retention basins, establishment of percolation chambers, use of
         permeable paving materials, etc.)
                  If the design analysis concludes that the project will result in a net decrease in
                  groundwater recharge from the project site, then a supplemental hydrologic
                  analysis shall be prepared by the applicant which evaluates cumulative hydrologic
                  impacts. The study shall establish a baseline of aquifer supply to existing
                  residential wells on Todd Point and evaluate cumulative impacts to aquifer
                  recharge from all projected development on Todd Point.
                  If the supplemental hydrologic analysis shows that the cumulative development
                  would adversely impact existing Todd Point wells, then the study shall establish
                  the nexus for new development, both in the City and in the County, to pay its pro
                  rata share of the costs of extending City water service to the affected existing
                  residences.
                  Prior to new development, the City will establish a program that identifies how
                  fees will be collected to extend City water, what existing residences will be
                  served, and when the water service would be extended.
                  The cost of preparing the cumulative hydrologic study will be borne by the first
                  application received which triggers this requirement, and all future applicants for
                  new development on Todd Point will be required to reimburse the original
                  applicant their fair share of the hydrologic study.
Goal OS-3          Protect and preserve soil as a natural resource.
Policy OS-3.1 Soil Erosion: Minimize soil erosion to prevent loss of productive soils, prevent
landslides, and maintain infiltration capacity and soil structure.
Goal OS-4          Protect and preserve Cultural Resources.
 Policy OS-4.1. Preserve Archaeological Resources. New development shall be located and/or
designed to avoid archaeological and paleontological resources where feasible, and where new
development would adversely affect archaeological or paleontological resources, reasonable
mitigation measures shall be required.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element     4-8                               July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Policy OS-4.2: Archaeological Resources Report Required.
         A) Development located within areas of known or potential archaeological or
             paleontological resources included in (i) – (iv) shall be required to submit a report
             consistent with the requirements of section B below prior to approval of a building,
             grading, or coastal development permit for the development.
             i. Former Georgia Pacific timber mill. The entire property which comprises the
                  former Georgia-Pacific timber mill site;
             ii. Noyo Bay. The area located along the south side of Noyo Bay (e.g., Todd
                  Point);
             iii. Noyo River. All of the areas located adjacent to the north side of the Noyo
                  River;
             iv. North Fort Bragg Coast. All of the areas located west of Highway 1 and north of
                  Pudding Creek;
             v. Special Review Areas. All Special Review Areas identified on Map OS-2 in the
                  Coastal General Plan; and
             vi. Other areas identified by the Director.          Other areas identified by the
                  environmental review process (Chapter 18.72), or brought to the attention of the
                  City through special studies performed after the enactment of this Section, as
                  having the potential for containing archaeological or paleontological resources.
         B) Report required. A project specific report shall be prepared by a qualified
             archaeologist and shall be submitted prior to filing as complete a coastal
             development permit application. The permit review authority may waive the
             requirement for a project specific report if the Director determines that an existing
             report satisfies the requirements of this section. The report shall be prepared
             consistent with the requirements of Section 18.50.030 of the Coastal Land Use &
             Development Code.
Policy OS-4.3: Halt all work if archaeological resources are uncovered during construction.
Require an evaluation by a qualified archaeologist before recommencing construction.
Policy OS-4.4: Locate and/or design new development to avoid archaeological resources where
feasible.
Policy OS-4.5: Mitigation shall be designed in compliance with the guidelines of the State Office
of Historic Preservation and the State Native American Heritage Commission.
Goal OS-5          Preserve areas with other biotic resources.
Policy OS-5.1 Native Species: Preserve native plant and animal species and their habitat.
Policy OS-5.2: To the maximum extent feasible and balanced with permitted use, require that
site planning, construction, and maintenance of development preserve existing healthy trees and
native vegetation on the site.
Policy OS-5.3: Require site planning and construction to maintain adequate open space to
permit effective wildlife corridors for animal movement between open spaces.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4-9                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-5.4: Condition development projects, requiring discretionary approval to prohibit the
planting of any species of broom, pampas grass, gorse, or other species of invasive non-native
plants deemed undesirable by the City.
         Program OS-5.4.1: Request that Caltrans, PG&E, and the County of Mendocino remove
         pampas grass and broom from their rights-of-way. The City shall strive to remove these
         plants from City-owned rights-of-way.
Goal OS-6         Reduce dependence on non-renewable energy and materials.
Policy OS-6.1 Energy Conservation Measures in Buildings: Continue to require structures to
comply with State energy conservation standards and encourage owners of existing dwellings to
retrofit with energy-saving features.
         Program OS-6.1.1: Require retrofitting of energy-saving features in existing dwellings as
         a part of the City's Housing Rehabilitation Program by providing information, technical
         assistance, and other incentives.
         Program OS-6.1.2: Review and revise the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances to
         incorporate standards for energy-efficient development, including site orientation, building
         design, use of materials, landscaping, solar access, and solar space and water heating.
Policy OS-6.2 Development Review Process: Make energy conservation an important criterion
in the development review process.
         Program OS-6.2.1: Adopt a solar access ordinance which would require development
         applications to be reviewed for potential energy conservation measures and designs
         including site orientation, building design and use of materials, landscaping, and solar
         access.
         Program OS-6.2.2: Include a section on energy-efficient features in the Design Review
         Guidelines.
         Program OS-6.2.3: Obtain PG&E assistance in reviewing commercial buildings and
         major subdivisions during the design and approval process to incorporate energy-efficient
         design suggestions into the plans.
Policy OS-6.3 Alternative Energy: Encourage the development and use of alternative sources of
energy such as wind, solar, and waves to meet Fort Bragg's energy needs.
         Program OS-6.3.1: Revise the Coastal LUDC to allow alternative energy facilities for on-
         site use as a conditional use in all zones within the City. Solar energy facilities for on-site
         use shall be allowed as a permitted use in all zoning districts.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 10                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal OS-7         Improve air quality.
      Policy OS-7.1      Participate in Regional Planning to Improve Air Quality: Continue to
cooperate with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District (MCAQMD) in
implementing the Regional Clean Air Plan.
      Policy OS-7.2      Air Quality Standards: Seek to comply with State and Federal standards
for air quality.
         Program OS-7.2.1: Adopt a plan and timelines to reduce greenhouse gas emissions for
         City operations through the establishment and implementation of a Greenhouse Gas
         Reduction Action Plan.
         Program OS-7.2.2: Consider adopting a plan and timeline to eliminate emissions from the
         City’s transportation sector by replacing internal combustion vehicles with zero emission
         vehicles (ZEV) to maintain compliance with AB 32, the California Global Warming
         Solutions Act passed in September 2006.
         Program OS-7.2.3: Review new project proposals for consistency with MCAQMD
         regulations and guidelines.
         Program OS-7.2.4: Revise the Coastal LUDC to require that all new woodburning stoves
         and heaters meet current EPA standards for woodburning devices. Do not allow
         woodburning devices in commercial or industrial development (except for use in
         operating the existing or an upgraded powerhouse on the Georgia-Pacific property solely
         for processing forest products).
         Program OS-7.2.5: Work with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District to
         ensure that all new industrial projects include Best Available Control Technologies
         (BACTs) to control emissions of air pollutants to the maximum extent permitted by law.
         Program OS-7.2.6: Require that proposed new asphalt plants undergo an air quality
         analysis that includes analysis of emissions, dispersion modeling, risk analysis, and
         mitigation required to reduce pollution and risk.
         Program OS-7.2.7: Include thorough dust control provisions in the Grading Ordinance.
         Program OS-7.2.8: The City will prohibit unpaved driveways of more than 50 feet and
         unpaved roads in all new development.
Goal OS-8         Reduce, recycle, and reuse solid waste generated in the City.
      Policy OS-8.1      Recycling and Reuse of Solid Waste: Comply with State requirements to
reduce the volume of solid waste through recycling and reduction of solid waste.
         Program OS-8.1.1: Enact ordinances requiring recycling, reuse, and waste reduction,
         including recycling of green waste and construction debris.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 11                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program OS-8.1.2: Require on-site areas for recycling in commercial, office, multi-family
         residential developments, and all municipal facilities.
         Program OS-8.1.3: Continue to participate in the County’s Integrated Waste
         Management Plan operated by the Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority.
C.       Water Quality
Goal OS-9         Improve water quality.
Policy OS-9.1: Minimize Introduction of Pollutants. Development shall be designed and
managed to minimize the introduction of pollutants into coastal waters (including the ocean,
estuaries, wetlands, rivers, streams, and lakes) to the extent feasible.
Policy OS-9.2: Minimize Increases in Stormwater Runoff. Development shall be designed and
managed to minimize post-project increases in stormwater runoff volume and peak runoff rate, to
the extent feasible, to avoid adverse impacts to coastal waters.
Policy OS-9.3: Maintain Biological Productivity and Quality of Coastal Waters. Development
shall be designed and managed to maintain, and restore where feasible, the biological
productivity and quality of coastal waters, consistent with sections 30230, 30231, and other
relevant sections of the California Coastal Act. The Coastal Act sections set forth below are
incorporated herein as policies of the Land Use Plan:
Policy OS-9.4: Maintain, Enhance, and Restore Marine Resources. Marine resources shall be
maintained, enhanced, and, where feasible, restored. Special protection shall be given to areas
and species of special biological or economic significance. Uses of the marine environment shall
be carried out in a manner that will sustain the biological productivity of coastal waters and that
will maintain healthy populations of all species of marine organisms adequate for long-term
commercial, recreational, scientific, and educational purposes.
Policy OS-9.5. Maintain and Restore Biological Productivity and Water Quality. The biological
productivity and the quality of coastal waters, streams, wetlands, estuaries, and lakes
appropriate to maintain optimum populations of marine organisms and for the protection of
human health shall be maintained and, where feasible, restored through, among other means,
minimizing adverse effects of waste water discharges and entrainment, controlling runoff,
preventing depletion of ground water supplies and substantial interference with surface water
flow, encouraging waste water reclamation, maintaining natural vegetation buffer areas that
protect riparian habitats, and minimizing alteration of natural streams.
Goal OS-10 Improve water quality through the Selection and Design of Appropriate Best
Management Practices (BMPs)
Policy OS-10.1: Construction-phase Stormwater Runoff Plan. All development that requires a
grading permit shall submit a construction-phase erosion, sedimentation, and polluted runoff
control plan. This plan shall evaluate potential construction-phase impacts to water quality and
coastal waters, and shall specify temporary Best Management Practices (BMPs) that will be
implemented to minimize erosion and sedimentation during construction, and prevent
contamination of runoff by construction chemicals and materials.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element 4 - 12                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Map OS-2
                                                        HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SPECIAL REVIEW AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RUNOFF SENSITIVE AREAS
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Existing Coastal Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Special Review Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Runoff Sensitive Area
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
Policy OS-10.2: Post-Construction Stormwater Runoff Plan. All development that has the
potential to adversely affect water quality shall submit a post-construction polluted runoff control
plan (“Runoff Mitigation Plan”). This plan shall specify long-term Site Design, Source Control,
and, if necessary, Treatment Control BMPs that will be implemented to minimize stormwater
pollution and erosive runoff after construction, and shall include the monitoring and maintenance
plans for these BMPs.
Policy OS-10.3: Emphasize Site Design and Source Control BMPs. Long-term post-construction
Best Management Practices (BMPs) that protect water quality and control runoff flow shall be
incorporated in the project design of development that has the potential to adversely impact
water quality in the following order of emphasis:
         A) Site Design BMPs: Any project design feature that reduces the creation or severity of
             potential pollutant sources, or reduces the alteration of the project site’s natural flow
             regime. Examples include minimizing impervious surfaces, and minimizing grading.
         B) Source Control BMPs: Any schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
             maintenance procedures, managerial practices, or operational practices that aim to
             prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source
             of pollution. Examples include covering outdoor storage areas, use of efficient
             irrigation, and minimizing the use of landscaping chemicals.
         C) Treatment Control BMPs: Any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by
             simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media
             adsorption, or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. Examples include
             vegetated swales, and storm drain inserts.
             Site Design BMPs may reduce a development’s need for Source and/or Treatment
             Control BMPs, and Source Control BMPs may reduce the need for Treatment Control
             BMPs. Therefore, all development that has the potential to adversely affect water
             quality shall incorporate effective post-construction Site Design and Source Control
             BMPs, where applicable and feasible, to minimize adverse impacts to water quality
             and coastal waters resulting from the development. Site Design and Source Control
             BMPs may include, but are not limited to, those outlined in the City’s Storm Water
             Management program.
Policy OS-10.4: Incorporate Treatment Control BMPs if Necessary. If the combination of Site
Design and Source Control BMPs is not sufficient to protect water quality and coastal waters
consistent with Policy OS-9.3, as determined by the review authority, development shall also
incorporate post-construction Treatment Control BMPs. Projects of Special Water Quality
Concern (see Policy OS-12.1) are presumed to require Treatment Control BMPs to meet the
requirements of OS-9.3. Treatment Control BMPs may include, but are not limited to, those
outlined in the City’s Storm Water Management program, including biofilters (e.g., vegetated
swales or grass filter strips), bioretention, infiltration trenches or basins, retention ponds or
constructed wetlands, detention basins, filtration systems, storm drain inserts, wet vaults, or
hydrodynamic separator systems.
Policy OS-10.5: Guidance on BMP Selection and Design. Where BMPs, are required, BMPs
shall be selected that have been shown to be effective in reducing the pollutants typically
generated by the proposed land use. The strategy for selection of appropriate BMPS to protect
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 13                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

water quality and coastal waters shall be guided by Chapter 18.64.070, Tables 1-3, of the Land
Use & Development Code, or equivalent tables which list pollutants of concern for each type of
development or land use.
          The design of BMPs shall be guided by the California Stormwater Quality Association
          (CASQA) Stormwater BMP Handbooks dated January 2003 (or the current edition), or an
          equivalent BMP manual that describes the type, location, size, implementation, and
          maintenance of BMPs suitable to address the pollutants generated by the development.
          Caltrans' 2007 "Storm Water Quality Handbook: Project Planning and Design Guide” (or
          the current edition) may also be used to guide design of construction-phase BMPs.
Policy OS-10.6: Water Quality Checklist. A water quality checklist shall be developed and used
in the permit review process to evaluate a proposed development’s potential impacts to water
quality and coastal waters, and proposed mitigation measures.
Goal OS-11        Improve water quality through Site Design and Source Control BMPs
Development shall be sited and designed to protect water quality and minimize impacts to
coastal waters by incorporating BMPs designed to ensure the following:
Policy OS-11.1: Use Integrated Management Practices in Site Design. The city shall require,
where appropriate and feasible, the use of small-scale integrated management practices (e.g.,
Low Impact Development techniques) designed to maintain the site’s natural hydrology by
minimizing impervious surfaces and infiltrating stormwater close to its source (e.g., vegetated
swales, permeable pavements, and infiltration of rooftop runoff).
Policy OS-11.2: Preserve Functions of Natural Drainage Systems. Development shall be sited
and designed to preserve the infiltration, purification, detention, and retention functions of natural
drainage systems that exist on the site, where appropriate and feasible. Drainage shall be
conveyed from the developed area of the site in a non-erosive manner.
Policy OS-11.3: Minimize Impervious Surfaces. Development shall minimize the creation of
impervious surfaces (including pavement, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking areas, streets,
and roof-tops), especially directly connected impervious areas, where feasible. Redevelopment
shall reduce the impervious surface site coverage, where feasible. Directly connected
impervious areas include areas covered by a building, impermeable pavement, and/or other
impervious surfaces, which drain directly into the storm drain system without first flowing across
permeable land areas (e.g., lawns).
Policy OS-11.4: Infiltrate Stormwater Runoff. Development shall maximize on-site infiltration of
stormwater runoff, where appropriate and feasible, to preserve natural hydrologic conditions,
recharge groundwater, attenuate runoff flow, and minimize transport of pollutants. Alternative
management practices shall be substituted where the review authority has determined that
infiltration BMPs may result in adverse impacts, including but not limited to where saturated soils
may lead to geologic instability, where infiltration may contribute to flooding, or where regulations
to protect groundwater may be violated.
Policy OS-11.5: Divert Stormwater Runoff into Permeable Areas. Development that creates new
impervious surfaces shall divert stormwater runoff flowing from these surfaces into permeable
areas, where appropriate and feasible, to enhance on-site stormwater infiltration capacity.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 14                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-11.6: Use Permeable Pavement Materials. To enhance stormwater infiltration
capacity, development shall use permeable pavement materials and techniques (e.g., paving
blocks, porous asphalt, permeable concrete, and reinforced grass or gravel), where appropriate
and feasible. Permeable pavements shall be designed so that stormwater infiltrates into the
underlying soil, to enhance groundwater recharge and provide filtration of pollutants. All
permeable pavement that is not effective in infiltrating as designed will be replaced with effective
stormwater detention and infiltration methods.
Policy OS-11.7: Avoid Steep Slopes with Highly Erodible Soil. Where feasible, development
shall be sited and designed to avoid areas on steep slopes (i.e., 12% or greater) with highly
erodible soil. Developments on these hillside areas are considered Developments of Special
Water Quality Concern, and are subject to additional requirements (see Policies OS-12.1 and
OS-12.2).
Policy OS-11.8: Landscape with Native Plant Species. The City shall encourage development to
use drought-resistant native plant species for landscaping, to reduce the need for irrigation and
landscaping chemicals (e.g., pesticides and fertilizers).
Policy OS-11.9: Provide Storm Drain Inlet Markers. Markers or stenciling shall be required for all
storm drain inlets constructed or modified by development, to discourage dumping and other
illicit discharges into the storm drain system.
Policy OS-11.10: Continue Operation and Maintenance of Post-Construction BMPs. Permitees
shall be required to continue the operation, inspection, and maintenance of all post-construction
BMPs as necessary to ensure their effective operation for the life of the development.
Goal OS-12 Improve water quality through additional requirements for Developments of
Special Water Quality Concern
Policy OS-12.1: Developments of Special Water Quality Concern.                   The categories of
development listed below have the potential for greater adverse coastal water quality impacts,
due to the development size, type of land use, impervious site coverage, or proximity to coastal
waters. A development in one or more of the following categories shall be considered a
“Development of Special Water Quality Concern,” and shall be subject to additional requirements
set forth in Policy OS-12.2 below to protect coastal water quality. Developments of Special Water
Quality Concern include the following:
      a) Housing developments of ten or more dwelling units.
      b) Hillside developments on slopes greater than 12 percent, located in areas with highly
           erodible soil.
      c) Developments that result in the creation, addition, or replacement of 10,000 square feet
           or more of impervious surface area.
      d) Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area, potentially
           exposed to stormwater runoff.
      e) Heavy industrial developments.
      f) Vehicle service facilities (including retail gasoline outlets, service stations, commercial
           car washes, and vehicle repair facilities).
      g) Commercial or industrial outdoor storage areas of 5,000 square feet or more, or as
           determined by the review authority based on the use of the storage area, where used for
           storage of materials that may contribute pollutants to the storm drain system or
           waterbodies.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 15                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     h) All developments within 125 feet of the ocean or a coastal waterbody (including
          estuaries, wetlands, rivers, streams, and lakes), or that discharge directly to the ocean or
          a waterbody, if such development results in the creation, addition, or replacement of
          2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface area.
              a. “Discharge directly to” the ocean or a waterbody means outflow from a drainage
                   conveyance system that is composed entirely of flows from the subject
                   development or redevelopment site, and not commingled with flows from adjacent
                   lands.
     i) Any other development determined by the review authority to be a Development of
          Special Water Quality Concern.
Policy OS-12.2: Additional Requirements for Developments of Special Water Quality Concern.
All Developments of Special Water Quality Concern (as identified in Policy OS-12.1, above) shall
be subject to the following four additional requirements to protect coastal water quality:
      1) Water Quality Management Plan. The applicant for a Development of Special Water
           Quality Concern shall be required to submit for approval a Water Quality Management
           Plan (WQMP), prepared by a qualified licensed professional, which supplements the
           Runoff Mitigation Plan required for all development. The WQMP shall include hydrologic
           calculations per City standards that estimate increases in pollutant loads and runoff
           flows resulting from the proposed development, and specify the BMPs that will be
           implemented to minimize post-construction water quality impacts.
      2) Selection of Structural Treatment Control BMPs. As set forth in Policy OS-10.4, if the
           review authority determines that the combination of Site Design and Source Control
           BMPs is not sufficient to protect water quality and coastal waters as required by Policy
           OS-9.3, structural Treatment Control BMPs shall also be required. The WQMP for a
           Development of Special Water Quality Concern shall describe the selection of Treatment
           Controls BMPs, and applicants shall first consider the BMP, or combination of BMPs,
           that is most effective at removing the pollutant(s) of concern, or provide a justification if
           that BMP is determined to be infeasible.
      3) 85th Percentile Design Standard for Treatment Control BMPs. For post-construction
           treatment of runoff in Developments of Special Water Quality Concern, Treatment
           Control BMPs (or suites of BMPs) shall be sized and designed to treat, infiltrate, or filter
           the amount of stormwater runoff produced by all storms up to and including the 85th
           percentile, 24-hour storm event for volume-based BMPs, and/or the 85th percentile, 1-
           hour storm event (with an appropriate safety factor of 2 or greater) for flow-based BMPs.
       4) Goal for Runoff Reduction. In Developments of Special Water Quality Concern, the
           post-development peak stormwater runoff discharge rate shall not exceed the estimated
           pre-development rate for developments where an increased discharge rate will result in
           increased potential for downstream erosion or other adverse habitat impacts.
Goal OS-13         Improve water quality through Municipal Activities to Protect Water Quality
Policy OS-13.1: Municipal Activities to Protect and Restore Water Quality. The City shall promote
both the protection and restoration of water quality and coastal waters. Water quality
degradation can result from a variety of factors, including but not limited to the introduction of
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 16                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

pollutants, increases in runoff volume and rate, generation of non-stormwater runoff, and
alteration of physical, chemical, or biological features of the landscape.
         Program OS-13.1.1: Water Quality Public Education and Outreach. The City shall
         continue to encourage public outreach and education about the water quality impacts of
         development. The City shall continue to coordinate with other agencies in the watershed
         area, as feasible, to develop public education programs on urban runoff issues and the
         appropriate roles of individuals, businesses, and government in the implementation of
         BMPs for pollution prevention.
         Program OS-13.1.2: BMPS for Municipal Maintenance Activities. The City shall ensure
         that municipal maintenance activities and other public projects not requiring a Coastal
         Development Permit also integrate appropriate BMPs to protect water quality and coastal
         waters.
Goal OS-14        Improve water quality through Construction-Phase Pollution Control
Policy OS-14.1: Minimize Polluted Runoff and Pollution from Construction. All development shall
minimize erosion, sedimentation, and the discharge of other polluted runoff (e.g., chemicals,
vehicle fluids, concrete truck wash-out, and litter) from construction activities, to the extent
feasible.
Policy OS-14.2: Minimize Land Disturbance During Construction. Land disturbance activities
during construction (e.g., clearing, grading, and cut-and-fill) shall be minimized, to the extent
feasible, to avoid increased erosion and sedimentation. Soil compaction due to construction
activities shall be minimized, to the extent feasible, to retain the natural stormwater infiltration
capacity of the soil.
Policy OS-14.3: Minimize Disturbance of Natural Vegetation. Construction shall minimize the
disturbance of natural vegetation (including significant trees, native vegetation, and root
structures), which are important for preventing erosion and sedimentation.
Policy OS-14.4: Stabilize Soil Promptly. Development shall implement soil stabilization BMPs
(including, but not limited to, re-vegetation) on graded or disturbed areas as soon as feasible.
Policy OS-14.5: Grading During Rainy Season. Grading is prohibited during the rainy season
(from November 1 to March 30), except in response to emergencies, unless the review authority
determines that soil conditions at the project site are suitable, and adequate erosion and
sedimentation control measures will be in place during all grading operations.
D.       Open Space
There are three categories of open space in the Fort Bragg Planning Area: 1) publicly-owned
land, such as Ocean Front Park, Pomo Bluffs Park, and MacKerricher State Park, 2) dedicated
land, which is privately-owned and maintained and has a recorded open space or conservation
easement, and 3) land which has a trail easement permitting public use.
Goal OS-15         Conserve and enhance a variety of open space features including creeks,
                   wildlife habitats, scenic view corridors, and other amenities.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 17                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-15.1: Open Space: Plan for and condition new development to implement the City’s
priorities for open space. Refer to the Community Design Element for specific policies and
programs dealing with scenic view corridors.
         Program OS-15.1.1: Use conservation easements wherever possible to protect
         environmentally sensitive open space areas.
         Program OS-15.1.2: Continue to work with local and regional agencies and interest
         groups, in conjunction with the Mendocino Coast Recreation and Park District Master
         Plan, to develop an open space preservation strategy.
         Program OS-15.1.3: Develop additional standards in the Coastal LUDC for further public
         access to open space areas.
Policy OS-15.2 Protect and Restore Open Space: During the development review process,
protect and restore open space areas such as wildlife habitats, view corridors, coastal areas,
and watercourses as open and natural.
         Program OS-15.2.1: Require that projects on parcels 5 acres or larger, requesting a
         rezoning to a higher density, include dedications for open space or parkland as needed.
         Program OS-15.2.2: Maintain an inventory of vacant parcels that could potentially be
         purchased and developed as public open space.
Policy OS-15.3 Trails in Open Space: Wherever feasible, plan and construct trails through the
greenbelts and open space that connect to the City’s trail system and that of Mendocino Coast
Recreation Park District (MCRPD) as defined in its Master Plan.
E.       Public Access and Recreation
Public access to the shoreline is guaranteed by the California Constitution and is further defined
by standards established by the Coastal Act to recognize the shoreline as a public resource
which is available for viewing, recreation, and scientific research at the water's edge and along
tidal rivers.
As development in the Fort Bragg area and elsewhere increases, there will be an increased need
for public access. Access to the coastline is dependent on the right of the public to cross public
and private land. Access across private land generally is obtained through purchase of an
easement, or obtained as a condition of development approval.
Goal OS-16        Maximize public access to and along the coast consistent with sound
                  resources and conservation principles and constitutionally protected rights
                  of private property owners.
Policy OS-16.1 Coastal Access: Maximum access and recreational opportunities shall be
provided consistent with public safety needs and the need to protect public rights, rights of
private property owners, and natural resource areas from overuse. Provide public open space
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element 4 - 18                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

and shoreline access in the Coastal Zone. Acquisitions for coastal access shall not preclude the
potential development of necessary infrastructure to support coastal-dependent uses.
         Program OS-16.1.1: Provide shoreline access in the Coastal Zone along the vertical and
         lateral access routes as described in Table OS-2 and Map OS-3.
         Program OS-16.1.2: Acquire additional public access to the shoreline by:
         a)       accepting Offers To Dedicate (OTDs) that will increase opportunities for public
                  access and recreation;
         b)       actively seeking public agency, community non-profit, or other private offers of
                  dedication and offers to assume the liability and maintenance responsibilities;
                  and
         c)       requiring public access as a condition of development consistent with the Coastal
                  Act, the Coastal Commission's Statewide Interpretive Guidelines, and the findings
                  required to support an Offer to Dedicate (OTD); and
         d)       creating a partnership with the State Coastal Conservancy and other funding
                  agencies to purchase and develop public access to and along the coast, with the
                  City assuming responsibility for management and maintenance of the public open
                  space.
         Program OS-16.1.3: Work with the California Coastal Conservancy to assure that the
         proposed access improvements and public facilities identified in the Noyo Harbor Plan
         are provided on the banks of the Noyo River.
         Program OS-16.1.4: Work with the appropriate State agencies to preserve and improve
         the existing coastal access north of Airport Road (i.e., Access "Q" on Map OS-3).
         Parking or recreational facilities shall not be required on the west side of Highway One in
         this area due to the fragile nature of the coastal terrace prairie habitat.
         Program OS-16.1.5: Acquisitions of coastal land and easements for public access
         purposes shall not preclude the potential development of necessary infrastructure to
         support coastal-dependent uses.
Policy OS-16.2 Right of Public Access: Development in the Coastal Zone shall not interfere with
the public's right of access to the sea where acquired through use or legislative authorization,
including, but not limited to, the use of dry sand and rocky coastal beaches to the first line of
terrestrial vegetation. Public prescriptive rights must be protected wherever they exist.
Policy OS-16.3: Unless a landowner chooses to adjudicate any existing prescriptive rights issue,
where there is substantial evidence that prescriptive rights of access to the beach exist on a
parcel, development on that parcel must be designed, or conditions must be imposed, to avoid
interference with the prescriptive rights that may exist or to provide alternative, equivalent
access.
Policy OS-16.4 New Development: Require public access from the nearest public roadway to
the shoreline and along the coast in new development except where:
         a)       it is inconsistent with public safety, military security needs, or the protection of
                  fragile coastal resources;
         b)       adequate access exists within 500 feet of the site; or
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 19                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         c)       access at the site would be inconsistent with other LCP policies, including but not
                  limited to, expanded or new coastal-dependent industry or the protection of
                  environmentally sensitive resources.
TABLE OS-1: COASTAL ZONE PUBLIC ACCESS
 Map                                                        Description of Proposed Access
  Key           Access Point/Area                                 and Related Programs
   A      Pudding Creek sand bar –           Existing access from Highway One to the sand bar located at
          Vertical Access                    the northern bank of Pudding Creek where it joins the ocean.
   B      Old Haul Road                      Existing lateral access from the Pudding Creek Trestle to
                                             northern City Limits.
   C      Bluff Access on the South Bluff    Lateral access shall be provided on the south bluff of the
          of the Mouth of Pudding Creek      mouth of Pudding Creek. Bluff top access as indicated in
                                             Map OS-3 shall be required as a condition of permit approval
                                             from Glass Beach Drive westerly to the point above the mouth
                                             of the river, and then southwesterly to Glass Beach. Other
                                             General Plan policies regarding protection of environmentally
                                             sensitive areas shall apply to the development of bluff access
                                             in this area.
   D      Glass Beach - Vertical Access      Vertical access from west end of Elm Street to Glass Beach
                                             shall be required as a condition of permit approval. Funding
                                             shall be sought by a public agency or private association for
                                             additional parking at the end of Elm Street and for directional
                                             signs at the site and on Main Street. Directional signs that
                                             may tend to increase utilization at the site shall be provided
                                             only after additional parking is provided.
   E      Glass Beach                        Beach and bluff lateral access to the area shall be required as
                                             a condition of permit approval on this site.
   F      Glass Beach South                  Public access south of Glass Beach shall be permitted in a
                                             manner that does not adversely impact environmentally
                                             sensitive areas.
   G      South Side of Noyo Bridge –        Vertical access shall be required as mapped as a condition of
          Vertical Access                    permit approval. Minor signing and path improvements shall
                                             be accomplished by a public agency or private association.
   H      South Side of Noyo Bridge -        Lateral access along the south bank of the Noyo River within
          Lateral Access                     the City Limits shall be acquired. This access shall be
                                             connected to the trail system leading from the southern bluff
                                             of the Noyo Headlands to South Harbor Drive as indicated in
                                             Map OS-3.
    I     North Harbor Drive – Vertical      A vertical access from the bottom of North Harbor Drive to the
          Access                             proposed lateral access along the north bank of the Noyo
                                             River shall be required as a condition of permit approval.
Note:    The Map Key refers to the letter code indicating the general location of the public access on Map
         OS-3: Coastal Land Use and Environment.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element       4 - 20                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Map                                                        Description of Proposed Access
  Key           Access Point/Area                                 and Related Programs
   J      North Bank of the Noyo –           Require public access along the entire length of the City's
          Lateral Access                     frontage on the north bank of the Noyo River as a condition of
                                             permit approval, except where physical conditions make
                                             access infeasible due to topography and/or safety
                                             considerations.
   K      South Street – Vertical Access     Require a vertical access from the end of South Street to the
                                             north bank of the Noyo River as a condition of permit
                                             approval. This access may be in conjunction with any street
                                             required for access to development. Public parking may be
                                             provided by a public agency or private association.
   L      Pomo Bluffs Overlook               Develop signage and trails to accommodate public use of the
                                             Noyo Bluffs Overlook park for passive recreation.
   M      North Shore of Noyo Bay            Rights for access and recreation shall be required as a
                                             condition of approval or through acquisition by a public or
                                             private organization for the north shore of the Noyo Bay, west
                                             of the Bridge, labeled “Open Space” as indicated on Map OS-
                                             3.
   N      Cypress Street - Vertical          Require a vertical access from the end of Cypress Street to
          Access                             the north bank of the Noyo River as a condition of permit
                                             approval. This access may be in conjunction with any street
                                             required for access to development. If the area is developed,
                                             then public parking may be provided by a public agency or
                                             private association.
   O      Highway One and                    A vertical access between Highway One and MacKerricher
          MacKerricher State Park –          State Park.
          Vertical Access
   P      Todd Point                         Recognize that prescriptive rights may exist on the portion of
                                             Todd Point labeled “PD” on Map OS-3. Require public
                                             access as a condition of permit approval in this area. Soil
                                             and vegetation restoration work shall be part of any
                                             acquisition and a paved parking area shall be developed.
   Q      Airport Road/Highway One           Acquire and improve the current unimproved dirt trail to the
                                             coast.     Major parking facilities and restrooms are not
                                             recommended due to the fragile nature of the coastal bluffs.
   R      Central Business District to       Proposed vertical access to start at Pine Street, along railroad
          Glass Beach Parking area           right-of-way to Glass Beach
   S      Pine Street to Bluff edge          Proposed vertical access from Pine Street to Glass Beach
Note:    The Map Key refers to the letter code indicating the general location of the public access on Map
         OS-3: Coastal Land Use and Environment.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element       4 - 21                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Policy OS-16.6: Easement Requirements. In order to avoid or offset a project’s significant
 adverse impacts on public access, and consistent with the provisions of Section 18.56.070, the
 City shall require a 25-foot-wide easement along all trails designated on Map OS-3 “Coastal
 Zone, Coastal Access, and City Trail System,” as a condition of approval to mitigate impacts of
 development that requires a coastal development permit where such impacts cannot be avoided.
 For any project where such mitigation is required, the preferred implementation should be
 through a recorded grant of easement to the City or to a designated private nonprofit association
 acceptable to the City who is willing to accept the easement and willing to operate and maintain
 the public accessway or trail. Where grants of easement are not feasible because neither the
 City nor private nonprofit association is willing to accept, maintain and operate the accessway,
 implementation of required access mitigation shall be implemented through a recorded Offer to
 Dedicate (OTD) an easement to a public agency or a designated private nonprofit association
 acceptable to the City. Offers of dedication shall last for a period of 21 years from the date of
 recordation of the offer.
 Policy OS-16.7: Mitigation measures required for impacts to public access and recreational
 opportunities shall be implemented prior to or concurrent with construction of the approved
 development. Mitigation shall not substitute for implementation of a feasible project alternative
 that would avoid impacts to public access.
 Policy OS-16.8: Public Access as a Permitted Use. Public accessways and trails to the
 shoreline and public parklands shall be a permitted use in all land use and zoning designations.
 Where there is an existing, but unaccepted and/or unopened public access Offer to Dedicate
 (OTD), easement, or deed restriction for lateral, vertical or trail access or related support
 facilities (e.g. parking), construction of necessary access improvements shall be permitted to be
 constructed, opened and operated for its intended public use.
 Policy OS-16.9: Review new development to prevent siting of structures that encroach on
 coastal access routes where prescriptive easements may exist so as to provide the opportunity
 to acquire the access through a conservation easement, adjudication, or other means, as
 appropriate.
 Policy OS-16.10: Require, as a condition of development for projects which create significant
 adverse impacts on public access and where discretionary approval by the City is required,
 lateral access along the bluffs of the Georgia-Pacific property and adjacent properties, north of
 the Noyo Harbor area to Pudding Creek as indicated in Map OS-3.
          Program OS-16.10.1: Consider the establishment of an ocean front park connecting to
          bicycle trails and rest areas from Hare Creek to MacKerricher State Park.
Policy OS-16.11 Use of Public Accesses: Dedicated accesses shall not be required to be
opened for public use until a public agency or private association agrees to accept responsibility
for maintenance and liability of the access.
 Policy OS-16.12: Open the Easement. For all grants of easement to the City, the City shall open
 the easement to the public as soon as is feasible, and shall be responsible for operating and
 maintaining the accessway, or the City shall grant the easement to a private nonprofit
 association that is willing to accept, maintain and operate the accessway.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 22                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Policy OS-16.12: Easements to Non Profits. For all grants of easement from the City to a private
 non-profit association, the Executive Director of the Commission must review and approve a
 management plan submitted by the private non-profit association that indicates that the
 association will open, operate, and maintain the easement in accordance with terms of the
 recorded grant of easement, and that the association will open the easement to the public as
 soon as is feasible.
         Program OS-16.12.1: Work with the Coastal Conservancy and other organizations to
         accept liability for and maintain public accesses.
         Program OS-16.12.2: Facilitate the acceptance of Offers to Dedicate (OTDs) as a means
         of obtaining additional public access.
 Policy OS-16.13: Offers to Dedicate. Any government agency may accept an offer to dedicate
 an easement if the agency is willing to operate and maintain the easement. For all offers to
 dedicate an easement that are required as conditions of Coastal Development Permits approved
 by the City, the Executive Director of the Commission must approve any private non-profit
 association that seeks to accept the offer. In order for the Executive Director of the Commission
 to approve any private association, the non-profit association must submit a management plan
 that indicates that the association will open, operate, and maintain the easement in accordance
 with terms of the recorded offer to dedicate the easement.
 Policy OS-16.14: Acquire OTDs for access easements for all areas designated on Map OS-3 in
 conjunction with new development which will adversely impact public access, unless other sites
 exist within 500 feet which provide sufficient access, parking, and other related facilities.
 Policy OS-16.15: In coordination with the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission, the
 City shall establish a procedure for acceptance of OTDs and management of public accesses
 prior to their expiration.
Policy OS-16.16           Priority to Beach Rather than Bluff Access North of Glass Beach: Where
public access to both beach and blufftop areas is feasible, give a higher priority to public use of
the beaches rather than to the bluffs in the design and development of accesses and the
location and placement of directional signs. This policy applies to bluffs north of Glass Beach to
the mouth of Pudding Creek and then easterly to the Pudding Creek Trestle.
Policy OS-16.17           Coastal Trails: Develop a continuous trail system throughout the City
which connects to the California Coastal Trail system.
         Program OS-16.17.1: Ensure that City trails connect with the California Coastal Trails
         system, as shown on Map OS-3. Acquire rights-of-way through Offers to Dedicate;
         easements; land transfers; and land acquisition, as appropriate.
         Program OS-16.17.2.         California Coastal Trail (CCT)
         1.     The City shall strive to complete the links in the California Coastal Trail (CCT) by
                participating and consulting with the National Park Service, the State Department of
                Parks & Recreation, the State Coastal Conservancy, Mendocino County, and other
                appropriate public and private entities and interested parties in designing, locating,
                funding, acquiring, and implementing the Fort Bragg California Coastal Trail (CCT)
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 23                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

               segment, including opening trails for vertical access designated on Map OS-3,
               “Coastal Zone, Coastal Access, and City Trail System.”
                  a) The CCT shall be identified and defined as a continuous trail system
                     traversing the length of the state’s coastline and designed and sited as a
                     continuous lateral trail traversing the length of the City’s Coastal Zone and
                     connecting with contiguous trail links in adjacent Coastal jurisdictions
                     (Mendocino County).
                  b) The CCT shall be designed and implemented to achieve the following
                     objectives:
                     · Provide a continuous walking and hiking trail as close to the ocean as
                          possible;
                     · Provide maximum access for a variety of non-motorized uses by utilizing
                          alternative trail segments where feasible;
                     · Maximize connections to existing and proposed local trail systems;
                     · Ensure that all segments of the trail have vertical access connections at
                          reasonable intervals;
                     · Maximize ocean views and scenic coastal vistas;
                     · Provide an educational experience where feasible through interpretive
                          facilities.
                  c) Ensure that shoreline and blufftop trail segments that may not be passable at
                     all times provide inland alternative routes.
         2. CCT Siting and Design Standards:
                  a) The trail should be sited and designed to be located along or as close to the
                     shoreline where physically and aesthetically feasible. Where it is not feasible
                     to locate the trail along the shoreline due to natural landforms or legally
                     authorized development that prevents passage at all times, inland bypass trail
                     segments located as close to the shoreline as possible should be utilized.
                     Shoreline and blufftop trail segments that may not be passable at all times
                     shall provide inland alternative routes.
                  b) Where gaps are identified in the trail, interim segments should be identified to
                     ensure a continuous coastal trail. Interim segments should be noted as such,
                     with provisions that as opportunities arise, the trail shall be realigned for ideal
                     siting. Interim trail segments should meet as many of the CCT objectives and
                     standards as possible.
                  c) The CCT should be designed and located to minimize impacts to
                     environmentally sensitive habitat areas to the maximum extent feasible.
                     Where appropriate, trail access should be limited to pass and repass. Where
                     necessary to prevent disturbance of nesting birds, sections of the trail may be
                     closed on a seasonal basis. Alternative trail segments shall be provided where
                     feasible.
                  d) The CCT should be located to incorporate existing oceanfront trails and paths
                     and support facilities of public shoreline parks and beaches to the maximum
                     extent feasible.
                  e) To provide a continuously identifiable trail along the base and shoreline of
                     Mendocino County, the trail should be integrated with the CCT in Mendocino
                     County which borders the City.
                  f) The CCT should be designed to avoid being located on roads with motorized
                     vehicle traffic where feasible. In locations where it is not possible to avoid
                     siting the trail along a roadway, the trail should be located off of the pavement
                     and within the public right-of-way, and separated from traffic by a safe
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 24                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                            Proposed Vertical Access
                           B      Haul Road
                                                                                                                                                                                            at Surfer Trail                                              Q
                                                                                      Y1
                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                 AIRPORT                             ROAD
                                                                                                            Haul Road
                                                                                                            Access                                                   O
                           Trestle
  N                            Parking
                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                       Glass Beach
                                                                                                                                                                                       Drive
               Glass
                                                               Pudding
                Beach                                                                                                                                                                       Pudding Creek
                           E                                                                                                                                                                Beach Access                                     A
                                                                                                                      Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                 k
                                      D
                                                                ELM ST.
                                                                SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                        PUDDING                    CREEK            RD.
          CBD to Glass
R         Beach Parkway                                                                                                          BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                 FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                 PINE STREET
                                                                                                                      STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LN.
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                   McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                  LAUREL STREET
                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DENNISON LANE
                                                                            STREET
Oce
                                                                                                                             REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                     FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                 ALDER STREET
    an
                                                                            MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K TERR                                                           SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CT.
                                                                                                                                 MADRONE                              ST.
                                                                                                                                                                       HAROLD STREET
                                      F                                                                                                                                                                       WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                           MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                      WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                    CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                 HAZEL ST.
                                                                                      STREET
                                                                                                 CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                      FRANKLIN
                                                                                                  WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                         MAIN ST.
Pacific
                                North Shore Access
                                         M                                                                                                                                                                                                             Vertical Access
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       at Cypress Street                                  N
                 Ocean Front Park
                 North Harbor Drive                                                                                                                                                                                                        Noyo River Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               J
                                                                                     L                                                                          RI
                                                                                                                                                                     VE
                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Map OS-3
                            H                                                                                                           O                                                                                    COASTAL ZONE, COASTAL ACCESS,
                                                                                                                                     OY
                                                            HWY 1                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AND CITY TRAIL SYSTEM
                                                                                                                                  I                                                             Vertical Access
                                                                                                                                                                                                at South Street                                 K                              City Boundary
                               OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
    Noyo Bluff
    Overlook                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                Vertical Access                                        COASTAL ACCESS AND OTHER TRAIL S
                                                            HWY.
                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                from South End
                                                                                                                                                                                                of Noyo Bridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               G             Existing coastal trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Proposed trails
                                                                                                                                                                                       HW
                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                         Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                            2   0                                                          X                   Key to Table LC-1
                                                    HWY 1
                                                                SIMPSON LANE
  Source: City of Fort Bragg
           July, 2008
 Scale 1Ó = 2300Õ(approximate)
  For Schematic purposes only

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                       WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                             LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                       WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Map OS-4
                                                        HWY 1                                                                                                                    EXISTING AND PROPOSED
                                                                                                                                                                            PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Existing School Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Existing Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Parks Under Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Proposed Parks
                                                HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                             Map OS-4 identifies the general area where new parks
                                                                                                                                                                                             should be located. The actual park site acquired and
                                                            SIMPSON LANE                                                                                                                     developed would be in the approximate vicinity of the
 Source: City of Fort Bragg                                                                                                                                                                  areas identified on Map OS-4.
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
                     distance. In locations where the trail must cross a roadway, appropriate
                     directional and traffic warning signing should be provided.
         3. CCT Acquisition and Management:
                  a) Trail easements should be obtained by encouraging private donation of land,
                     by public purchase, or by dedication of trail easements. Trail easement
                     dedications shall be required as a condition of approval of a Coastal
                     Development Permit for development on property located on the CCT route or
                     on designated vertical accessways to the route, when the dedication will
                     mitigate adverse impacts on public access and/or recreation by the project.
                  b) The CCT plan should identify the appropriate management agency(s) to take
                     responsibility for trail maintenance.
         4. CCT Signage Program Standards:
                  a) The trail should provide adequate signage at all access points, trailheads,
                     parking lots, road crossings, and linkages or intersections with other trails or
                     roads which incorporate the CCT logo (to be designed).
                  b) The trail should provide adequate safety signage, including but not limited to,
                     road crossing signs and yield/warning signs on multi-use trail segments.
                     Where appropriate signs should be developed in coordination with Caltrans
                     and/or City and County Public Works Departments and any other applicable
                     public agencies.
                  c) Signs shall be posted in Spanish and in English.
         5. CCT Support Facilities:
                  a) To maximize access to the CCT, adequate parking and trailhead facilities
                     should be provided.
         6. CCT Mapping:
                  a) The final CCT map shall identify all planned or secured segments, including
                     existing segments, all access linkages and planned staging areas, public and
                     private lands, existing easements, deed restricted sections and sections
                     subject to an Offer-to-Dedicate (OTD). The map shall be updated on a regular
                     basis.
                  b) The CCT shall be identified on all applicable City Trail Maps contained in the
                     LCP Access Component.
         7. Inclusion of CCT in LCP:
                  a) The LCP shall be amended to incorporate all plans and designs for locating
                     and implementing the CCT within the City including the final mapped
                     alignment.
Policy OS-16.18 General Standards: Require that all public access easements offered for
dedication to public use be a minimum of 25 feet wide. The area where public access is allowed
within the easement may be reduced to the minimum necessary to avoid:
         a)       adverse impacts on sensitive environmental areas;
         b)       encroachment closer than 20 feet from an existing residence; and/or
         c)       hazardous topographic conditions.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 25                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-16.19 Standards for Lateral Shoreline Access Easements: Lateral shoreline access
easements shall extend landward 25 feet from mean high tide to the toe of the bluff or the first
line of terrestrial vegetation if the width of the beach is greater than 25 feet. Lateral blufftop
easements shall be at least 25 feet in width. The area where public access is allowed within the
easement may be reduced consistent with Policy OS-16.18 above. The average annual bluff
retreat (erosion) shall be taken into account when planning lateral accesses. Shoreline and
blufftop trail segments that may not be passable at all times shall provide inland alternative
routes.
Policy OS-16.20 Visitor Accommodations and Services: In order to avoid or offset a project’s
significant adverse impacts on public access and consistent with the provisions of Section
18.56.070, require public access to the blufftop and/or shoreline for visitor serving uses, as a
condition of permit approval, or by other methods such as OTDs, specified by the City. Access
shall be available to the public at large as well as to guests.
Policy OS-16.21 Safety and Environmental Protection: Permanent closure of any existing
public accessway shall require an amendment to the Local Coastal Program.
 Policy OS-16.22: Unless immediate action by a person or a public agency performing a public
 service is required to protect life and property from imminent danger, the City shall not close,
 abandon, or render unusable by the public any existing accessway which the City owns,
 operates, maintains, or is otherwise responsible for, without first obtaining a Coastal
 Development Permit. Any accessway which the City or any other managing agency or
 organization determines cannot be maintained or operated in a condition suitable for public use
 shall be offered to another public agency or qualified private association that agrees to open and
 maintain the accessway for public use.
         Program OS-16.22.1: Request the California Department of Fish and Game monitor
         public accesses adjoining or near sensitive environmental resources such as wetlands,
         dunes, tide pools, and other sensitive wildlife habitats to determine whether they are
         being adversely impacted or degraded. Request that regulations governing use of
         accesses be implemented and posted as needed. Limit public use, as needed, to allow
         resource recovery and restoration.
F.       Parks and Recreation
Goal OS-17        Provide an attractive system of parks and recreation facilities throughout
                  the City to meet the needs of all age groups and capabilities.
Policy OS-17.1 Parkland Standard: Use the standard of three acres of parkland per 1,000
residents for the acquisition of additional parkland pursuant to the provisions of the Quimby Act
(Government Code Section 66477).
         Program OS-17.1.1: Establish a parkland dedication ordinance that provides standards
         and a process for dedication of parkland and/or payment of in-lieu fees.
         Program OS-17.1.2: Establish a Park and Open Space Trust Fund as required by the
         Quimby Act and Government Code Sections 66000-66011.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 26                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-17.2 Neighborhood Parks: Acquire and develop new neighborhood parks, in concert
with other local recreation agencies, to meet the needs of the existing population and consistent
with growth of the City's population.
         Program OS-17.2.1: Acquire and develop additional neighborhood parks as shown on
         Map OS-4.
Policy OS-17.3 Recreational Facilities: Provide recreational facilities to meet the needs of all
Fort Bragg citizens, especially children and teenagers.
         Program OS-17.3.1: Consider teen recreation needs when planning new or redesigned
         parks.
         Program OS-17.3.2: Consider building a skateboard facility in an existing or newly
         developed park as deemed feasible.
         Program OS-17.3.3: Work with other agencies to develop an inventory of recreational
         facilities and programs available to young people. Seek to implement joint programs and
         identify additional facilities that are necessary to meet the recreational needs of youth.
      Policy OS-17.4 Playground Facilities: Add or upgrade playground facilities at existing
neighborhood parks.
         Program OS-17.4.2: Provide additional playground facilities and basketball courts at
         appropriate locations within neighborhoods.
      Policy OS-17.5 Ballfields: Develop additional baseball, softball, and other ballfields.
         Program OS-17.5.1: Work with the School District and other agencies to develop
         additional sports field facilities.
Policy OS-17.6 Prioritize Park Acquisitions: Use the following criteria to prioritize acquisition of
parkland and open space:
         a)       distribution of neighborhood parks/playground facilities and ballfields on a
                  neighborhood basis;
         b)       scenic beauty;
         c)       relationship to the existing and proposed trail systems and parks; and
         d)       natural resource protection.
         e)       appropriateness (physical characteristics) of the site to meet specific recreational
                  needs.
         Program OS-17.6.1: Consider the acquisition of strategically located vacant lots for the
         development of neighborhood parks using the criteria listed in Policy OS-17.6.
         Program OS-17.6.2: Adopt a management plan that analyzes geoseismic and other
         related potential hazards before City acceptance of dedications of land for park or open
         space. Identified hazards shall be fully repaired and/or financial protection provided to
         the City for liability before acceptance of land. The management plan shall also specify
         funding for ongoing maintenance.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 27                               July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy OS-17.7 Financing Parks: Consider methods of increasing revenues for the
acquisition and development of parkland and open space areas and supporting recreational
facilities.
         Program OS-17.7.1: Consider the following potential funding sources for the acquisition
         of park and trails and development of recreation facilities:
                  a)     Establish a Park Improvement Fee pursuant to Government Code Section
                         66000;
                  b)     Place an advisory measure on the ballot for a tax proposal or assessment;
                         and/or
                  c)     Pursue available grants.
         Program OS-17.7.2: Include in the Capital Improvement Program the schedule and costs
         of expanding and improving the City’s parks and recreation facilities as deemed
         appropriate by the City Council.
Goal OS-18         Develop park and recreation facilities with the coordination of other
                   agencies and the public.
Policy OS-18.1 Coordinate with Other Agencies: Coordinate with other governmental entities to
procure and develop additional park and recreational facilities.
         Program OS-18.1.1: Consider establishing joint powers agreements with the Mendocino
         Coast Recreation and Parks District (MCRPD), Fort Bragg Unified School District
         (FBUSD), and Mendocino County to coordinate planning and development of recreation
         facilities.
         Program OS-18.1.2: Continue to coordinate with State Department of Parks and
         Recreation regarding development adjacent to MacKerricher State Park.
         Program OS-18.1.3: In reviewing development applications adjacent to MacKerricher
         State Park, the City shall confer with the State Department of Parks and Recreation to
         determine if additional mitigation measures regarding access to the park, or protection of
         park resources, are warranted. If feasible, these additional measures will be required.
         Program OS-18.1.4: Support public acquisition of land along the eastern boundary of
         MacKerricher State Park as indicated in Map OS-3: Coastal Zone, Coastal Access, and
         City Trail System which would be donated to the State Parks.
        Policy OS-18.2 City/School/Recreation District Cooperation: Continue to encourage
City/School/Recreation District cooperation in developing and maintaining park and recreation
facilities.
         Program OS-18.2.1: Develop joint use agreements with the School District.
         Program OS-18.2.2: Continue to cooperate with the FBUSD, MCRPD, and Timberwolf
         Stadium to develop playfield improvements and maintenance programs.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 28                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy OS-18.3 Public Participation: Actively solicit public participation in the selection,
design, and facilities planning for existing and future park sites.
         Program OS-18.3.1: Utilize local volunteer efforts and fund-raising to cover the "match"
         costs needed to secure rehabilitation or purchase grants for public parks.
Goal OS-19        Provide a comprehensive trail system in Fort Bragg.
Policy OS-19.1 Multiple Use Trail System: Develop a multiple use trail system.
         Program OS-19.1.1: Identify potential additions to the trail system which increase access
         to rivers and the coastline with cross linkages through to the eastern parts of Fort Bragg.
         Work with the MCRPD to seek funding and to acquire rights-of-way.
         Program OS-19.1.2: Establish an integrated trail system serving both inland hiking and
         trail needs as well as the coastal trail programs as shown on Map OS-3 utilizing existing
         rights-of-way, City streets, and river front property.
Policy OS-19.2: Review development applications and require a trail easement dedication for
locations where trails are shown on Map OS-3 where an appropriate nexus is established
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 18.56 (Public Access) of the Coastal Land Use &
Development Code.
Policy OS-19.3: Require new development to provide direct pedestrian connections, such as
sidewalks, trails, and other rights-of-way to the existing and planned network of parks and trails
wherever feasible.
         Program OS-19.3.1: Consider the access needs of a variety of users, including school-
         age children, the elderly, and those with handicaps or disabilities when developing trails
         and recreation facilities.
         Program OS-19.3.2: Support efforts to extend the existing trail from the end of Cypress
         Street east adjacent to the Georgia-Pacific haul road.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 29                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element 4 - 30 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

5.       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
Government Code Section 65302[b] requires that every General Plan include a Circulation
Element which consists of "the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all
correlated with the Land Use Element of the Plan."
The Circulation Element discusses transportation issues for the Fort Bragg Planning Area; it
briefly describes the existing circulation system and travel characteristics and projects future
traffic based on the land uses and growth projections described in the Land Use Element.
Policies and programs contained in this element provide a guide for decisions regarding
transportation system improvements to accommodate Fort Bragg's anticipated growth. Detailed
description and analysis of Fort Bragg’s transportation system are contained in the Draft EIR.
The main objectives of the Circulation Element are to:
     • Ensure that Fort Bragg’s circulation network is sufficient to accommodate anticipated
         development;
     • Minimize the intrusion of through-traffic onto local streets;
     • Encourage public transportation, bicycle, and pedestrian movement, and other
         alternatives to the single-occupant vehicle; and
     • Provide improvements to the transportation system which complement and support the
         other goals of this Coastal General Plan.
B.       Existing Conditions
1.       Roadway Classifications
The street system in Fort Bragg is laid out in a grid pattern with Main Street (Highway One)
functioning as the primary north-south roadway. Franklin Street is located one block east of
Main Street and provides access along the main commercial corridor. A number of streets,
including Cypress Street, Chestnut Street, Oak Street, Redwood Avenue, Pine Street, and Elm
Street provide east-west connections. Streets in Fort Bragg are classified according to their
function as defined and shown in Table C-1 and Map C-1: Existing Roadway System.
5 – Circulation Element                        5-1                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                   The Roadway Classification System
Highway:               A high-speed, limited access roadway serving primarily regional and county-wide
                      travel. California State Department of Transportation (Caltrans) controls the design,
                      operation, and maintenance of highways. Fort Bragg does not have any limited
                      access roadways.
Arterial:              A medium-speed, medium capacity roadway that provides travel and access within
                      the City and access to highways. Main Street (Highway One) and Highway 20 are
                      considered arterial roadways.
Major Collector:      A relatively low-speed, street that provides access within and between
                      neighborhoods. Major Collectors usually serve short trips and are intended for
                      collecting trips from local streets and distributing them to Arterial streets.
Minor Collector:      A relatively low-speed street that provides a connection between Arterials and Major
                      Collectors and direct access to parcels. They handle a lower volume of traffic than
                      Major Collectors.
Local Street:          A low-speed, low-volume street that provides access to adjacent land. Local streets
                      are designed for trips within neighborhoods and to Collector and Arterial streets, and
                      not to serve through-traffic.
                                              Table C-1
                              Fort Bragg Roadway Classification
           Roadway Classification                             Location
           Arterials
           Main Street                                        Full Length
           Highway 20                                         Full Length
           Major Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Main Street to Franklin Street
           Franklin Street                                    Full Length
           Redwood Avenue                                     Main Street to Harold Street
           Oak Street                                         Alley West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Minor Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Franklin Street to Dana Street
           Maple Street                                       Main Street to Lincoln Street
           Alder Street                                       Main Street to Harold Street
           Laurel Street                                      Block West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Pine Street                                        Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Fir Street                                         Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Elm Street                                         Glass Beach Drive to Franklin Street
           McPherson Street                                   Chestnut Street to Bush Street
           Harrison Street                                    Walnut Street to Bush Street
           Harold Street                                      Maple Street to Fir Street
           Lincoln Street                                     Chestnut Street to Willow Street
           Sanderson Way                                      Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Dana Street                                        Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Cypress Street                                     Full Length
           South Harbor Drive                                 Full Length
           South Street                                       Main Street to River Drive
           Local Streets
           All remaining streets will be considered local streets.
5 – Circulation Element                              5-2                                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PACIFIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OCEA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                   Neptune               Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ocean
                                                                                                                                                               Pacific                                   Drive
                                                          S
                                                               r
                                                            ho                                               Bayview Avenue                                                                 View
                                                                e lin
                                                                        n.                                                                                                                          Monterey Av .
                                                                     eL
                                           Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                            Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                         Ro
                                        Coas t       H ig h w                     ad
                                 O ld                           ay
                                                                                                   Ha
                                                                                                        re                                                                                          Harbo r                    Avenu e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S t ew
                                                         Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W                                                                                                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rn                                                                      Spruce               Elm St
            Simpson                                                                                              Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o   ad
                                                                                                                                                               V ie w Boat Yard                     an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                Dr.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
            Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a in                                                             Manzanita                    Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Myr                                                                                                                                St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fir St                                                                                                                       dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tl e St            S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Airpor t
            e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  ing Cre         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bush St                                                                             dd
                                    Hare Creek Terrac            e                                                                                                                                                                                   Haz       dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d St                     S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison S t                                                                                                                      Winnifred                                                                                                                                                Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t                                      C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr
                                                                                            Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DuBois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               k    ee                                                                                                             Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                           re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                                    Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                             Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Highway   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             John
                                                ek
                                            Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hyman
                                                                                                         Babcock Lan                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Roa d                                                        Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesota Avenu e                                                                                                                              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Petaluma                               A            v                                           Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                           Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Johnson
                                                                                           Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                                     Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ln.                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                                        re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee
                                                                                                                                                  s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                                                   Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Johnson   Ln   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Howlan d                                                                                                                               Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Map C-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lane
                             Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stree t
                                                                     Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Denniso n
                             Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                          Benson                                                      W i n d in g
                                                                                  Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                              Camille
                             Sears Lan       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                                           Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                             W ay
                                                                                                                                                                               Hanso n                                        Roa d
                             A nd r e a              W ay                                                                                                                Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Puddin g
                             Lahmon Lan          e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Monsen Wa y
                             Tex-Mon t                                                                              Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                             Benson                           Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                           Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EXISTING ROADWAY SYSTEM
                                                                                  Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Road
                                                                 S ummers
                                                                                                                                                 Ro
                                                                                                                                                      ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Arterial                                          LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limit
Scale 1Ó = 2300Õ (approximate)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Minor Collector   Major Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sphere of Influence
For Schematic purposes only

 2.        Level of Service Standards
 Level of Service (LOS) standards provide a qualitative indicator based on a quantitative analysis
 of the functional capacity of a roadway or intersection. LOS standards describe the relative
 ease or congestion of traffic movement on a roadway or at an intersection. LOS "A" represents
 free flow conditions and LOS "F" represents jammed conditions where traffic flow is at or over
 the capacity of the roadway and consequently moves very slowly. Table C-2 below explains in
 more detail the LOS concept. LOS is normally used to describe peak-hour conditions.
                                                 Table C-2
                                       Level of Service Definitions
 Level of Service        Description                                                            V/C Ratio*
 Free Flowing            Relatively free-flow. No restrictions to vehicle maneuverability or    0.00-0.60
 LOS A                   speed. Very slight delay.
 Minimal Delays          Stable Flow. Some slight reduction in maneuverability and speed.       0.61-0.70
 LOS B                   Vehicle platoons form. This is a suitable level of operation for rural
                         design. Slight delay
 Acceptable Delays       Stable flow operation. Higher volumes. More restrictions on            0.71-0.80
 LOS C                   maneuverability and speed. Acceptable delay.
 Tolerable Delays        Approaching unstable flow operation. Queues develop. Little freedom    0.81-0.90
 LOS D                   to maneuver. Tolerable delays for short periods.
 Significant Delays      Unstable flow or operation. Low operating speed; momentary             0.91-1.00
 LOS E                   stoppages.     This condition is not uncommon in peak hours.
                         Congestion and intolerable delays.
 Excessive Delays        Forced flow or operation. There are many stoppages. The highway           1.00+
 LOS F                   acts as a vehicle storage area. Jammed. Gridlock.
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, HRB Special Report 87.
 C.        Existing and Projected Traffic Patterns
 Fort Bragg is built along Highway One which is also called Main Street within the City. Highway
 One is the only continuous north-south road serving the north coast of Mendocino County,
 providing a local transportation corridor for many communities and the primary access route for
 visitors. Traffic volumes on this roadway have increased steadily over the years.
 Traffic into and out of Fort Bragg is constrained by the capacity of two bridges: Hare Creek and
 Pudding Creek, and by the two-lane (i.e., one through lane in each direction) roadway sections
 along Highway One. The Hare Creek and Pudding Creek bridges are limited to one lane of
 traffic in each direction.
 The most congested street in the City is Main Street between the northbound merge area
 located just south of Laurel Street through Elm Street. The northbound section of this road
 currently operates at LOS D to LOS E during peak hours.
 Caltrans recently replaced the Noyo River Bridge with a four lane bridge, a center lane for
 emergency vehicles, and a sidewalk on both sides. The new bridge provides improved access
 at the south end of the City and to Highway 20 and operates at LOS A.
 5 – Circulation Element                           5-3                                            July 2008
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Although the volume of traffic on Main Street has increased over the past few years,
intersections with traffic signals – Highway 20, Ocean View Drive, Cypress Street, Chestnut
Street, Oak Street, Elm Street, and Redwood Avenue - are operating at LOS B or better. The
side street stop sign controlled intersections with Main Street are also operating at LOS B or
better for traffic traveling on Main Street, although traffic turning onto Main Street from some
side streets can experience LOS D, E, or F during peak hours.
D.       Projected Traffic Volumes
Land use and transportation must be coordinated so that the capacity of the transportation
system will accommodate the traffic generated by the development of the community. To
understand the relationship between land use and transportation, the new traffic that would be
generated by the 10-year buildout projections listed in Table LU-1 and Table LU-2 of the Land
Use Element was added to existing traffic volumes on major streets. See the Draft EIR for the
General Plan for a full description of the trip generation and trip assignment methods that were
used.
The traffic projections take into account the type and intensity of existing and future
development, areas of vacant developable land, and the policies established by the Coastal
General Plan. The traffic projections estimate how much traffic will be generated by new
development, what traffic problems will occur, and what roadway improvements would relieve
traffic congestion. This projected traffic increase would be generated by development within the
City and its Sphere of Influence, new development in the County, and tourist traffic which will
continue to increase in Fort Bragg and the coastal areas of Mendocino County.
The traffic projections include the existing roadway network as shown in Map C-1.
Tables C-3 and C-4 summarize the Levels of Service for roadway segments and intersections
for a summer Friday mid-day peak hour when traffic is generally the most congested. These
tables show the projected LOS with and without the roadway improvements recommended in
this element.
E.       Roadway Deficiencies
Traffic projections in Tables C-3 and C-4 indicate that, without intersection signalization and
roadway widening, Levels of Service will decline at several intersections and roadway segments
below the standards established by the General Plan. The recommended transportation
improvements recognize that it may not be feasible to accommodate all of the projected traffic at
established LOS standards. This would require extensive street widening on Main Street
between the northbound merge area (south of Laurel Street) and Elm Street where there is
limited right-of-way. Roadway widening in this area could have adverse impacts on businesses
fronting Main Street due to the loss of on-street parking.
5 – Circulation Element                        5-4                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

F.       Alternatives to the Automobile
Effective alternatives to automobile use are needed. These include:
• Better public transit;
• Expansion of bicycle routes;
• Provision of safe sidewalks throughout the City; and
• Land use designations which reduce the need to drive from home to work, schools, and/or
     commercial outlets.
By improving alternative modes of transit, the City best serves those individuals who lack
access to a vehicle and those who would prefer to use alternate modes of transport to conserve
energy, reduce air and noise pollution, and/or reduce the costs of constructing and maintaining
roads and parking facilities.
5 – Circulation Element                      5-5                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                           Table C-3
  INTERSECTION LEVEL OF SERVICE
  (FRIDAY PM PEAK HOUR IN AUGUST)
                                                Existing
Intersection                                (August 2001)              Year 2006             Year 2011
                                                       (1)
Highway One/Hwy. 20 (Signal)                  B-17.3                   B-18.9                 C-21.0
Highway One/Ocean View Dr.                    B-16.0(1)                C-20.6                 C-24.3
(Signal)
Highway One/Cypress St.                       B-16.7(1)                B-18.7                 C-21.0
(Signal)
Highway One/Chestnut St.                      A-8.7(1)                 A-9.3                  B-10.1
(Signal)
Highway One/Oak St. (Signal)                  B-10.2(1)                B-11.3                 B-12.5
Highway One/Redwood Ave.                      B-16.6(1)                B-17.0                 B-17.5
(Signal)
Highway One/Laurel St. (Side                  E-35.4/B-10.3(2)         A-8.3(1)               A-9.2
Street Stop)
Highway One/Pine St. (Side                    D-26.6/F-55.8/           E-40.6/F-99.8/         F-65.9/F-193/
Street Stop)                                  A-9.0/A-9.4(3)           A-9.3/A-9.7            A-9.7/B-10.1
Highway One/Elm St. (Signal)                  A-7.9(1)                 A-8.3                  A-8.9
Highway One/Pudding Creek                     E-38.7/A-9.1(4)          F-60.7/A-9.4           F-103/A-9.6
Rd. (Side Street Stop)
Franklin St./South St. (Side                  A-6.6/A-6.6(5)           A-8.0/A-6.8            A-8.3/A-7.0
Street Stop)
Franklin St./Cypress St. (All                 B-11.6(6)                B-13.5                 C-16.0
Way Stop)
Franklin St./Chestnut St. (All                B-12.4(6)                B-14.0                 C-16.1
Way Stop)
Franklin St./Oak St. (All Way                 C-16.8(6)                C-20.7                 D-27.0
Stop)
Franklin St./Redwood Ave. (All                B-10.9(6)                B-11.7                 B-12.7
Way Stop)
Franklin St./Laurel St. (Side                 B-13.7/A-8.0(7)          B-14.5/A-8.0           C-15.4/A-8.1
Street Stop)
   (1)   Signalized level of service–control delay in seconds.
   (2)   Unsignalized level of service–average control delay in seconds. Laurel St. eastbound stop sign controlled
         approach to Highway One/Highway One southbound left turn to Laurel St.
   (3) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds. Pine St. eastbound stop sign controlled approach to
         Highway One/Pine St. westbound stop sign controlled approach to Highway One/southbound Highway One left
         turn/northbound Highway One left turn.
   (4) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds. Pudding Creek Rd. westbound stop sign controlled
         approach to Highway One/Highway One southbound left turn to Pudding Creek Rd.
   (5) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds.              Franklin St. northbound stop sign controlled
         approach/Franklin St. southbound stop sign controlled approach.
   (6) All way stop level of service–average control delay in seconds.
   (7) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds.               Laurel St. eastbound stop sign controlled
         approach/Franklin St. southbound left turn.
   Year 2000 Highway Capacity Manual Analysis Methodology
   Source: Crane Transportation Group, February, 2002
   5 – Circulation Element                                  5-6                                           July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Table C-4
5 – Circulation Element         5-7 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

G.       Goals, Policies and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:           are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy C-2.11,
Policy C-9.4, Policy C-9.7, Policy C-12.1, Policy C-12.1, Policy C-12.3, Policy C-13.1, and Policy
C-15.1.
1.       Transportation Planning
Goal C-1            Coordinate land use and transportation planning.
Policy C-1.1       Level of Service Standards: Establish the following Level of Service (LOS)
standards:
     Signalized and All-Way-Stop                    LOS D
     Intersections Along Highway One
     Side Street Stop Sign Controlled              LOS D, or LOS F if there are less than 15
     Intersections Along Highway One (Side         vehicles/hour left turns plus through
     Street Approach)                              movements from the side street and the
                                                   volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                   hour signal warrant criteria levels.
     Signalized and All-Way Stop                    LOS C
     Intersections
     Not Along Highway One
     Side Street Stop Sign Controlled               LOS C, or LOS E if there are less than 15
     Intersections Not Along Highway One            vehicles/hour left turns plus through
     (Side Street Approach)                         movements from the side street and the
                                                    volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                    hour signal warrant criteria levels.
         •         If volumes at an unsignalized intersection are increased to meet or exceed
                   Caltrans rural peak hour signal Warrant #11 criteria levels and the intersection is
                   operating at an unacceptable level of service, then signalization of the
                   intersection is warranted.
         •         LOS E for Main Street (Highway One) between the northbound lane merge area
                   and Manzanita Street.
         •         LOS D for Main Street south of the northbound merge lane and north of
                   Manzanita Street and other City-designated arterials and collectors.
         •         LOS C on all City-designated local streets.
         •         The maximum allowable LOS standards for Main Street apply to the p.m. peak
                   hour weekdays during the summer and to the p.m. peak hour on weekdays and
                   weekends during the remainder of the year. They do not apply to p.m. peak
                   hours on weekends and holidays during the summer. During the p.m. peak
                   hours on summer weekends and holidays, Main Street can operate at LOS F.
5 – Circulation Element                         5-8                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy C-1.2 Coordinate Land Use and Transportation: Ensure that the amount and phasing
of development can be adequately served by transportation facilities.
         Program C-1.2.1: Review development proposals for their direct and cumulative effects
         on roadway Level of Service standards. During the development review process, City
         staff will determine whether traffic studies need to be carried out and the scope of such
         studies.
Policy C-1.3: Do not permit new development that would result in the exceedance of roadway
and intersection Levels of Service standards unless one of the following conditions is met:
                   a)     Revisions are incorporated in the proposed development project which
                          prevent the Level of Service from deteriorating below the adopted Level
                          of Service standards; or
                   b)     Funding of prorata share of the cost of circulation improvements and/or
                          the construction of roadway improvements needed to maintain the
                          established Level of Service is included as a condition or development
                          standard of project approval.
Policy C-1.4: Include specific time frames for the funding and completion of roadway
improvements for projects which cause adopted roadway and intersection Level of Service
standards to be exceeded. Require security, bonding or other means acceptable to the City to
ensure the timely implementation of roadway mitigations.
Policy C-1.5: Traffic Impact Fees. When traffic impact fees are collected, establish a schedule
from the date of collection of said fee for the expenditure of funds to construct roadway
improvements that meets project needs. Where a project would cause a roadway or
intersection to operate below the adopted traffic Level of Service standards, the roadway or
intersection improvements should be completed in a timely manner but no later than five years
after project completion.
2.       Recommended Roadway Improvements
Goal C-2            Develop and manage a roadway system that accommodates future growth
                    and maintains acceptable Levels of Service while considering the other
                    policies and programs of the Coastal General Plan.
Policy C-2.1 Roadway Improvements: In coordination with Caltrans and Mendocino County,
plan for and seek funding for on-going improvements to the local and regional road system to
ensure that the roadway system operates safely and efficiently and to ensure that Highway 1 in
rural areas outside the Mendocino County urban/rural boundary will remain a scenic two-lane
road consistent with Section 30254 of the Coastal Act. Project applicants are fiscally
responsible for their fair share of roadway improvements necessary to serve their projects.
Policy C-2.2: Improvements to major road intersections for public safety or increased vehicle
capacity shall be permitted, as necessary, in existing developed areas and where such
improvements are sited and designed to be consistent with all policies of the LCP.
Policy C-2.3: Design Roadways to Protect Scenic Views. In scenic areas, roadway
improvements, including culverts, bridges or overpasses, shall be designed and constructed to
5 – Circulation Element                         5-9                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

protect public views and avoid or minimize visual impacts and to blend in with the natural setting
to the maximum extent feasible.
         Program C-2.3.1: When a traffic analysis of levels of service and/or safety hazards
         indicates the need, construct the following roadway improvements where such roadway
         improvements are found to be consistent with all applicable policies of the LCP
         including, but not limited to, the wetland, environmentally sensitive habitat area, public
         access, and visual protection policies:
                   a)    Signalize the Main Street/Pudding Creek Road intersection;
                   b)    Signalize the Franklin Street/Oak Street intersection;
                   c)    Widen the section of Main Street from the Pudding Creek Bridge to the
                         northern City Limits to three lanes, adding a center turn lane;
                   d)    Reconstruct the Main Street/Ocean View Drive intersection at time of
                         development of the property between the College of the Redwoods and
                         Main Street. Require a traffic engineering analysis of the intersection to
                         determine appropriate geometrics and signal timing. Construct turning
                         lane mitigations as needed.
                   e)    Signalize the Main Street/Laurel Street intersection or provide some other
                         improvement to provide for pedestrian safety;
                   f)    Signalize the Main Street/Pine Street intersection;
                   g)    Construct bicycle lane and pedestrian improvements on Chestnut Street
                         and Oak Street;
                   h)    Consider extending Harrison Street south from Walnut Street to Cypress
                         Street.
                   i)    Continue the two northbound through lanes on Main Street from Oak
                         Street to just north of Laurel Street. Stripe the curb lane as a right turn
                         only lane between Redwood Avenue and Laurel Street.                         This
                         improvement shall only be implemented if there are no other feasible
                         circulation improvements that would result in the street operating at a
                         LOS E or better.
                    j)   Construct a second southbound through travel lane on Main Street from
                         Elm Street to Laurel Street. This improvement shall only be implemented
                         if there are no other feasible circulation improvements that would result in
                         the street operating at a LOS E or better.
Policy C-2.4 Roadway Standards: Continue to provide consistent standards for the City's
street system.
         Program C-2.4.1: Establish standards for public streets, which allow for the following:
                   a)    traffic "calming" measures;
                   b)    sidewalks with curbs, gutters, and a planting strip between the sidewalk
                         and the roadway;
                   c)    rounded street corners with "bulb-outs" at key intersections;
                   d)    continuation of the grid street system; and
                   e)    standards for radius returns for local, collector, and arterial streets.
         Program C-2.4.1.2: Adopt standards for alleyways which address parking restrictions,
         shared access, lighting, and maintenance.
Policy C-2.5: Continue to prohibit the establishment of private roads.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 10                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy C-2.6: Traffic Studies for High Trip Generating Uses: Traffic studies shall be required
for all major development proposals, including but not limited to, drive-through facilities, fast
food outlets, convenience markets, major tourist accommodations, shopping centers,
commercial development, residential subdivisions, and other generators of high traffic volumes
that would affect a Level of Service. Traffic studies shall identify, at a minimum:
     (a) the amount of traffic to be added to the street system by the proposed development;
     (b) other known and foreseeable projects and their effects on the street system;
     (c) the direct, indirect, and cumulative adverse impacts of project traffic on street system
          operations, safety, and public access to the coast;
     (d) mitigation measures necessary to provide for project traffic while maintaining City Level
          of Service standards;
     (e) the responsibility of the developer to provide improvements; and
     (f) the timing of all improvements.
 Policy C-2.7: Consider Impacts to Roads for LCP Amendments. Direct, indirect, and cumulative
 adverse impacts to Highway 1 capacity in the rural areas surrounding Fort Bragg shall be
 considered during the review of proposed LCP amendments that would increase density or
 change land use classifications to ensure that Highway 1 in rural areas outside the Mendocino
 County urban/rural boundary remains a scenic two-lane road consistent with Section 30254 of
 the Coastal Act.
Policy C-2.8 Continuation of Streets: Require the continuation of streets and bicycle and
pedestrian paths through new developments wherever possible.
Policy C-2.9: Facilitate Street Connections. Review site plans for new development to facilitate
the continuation of streets to improve local circulation. Priority shall be given to providing
pedestrian and bicycle trails that establish connections to streets wherever possible.
Policy C-2.10 Continue Grid System onto Mill Site: Ensure that the grid street system and a
north/south arterial on the Mill Site be designed to ensure the maximum benefit to local traffic,
pedestrian, and bicycle circulation and to provide maximum public access to the coast.
      Policy C-2.11        Right-of-Way Acquisition:    Require right-of-way acquisition for new
development to meet the City’s roadway width standards.
Policy C-2.12 Roadway Safety: Improve the safety of the roadway system. All safety
improvements shall be consistent with the applicable policies of the LCP including, but not
limited to, the wetlands, environmentally sensitive habitat area, public access, and visual
protection policies.
          Program C-2.12.1: Periodically analyze the locations of traffic accidents to identify
          problems and use this information to set priorities for improvements as a part of the
          City's Capital Improvement Program.
3.        Residential Areas
The City's residential neighborhoods need to be protected from excessive through-traffic. When
Main Street and other arterial streets become congested, drivers may seek alternate routes to
their destination, often taking local streets through residential areas.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 11                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Excessive traffic on local streets has an impact on the quality of life. Through-traffic can
generate excessive noise and present potential safety hazards to children. The goals, policies,
and programs below are intended to address this issue.
Goal C-3            Preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
Policy C-3.1 Reduce Through-Traffic on Local Streets: Reduce through-traffic on local streets
to preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
         Program C-3.1.1: Develop measures to limit through-traffic on residential streets when
         traffic studies indicate that traffic volumes on such streets exceed the adopted Levels of
         Service and/or safety concerns warrant such measures.
         Program C-3.1.2: Consider the following measures, as appropriate, to reduce through-
         traffic from using local streets in residential areas:
                   a)     narrow and landscape the street entrances to residential areas that
                          experience heavy traffic;
                   b)     restrict turning movements into residential areas; and
                   c)     use traffic calming measures such as permitting wider sidewalks,
                          additional on-street parking, and landscape strips between the sidewalk
                          and the road.
Policy C-3.2 Additional Connector Streets: Establish additional connectors between residential
streets to improve emergency access, particularly on dead-end streets south of Chestnut Street.
4.       Main Street Corridor
Transportation improvements to Main Street and principal streets in the Central Business
District will enhance the character, sense of place and economic well-being of this area.
However, the need to accommodate traffic flow through the City should be considered in the
context of the community's desire to preserve and enhance the historic character of Fort Bragg's
Central Business District.
Goal C-4            Regard the quality of life in Fort Bragg and maintaining community identity
                    as more important than accommodating through-traffic.
Policy C-4.1 Community Priorities for Transportation Improvements: Place a higher priority on
maintaining a sense of place and enhancing the attractiveness of the Central Business District
than on efficient traffic flow and movement. (The adopted Level of Service Standards make an
exception for Main Street between the northbound lane merge area, currently located just south
of Laurel Street, to Manzanita Streets, to prevent street widening and/or elimination of on-street
parking which would require acquisition of the right-of-way, and consequently change the
character of the City’s historic downtown. Widening this segment of Main Street would require
acquisition of right-of-way and reduction in on-street parking, thereby changing the intimate,
pedestrian-oriented downtown the City wishes to preserve and enhance.)
         Program C-4.1.1: Consider traffic safety, the ease and safety of pedestrian movement
         across Main Street, and adequacy of on-street parking as key factors in evaluation of
         proposed roadway improvements along Main Street.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 - 12                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program C-4.1.2: Ensure that property and business owners in the Central Business
         District are informed and actively involved in planning future improvements to Main
         Street and other nearby streets.
         Program C-4.1.4: Consider signalizing the intersection of Pine Street and Main Street to
         provide adequate pedestrian safety.
         Program C-4.1.5: Consider options for increasing the capacity of Main Street north of
         the northbound lane merge area south of Laurel Street that do not require elimination of
         parking.
5.       Parking
Adequate off-street parking is essential for Central Business District businesses1. Fort Bragg
has implemented an in-lieu fee to build additional off-street parking facilities. Providing
additional off-street parking facilities in the Central Business District will have a community-wide
benefit.
Goal C-5            Provide additional parking spaces in the Central Business District.
Policy C-5.1 Additional Off-Street Parking: Continue to construct additional off-street parking
spaces in the Central Business District.
         Program C-5.1.1: Continue, and update, as needed, the City's parking in-lieu fee
         program for the Central Business District.
         Program C-5.1.2: Define priorities for the acquisition of property and the construction of
         additional parking facilities.
         Program C-5.1.3: Encourage the use of reciprocal access agreements and
         interconnecting off-street parking and circulation between adjacent commercial uses.
         Program C-5.1.4: Revise the Coastal LUDC to allow shared parking and driveways for
         commercial uses having day/night activity patterns.
         Program C-5.1.5: Develop a comprehensive signage program within the Central
         Business District to direct vehicles to off-street parking areas.
         Program C-5.1.6: Develop incentives for employers and employees to park off-street in
         the Central Business District.
         Program C-5.1.7: Continue enforcing parking restrictions in alleyways to ensure access
         for emergency and delivery vehicles.
         Program C-5.1.8: Review building setback standards from alleyways to ensure adequate
         emergency vehicle access.
1
         Refer to the Downtown Parking Study, City of Fort Bragg, 1999.
5 – Circulation Element                              5 - 13                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

6.       Additional Access to Noyo Harbor
Currently, access to the north side of Noyo Harbor is limited to North Harbor Drive. Another
access is required to improve traffic circulation and to ensure that emergency vehicles can
reach Noyo Harbor in the event North Harbor Drive is obstructed. Improved access to the Noyo
Harbor would be considered if and when the City annexes the harbor.
Goal C-6           Improve access to the North Part of the Noyo Harbor.
Policy C-6.1 Provide Additional Access Routes to Noyo Harbor: Consider constructing a new
access route from the west side of Main Street to the north side of the Noyo Harbor. Any new
access route to the north side of the Noyo Harbor shall be consistent with all applicable policies
of the LCP including, but not limited to, the wetland, environmentally sensitive habitat area,
public access, and visual protection policies.
         Program C-6.1.1: Evaluate the economic and environmental feasibility of acquiring an
         access route to Noyo Harbor using existing road alignments extended onto the Georgia-
         Pacific site.
Policy C-6.2 Improve Existing North Harbor Drive: Consider improvements to North Harbor
Drive to increase capacity and safety for vehicles and pedestrians. Any improvements to North
Harbor Drive shall be consistent with all applicable policies of the LCP including, but not limited
to, the wetland, environmentally sensitive habitat area, public access, and visual protection
policies.
         Program C-6.2.1: Develop a plan to improve North Harbor Drive by enlarging lane widths
         and constructing a sidewalk along one side of the street.
7.       Additional Eastern Emergency Route
The City needs to establish an emergency route to the east for emergency vehicles and for
evacuation in the event bridges are blocked or destroyed.
Goal C-7           Improve emergency access to the City.
Policy C-7.1 Emergency Access: Establish an access route out of Fort Bragg that could be
used in the event of damage to the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges.
         Program C-7.1.1: Work with the Georgia-Pacific Corporation to obtain temporary use, in
         the event of an emergency, of the logging road that begins on Cypress Street and
         provides access to Highway 20, east of Fort Bragg.
          Program C-7.1.2: Prepare an emergency evacuation route plan for the City.
8.       Public Transit
Fort Bragg is served by the Mendocino Transit Authority (MTA). MTA provides daily bus service
(the "65 CC Rider") between Fort Bragg, Willits, Ukiah, and Santa Rosa. A separate bus route
(the "60 The Coaster") provides weekday service between Fort Bragg, Mendocino, and the
Navarro River.
5 – Circulation Element                       5 - 14                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

MTA has a fixed-route weekday bus service (the "5 BraggAbout") in Fort Bragg with seven fixed
stops that connect the College of the Redwoods, shopping centers, the Central Business
District, and the hospital. Local trips within the Fort Bragg area are also provided by MTA's dial-
a-ride service where riders can call to be picked up and delivered to their destination Monday
through Saturday. In addition, the Redwood Senior Center provides transportation services for
seniors in the community.
Goal C-8            Provide better public transportation.
Policy C-8.1: Encourage Transit Use.
         Program C-8.1.1: Continue to support the expansion of transit services provided by
         MTA and other public transit providers.
Policy C-8.2: Bus Shelters: Encourage attractive, well-lighted, and comfortable bus shelters
placed in convenient locations.
         Program C-8.2.1: Continue to require the provision of bus stops, bus shelters, benches,
         turnouts, and related facilities in all major new commercial, industrial, residential, and
         institutional developments, and identify, in collaboration with MTA, additional locations
         for bus stops and shelters.
Policy C-8.3: Transit Facilities in New Development. Continue to require the provision of bus
stops, bus shelters, benches, turnouts, and related facilities in all major new commercial,
industrial, residential, and institutional developments.
9.       Pedestrian Facilities
Most areas of Fort Bragg have sidewalks for pedestrians. There are, however, a number of
residential streets which lack sidewalks, and substandard sidewalk facilities exist throughout the
City. Better pedestrian access across Fort Bragg's bridges and along Main Street from the
Noyo Bridge to the southern City limits and from Elm Street north is needed. New development
must be served by adequate pedestrian facilities. In addition to the policies and programs listed
below, see the Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element regarding policies and programs
recommended for increasing and improving the trail system within the Planning Area.
Goal C-9            Make it easier and safer for people to walk in Fort Bragg.
Policy C-9.1: Provide Continuous Sidewalks: Provide a continuous system of sidewalks
throughout the City.
Policy C-9.2: Require Sidewalks. Require a sidewalk on both sides of all collector and arterial
streets and on at least one side of local streets as a condition of approval for new development.
         Program C-9.2.1: Consider implementing the following funding sources for the purpose
         of installing sidewalks in existing developed areas of the City:
                   a)     special benefit assessment districts; and/or
                   b)     a low-interest revolving loan fund.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 15                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program C-9.2.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments and Caltrans to
         construct pedestrian walkways over the Hare Creek and Pudding Creek Bridges. These
         facilities may qualify for Transportation Enhancement Activities (TEA) funding available
         through Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG).
Policy C-9.3: Where feasible, incorporate pedestrian facilities into the design and construction
of all road improvements.
         Program C-9.3.1: Incorporate additional sidewalks from the Noyo Bridge to Ocean View
         Drive in the Capital Improvement Program.
     Policy C-9.4: Sidewalk Maintenance: Ensure that property owners maintain sidewalks in a
safe manner.
         Program C-9.4.1: Continue to implement City regulations that require sidewalks to be
         maintained by property owners. Carry out regular inspections, notification, and
         enforcement of this requirement.
         Program C-9.4.2: Financial Concerns: Consider the financial ability of property owners
         when establishing proposed sidewalk assessment districts.
         Program C-9.4.3: Seek available funding from grants and other funding sources for the
         construction of sidewalks in existing developed areas.
         Program C-9.4.4: Consider deferring payment for sidewalk installations for property
         owners with low incomes and/or on fixed incomes.
Policy C-9.5 Pedestrian Paths: Develop a series of continuous pedestrian walkways
throughout the commercial districts and residential neighborhoods.
         Program C-9.5.1: Allow asphalt or other approved surface pedestrian paths in very low
         density single-family residential areas where sidewalks are not required.
         Program C-9.5.2: Revise the Subdivision and Coastal Program to allow approved
         surface pedestrian paths within developments to create pedestrian connections to
         nearby streets, community facilities, and adjacent developments as a part of on- and off-
         site improvements.
Policy C-9.6:        Ensure that pedestrian paths are sited to avoid wetlands and other
environmentally sensitive areas.
     Policy C-9.7: Improve Pedestrian Safety.
         Program C-9.7.1: Continue to provide traffic controls and well-lit intersections in areas
         with a high volume of pedestrian movement.
         Program C-9.7.2: Consider expanded use of illuminated crosswalks.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 16                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

10.      Bikeways
With better facilities and trails, bicycling can become a more significant part of the transportation
system and an alternative to automobile use. Fort Bragg has few constraints to bicycling: most
of the City is flat, the weather is mild, and the City is compact with relatively short distances
between residential areas, schools, parks, and commercial centers.
The California Street and Highway Code has established three categories of bicycle trails based
on the physical conditions of the right-of-way.
     Class 1 Bikeway - Bike Path or Bike Trail: These facilities are constructed on a separate
     right-of-way, are completely separated from street traffic, and have minimal cross flows of
     automobile traffic. The State standard for minimum paved width of a two-way bike trail is
     eight feet.
     Class 2 Bikeway - Bike Lane: A restricted right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles with
     vehicle parking and cross flow by pedestrians and motorists permitted. Bike lanes are
     normally striped within paved areas of highways and are one-directional with a minimum
     standard width of five feet.
     Class 3 Bikeway - Bike Route: A route for bicyclists designated by signs or other markings
     and shared with pedestrians and motorists. Bike routes are typically designated to provide
     linkages to the bikeway system where Class 1 or 2 Bikeways cannot be provided.
The following local bikeway projects are identified as high priority by Mendocino County's 2000
Regional Bikeway Plan. A full description of recommended improvements is included in that
Plan.
•    The Pudding Creek Trestle to Otis Johnson Park Bikeway would provide a link between a
     park in northeast Fort Bragg and the beach at the mouth of Pudding Creek. It would also
     connect with the Old Haul Road, which travels north through MacKerricher State Park. As
     indicated on Map C-2, this path would serve Fort Bragg Middle School and neighborhoods
     in the northwest area of the City through a combination of Class 2 and 3 Bikeways. New
     Class 3 segments would be required from the Pudding Creek Trestle to Elm Street. Class 3
     improvements would be constructed on Elm Street, Franklin Street, and Laurel Street.
•    The Otis Johnson Park/Dana Street Bikeway would provide a north-south link within central
     Fort Bragg. This bicycle route would connect Fort Bragg Middle School and Fort Bragg High
     School. The proposed bike route would use existing bikeways and a section of the
     proposed bikeway improvement listed above for Laurel Street. It would consist of Class 3
     Bikeway improvements on Oak Street and Class 1 Bikeway improvements on Dana Street.
•    The Dana Gray School to Maple Street Bikeway would provide east-west access between
     Dana Gray School and an existing bikeway on Maple Street. Class 3 Bikeways would be
     constructed on S. Sanderson Way, Willow Street, and Lincoln Street.
Goal C-10          Make it easier and safer for people to travel by bicycle.
Policy C-10.1 Comprehensive Bikeway System: Establish a comprehensive and safe system
of bikeways connecting all parts of Fort Bragg.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 17                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program C-10.1.1: Complete the bikeway system as indicated in Map C-2: Bicycle
         Paths. Make the completion of the Pudding Creek Trestle/Glass Beach to Otis Johnson
         Park a high priority.
         Program C-10.1.2: Incorporate bicycle and pedestrian facilities into the design and
         construction of all road improvements as feasible.
         Program C-10.1.3: Continue to participate in MCOG's Regional Bikeway Plan to qualify
         for State Bicycle Lane Account funds.
         Program C-10.1.4: Utilize parking-in-lieu funds, dedications, grant funding, traffic impact
         fees, and other means, as appropriate, to acquire rights-of-way needed for a
         comprehensive bikeway system as indicated in Map C-2.
         Program C-10.1.5: Maintain bikeways to ensure that they are free of debris and other
         obstacles. Consider increasing the number of trash receptacles, solar-powered
         emergency telephones, and increased lighting along bicycle trails.
Policy C-10.2: Require Bikeways. Require new development to provide on-site connections to
existing and proposed bikeways, as appropriate.
Policy C-10.3: Require that streets linking residential areas with school facilities be designed to
include bikeways.
Policy C-10.4: Consider bicycle operating characteristics in the design of intersections and
traffic control systems.
Policy C-10.5 Bicycle Parking: Provide adequate and secure bicycle parking at public transit
facilities, park and ride lots, schools, the library, parks, City offices, and commercial areas.
         Program C-10.5.1: Revise the Coastal LUDC parking standards to require larger
         commercial and multi-family residential projects, public buildings, and transit facilities to
         provide secure bicycle parking.
         Program C-10.5.2: Continue the bicycle safety program conducted by the Police
         Department.
11.      Access for the Mobility Impaired
Providing transportation facilities accessible to persons who are mobility-impaired is essential.
Approximately three percent of the population in Fort Bragg cannot use conventional public
transit due to a disability. The Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 contains many
requirements regarding removal of barriers for persons with disabilities.
Goal C-11          Provide mobility-impaired persons with access to transportation.
      Policy C-11.1: Regulations for Disabled Persons: Enforce Federal and State regulations
regarding access for persons with disabilities.
5 – Circulation Element                           5 - 18                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                 HW
                                                                                   Y1
                                                                                                                          AIRPORT                           RD.
                     Trestle Bridge Connection to the
                              Haul Road Trail
                                                                Pudding
                                                                                                                   C   re
                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                 ELM ST.
                                                                SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                      PUDDING                  CREEK         RD.
                                                                                                                               BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                                FIR ST.
                                                                                    Library                                                    PINE ST.
                                   Guest House Museum                                                                                    LAUREL ST.
                                                                                                                    ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DENNISON LANE
                                                                                  ST.
                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                 McPHERSON
                                                                                                 McPH
                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                 McPHERSO
                                                                                                   cPHERSON
                                                                                                       RSO
                                                                                                         ON S
                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                            ST.
                                                                                                              T.
                                                                                                                                REDWOOD AVE.
          an
                                                                                                                    HARRISON
                                                                                                                           N
                                                                          ST
                                                                           T.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                  FRAN
                                                                                  F RA KLIN
                                                                                        L IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                  ALDER ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Corporation
                                                                          MAIN
                                                                          M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OAK
        Oce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SHERWOOD RD.         Yard
                                                                                                                          MADRONE                           ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                           WILLOW ST.
                                                                                             MAP
                                                                                             MAPL
                                                                                             MA
                                                                                              APLE ST.
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.    CORRY ST.     HAROLD ST.          LINCOLN ST.       WALL ST.
                                                                                               HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                                     WALNUT                         ST.
                                                                                                                                               Health Club
                                                                      MAIN ST.
        Pacific
                                                                                                             CYPRESS ST.
                                                                                                                   SOU
                                                                                                                           TH
                                                                                                                                  ST.
                                                                                                                                                      RI
                                                                                                                                                        VE
                                                                                                                                                          R                                                                                  MAP C-2
                                                             HWY 1                                                             NO
                                                                                                                                 YO                                                                                                          BICYCLE PATHS
               College              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                of the                                                             Boatyard Shopping
              Redwoods                                                                  Center
                                                             HWY.
                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                                                           Y.
                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                     HWY 1
                                                                 SIMPSON LANE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Legend
                                                                                                                                               City Boundary                                                                          Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                      School                            Parks       Hospital                      Harbor/Marina
0           1400         2800
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Aquatic Center                    Points of Interest
feet
                                                                                                                                                                           Proposed Hwy 1 Bike Lanes                                           Existing Bikeways
SOURCE: CITY OF FORT BRAGG, 2007
(revised 11/28/07)

Policy C-11.2: Handicapped Access. In conformance with State and Federal regulations,
continue to review all projects for handicapped access and require the installation of curb cuts,
ramps, and other improvements facilitating handicapped access.
         Program C-11.2.1: Assist organizations, such as the Senior Center, which provide transit
         service to the elderly and the mobility-impaired, in identifying and obtaining funding.
      Policy C-11.3      Support Improved Access:            Support improved access to public
transportation and pedestrian facilities for people with disabilities.
         Program C-11.3.1: Continue to apply for grants for ADA-related projects from MCOG
         and other sources.
         Program C-11.3.2: Consider funding to implement the City’s ADA Access and
         Transportation Plan through the City’s Capital Improvement Plan (CIP), grants, and
         State and Federal transportation funds.
12.      Train Service
The Sierra Railroad, known as the Skunk Line, operates a rail system between Willits and Fort
Bragg. It is the only railroad in the region that has maintained passenger service on a regular
basis since its founding. Train service is offered daily (approximately eleven months per year),
and handles approximately 80,000 passengers annually. Freight service is provided on request.
The Skunk Depot, located at Laurel Street in the Central Business District, has been recently
renovated, including additional parking facilities. It provides access to MTA’s local and regional
buses. The railroad not only benefits from the extensive tourist traffic on the Mendocino Coast,
it is also a major generator of visitors to the Willits and Fort Bragg areas.
Although the use of the Skunk Line for freight transportation has decreased in recent years, it
continues to provide freight service. If the rail lines were upgraded to carry heavier loads, it
could serve as an incentive to increase freight loads.
Goal C-12          Increase use of the Skunk Line for transportation of people and freight.
      Policy C-12.1      Skunk Train: Encourage increased use of the Skunk Train.
         Program C-12.1.1: Continue to work with the Skunk Train Company to improve and
         expand facilities at the Skunk Depot.
         Program C-12.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments to facilitate
         increased use of the Skunk Line as an alternative to automobile transportation between
         Fort Bragg and Willits.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 19                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

13.      Coordinate Regional Transportation Planning
Traffic congestion along Fort Bragg's Main Street is connected to development in
unincorporated areas to the north and south of the City. Main Street is Highway One which is
the primary north-south route for all communities on the coast. Land use decisions made by the
County of Mendocino have a significant impact on transportation in the Fort Bragg area. The
City works closely with the regional agencies described below:
     • County of Mendocino: maintains and plans the county road system.
     • Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG): prepares and carries out a Regional
         Transportation Plan, establishes priorities for Federal and State funding, and funds
         studies of transportation corridors.
     • Mendocino Transit Authority, (MTA): operates several transit routes serving the City and
         the region. It is a county-wide authority created through a joint powers agreement
         among cities and the County.
Goal C-13          Coordinate regional traffic planning.
      Policy C-13.1      Regional Transportation Efforts:    Participate in regional transportation
planning efforts.
         Program C-13.1.1: Continue to provide City Council and staff representation on regional
         transportation planning agencies.
         Program C-13.1.2: Work with the MCOG and Caltrans to coordinate transportation
         planning and to identify funding for necessary transportation improvements.
         Program C-13.1.3: Continue to ensure that MCOG's Regional Transportation Plan
         (RTP), the State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) and the State Highway
         Systems Operation and Protection Plan (SHOPP) include needed improvements to
         Highway One and Highway 20 in the Fort Bragg Planning area. Such improvements
         shall be designed to ensure that Highway One in rural areas outside the Mendocino
         County urban/rural boundary remains a scenic two-lane road consistent with Section
         30254 of the Coastal Act.
14.      Funding Transportation Improvements
Funding transportation improvements is predominantly a Federal, State, and regional
responsibility. For many years the road system has received the largest proportion of public
expenditures for transportation.         Although increased funding for alternative modes of
transportation has significant environmental and social benefits, roadway funding will continue
to receive the highest priority. Fort Bragg remains a relatively isolated coastal community and
depends on the road system for the majority of its transportation needs.
A significant amount of the traffic in Fort Bragg is through-traffic (trips that originate or have
destinations outside of the City). The logging industry, tourist travel, and people coming to Fort
Bragg from around the region for shopping, educational, medical, and other services generate
much of the traffic.
It is necessary that funding mechanisms be expanded to ensure effective coordination among
different government jurisdictions. The goals, policies, and programs below complement those
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 20                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

in the Land Use and Public Facilities Elements requiring new development to pay for its fair
share of maintaining the City's infrastructure and service levels.
Goal C-14          Promote balanced funding for transportation.
     Policy C-14.1       Development to Pay Its Fair Share: Require new development to pay its
fair share of transportation improvements to maintain levels of service and traffic safety in the
City.
         Program C-14.1.1: Develop a City-wide Traffic Mitigation Fee Program.
         Program C-14.1.2: Work with the County of Mendocino and MCOG to develop traffic
         mitigation fees for the Fort Bragg Sphere of Influence.          Consider adopting a
         memorandum of understanding between the City of Fort Bragg and the County
         regarding traffic mitigation fees.
         Program C-14.1.3: Work with MCOG to ensure that the standards and requirements
         contained in the joint City and County Traffic Mitigation Program between Fort Bragg
         and the County are incorporated into the Regional Transportation Plan.
         Program C-14.1.4: Include in the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program mitigation fees for new
         development with primary access to Highway One and Highway 20. Utilize the funds
         collected as a local match to encourage Caltrans to raise the priority of Highway One
         and Highway 20 improvements.
         Program C-14.1.5: Ensure that the City's Pavement Management System obtains
         funding from the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program, as deemed appropriate by the traffic
         impact fee nexus study and applicable State law.
         Program C-14.1.6: Carry out an ongoing inventory of transportation system needs to be
         included in the City's Capital Improvement Plan.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 21                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

5 – Circulation Element         5 - 22 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

6.       COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Community Design Element is concerned primarily with the protection of the visual
resources and quality in the Coastal Zone and the City, or what residents and visitors see. The
City’s appearance is essential to the quality of life in Fort Bragg. Visual quality and amenities
go hand-in-hand with long-term economic development strategies, and strengthen the stability
and desirability of the community. To be attractive to residents, visitors, and businesses, the
City must be concerned about its appearance, physical character, and livability. Existing
residential real estate values and the desirability of businesses that depend on tourism are
closely tied to the visual character of the community.
This element contains sections addressing Visual Analyses for development in the Coastal
Zone, Design Review, the Central Business District, historic preservation, and public art and
spaces.
The Community Design Element also establishes goals, policies, and programs to preserve and
enhance Fort Bragg’s authentic, small town character. The community is defined in part by its
isolated location on the magnificent coastline of Mendocino County. Its sense of place derives
from its heritage as a regional center for the timber and fishing industries. As the economy
evolves to a more tourism and service-based economy, the community has acknowledged the
importance of maintaining the historic identify of downtown and the integrity of the residential
neighborhoods, while enhancing views and access to the coastline and planning for continued
growth and development.
B.       Community Design and the Coastal Act
Protection of visual resources is called for by the Coastal Act. Section 30251 of the Coastal Act
states that the scenic and visual qualities of coastal areas shall be considered and protected as
a resource of public importance. Permitted development shall be sited and designed to protect
views to and along the ocean and scenic coastal areas to minimize alteration of natural land
forms, to be visually compatible with the character of surrounding areas, and, where feasible, to
restore and enhance visual quality in visually degraded areas. The Local Coastal Program
Background Report contains an inventory of scenic views.
Fort Bragg has many valuable visual resources in the Coastal Zone, including high bluffs, jutting
headlands, wetlands, serene river estuaries, beaches, and dunes. The mature trees that front
the west side of Main Street between the North Cliff Hotel and Maple Street provide an
important visual resource. Scenic resources attract many visitors to these areas and provide
the basis for the City's tourist industry. Visual resources can be readily degraded through
poorly-designed and located structures, roads, signs, and utility lines that block coastal views,
alter natural landforms, and detract from the small town character of the community.
6 – Community Design Element                   6-1                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

In addition, Section 30253 of the Coastal Act states that new development shall, where
appropriate, protect special communities and neighborhoods which, because of their unique
characteristics, are popular visitor destination points for recreational uses.
C.       Design Review
Most new development in the City is subject to a design review process which is intended to
ensure that it preserves and enhances the aesthetic character of its setting. This Element and
the City’s recently adopted Citywide Design Guidelines assist property owners, business
owners, and developers to design projects which fit with the City. This element and the Citywide
Design Guidelines also assist decision-makers with the evaluation of proposed development.
The Citywide Design Guidelines are intended to be flexible and to encourage innovative and
creative designs. For this reason, the Guidelines are generally qualitative statements rather
than quantitative standards, and there are many acceptable ways to meet each of the
Guidelines. Design Review approval requirements do not replace, supersede or otherwise
modify the independent requirement for a coastal development permit approved pursuant to the
applicable policies and standards of the certified LCP.
D.       Historic Preservation
Much of Fort Bragg was built during the first half of the twentieth century, and the built
environment in the Central Business District and many of the neighborhoods reflects the
architectural heritage of the community. Fort Bragg’s architecturally significant buildings and
structures convey a sense of the community’s history, providing a link to the past and
strengthening the City’s identity. From the Sherwood Pomo who lived in the area for over 5,000
years to the more recent European settlers seeking lumber, fish, and fur, the landscape has
seen remarkable transformations.
The City has a Historic Building Inventory that identifies buildings, sites, structures, and objects
of cultural and historical importance. The purpose of the Inventory is to preserve the
community’s heritage by facilitating use of the State of California’s Historic Building Code. To
be included in the Historic Building Inventory, a structure must be at least 40 years old and meet
other criteria related to its design and history. The Inventory is not a comprehensive description
of all historically or culturally significant buildings or sites in the community, and a property is
listed at the owner’s request.
E.       The Central Business District
The Central Business District (CBD) is the heart of the community’s commercial, civic, historic,
and cultural life. It is the area with the largest concentration of historic buildings such as the
Skunk Train Depot, the Guest House Museum, the Old Fort Building, Town Hall, City Hall, and
numerous commercial and residential structures. The combined efforts of government and
property owners will ensure that the attractiveness of the downtown will be preserved and
enhanced. Increasing pedestrian activity, improving street lighting, parking, and amenities, and
ensuring that renovations and new construction maintain the historic scale and character of this
area will foster the continued vitality of the CBD.
6 – Community Design Element                     6-2                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                  Old Fort Building, 430 Franklin Street
F.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:                 are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy CD-2.6,
Policy CD-3.3, Policy CD-7.3, and Policy CD-8.1.
Goal CD-1          Preserve and enhance scenic views.
Policy CD-1.1: Visual Resources: Permitted development shall be designed and sited to
protect views to and along the ocean and scenic coastal areas, to minimize the alteration of
natural landforms, to be visually compatible with the character of surrounding areas, and, where
feasible, to restore and enhance scenic views in visually degraded areas.
         Program CD-1.1.1:            Require Design Review of new development or significant
         expansion to existing development1 located in areas designated "Potential Scenic Views
         Toward the Ocean or the Noyo River" on Map CD-1: Scenic Views in the Coastal Zone.
Policy CD-1.2: The large trees fronting the west side of Highway One between the North Cliff
Hotel and Cypress Street shall be retained as far as feasible; trees may be removed if they are
dead or damaged or pose a public safety hazard, or to provide driveways or new public streets.
The forested area north of the Georgia-Pacific nursery and south of Maple Street shall be
maintained as a sensitive natural habitat and scenic resource, and it shall not be developed.
Policy CD-1.3: Visual Analysis Required. A Visual Analysis shall be required for all
development located in areas designated "Potential Scenic Views Toward the Ocean or the
Noyo River" on Map CD-1 except development listed in below. Development exempt from
Visual Analysis includes the following:
1
         For purposes of Design Review, Significant expansion of existing development is defined as an increase
         equal to or over 25 percent of the existing floor area of a structure.
6 – Community Design Element                             6-3                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

       1. The replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, destroyed by a
            disaster. The replacement structure shall conform to applicable existing zoning
            requirements, shall be for the same use as the destroyed structure, shall not exceed
            either the floor area, height, or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than 10
            percent, and shall be sited in the same location on the affected property as the
            destroyed structure.
       2.  The demolition and reconstruction of a single-family residence; provided, that the
            reconstructed residence shall not exceed either the floor area, height or bulk of the
            former structure by more than 10 percent, and that the reconstructed residence shall
            be sited in the same location on the affected property as the former structure.
       3. Improvements to any structure which do not change the intensity of its use, which do
            not increase either the floor area, height, or bulk of the structure by more than l0
            percent, which do not block or impede public access, and which do not result in a
            seaward encroachment by the structure.
       4. The reconstruction or repair of any seawall; provided, however, that the reconstructed
            or repaired seawall is not seaward of the location of the former structure.
       5. Any repair or maintenance activity for which the Director determines has no potential
            for impacts to visual resources.
       Definitions as used in this subsection:
              1. "Disaster" means any situation in which the force or forces which destroyed the
              structure to be replaced were beyond the control of its owner.
              2. "Bulk" means total interior cubic volume as measured from the exterior surface of
              the structure.
              3. "Structure" includes landscaping and any erosion control structure or device
              which is similar to that which existed prior to the occurrence of the disaster.
Policy CD-1.4: New development shall be sited and designed to minimize adverse impacts on
scenic areas visible from scenic roads or public viewing areas to the maximum feasible extent.
Policy CD-1.5: All new development shall be sited and designed to minimize alteration of
natural landforms by:
         1. Conforming to the natural topography.
         2. Preventing substantial grading or reconfiguration of the project site.
         3. Minimizing flat building pads on slopes. Building pads on sloping sites shall utilize
             split level or stepped-pad designs.
         4. Requiring that man-made contours mimic the natural contours.
         5. Ensuring that graded slopes blend with the existing terrain of the site and
             surrounding area.
         6. Minimizing grading permitted outside of the building footprint.
         7. Clustering structures to minimize site disturbance and to minimize development
             area.
         8. Minimizing height and length of cut and fill slopes.
         9. Minimizing the height and length of retaining walls.
6 – Community Design Element                     6-4                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                        HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Map CD-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SCENIC VIEWS IN THE
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE                                                                                                                                                                           COASTAL ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Potential scenic views toward the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ocean or the Noyo River
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The protection and enhancement of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               scenic views on the former Mill Site will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               be addressed in a Specific Plan.
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
        10. Cut and fill operations may be balanced on-site, where the grading does not
             substantially alter the existing topography and blends with the surrounding area.
             Export of cut material may be required to preserve the natural topography.
Policy CD-1.6: Fences, walls, and landscaping shall minimize blockage of scenic areas from
roads, parks, beaches, and other public viewing areas.
Policy CD-1.7: Bluff Face and Bluff Retreat Setback Development. Development on the bluff
face and within the bluff retreat setback shall be limited to the following uses with a conditional
use permit where there is no feasible less environmentally damaging alternative, feasible
mitigation measures have been provided to minimize all adverse environmental impacts. and
allowable structures are designed be visually compatible with the surrounding area to the
maximum extent feasible.
         (a) engineered accessways or staircases to beaches, boardwalks, viewing platforms,
         and trail alignments for public access purposes,
         (b) pipelines to serve coastal dependent industry,
         (c) habitat restoration,
         (d) hazardous materials remediation, and
         (e) landform alterations where such alterations re-establish natural landforms and
         drainage patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
Policy CD-1.8: Blufftop development shall incorporate a setback from the edge of the bluff that
avoids and minimizes visual impacts from the beach and ocean below. The blufftop setback
necessary to protect visual resources may be in excess of the setback necessary to ensure that
risk from geologic hazards are minimized for the life of the structure, as detailed in Policy SF-B.
Policy CD-1.9: Exterior lighting (except traffic lights, navigational lights, and other similar safety
lighting) shall be minimized, restricted to low intensity fixtures, and shielded so that no light
shines beyond the boundary of the property.
Policy CD-1.10: All proposed divisions of land and boundary line adjustments shall be analyzed
for consistency of potential future development with the visual resource protection policies of the
LCP, and no division of land or boundary line adjustment shall be approved if development of
resulting parcel(s) would be inconsistent with these policies.
Policy CD-1.11: New development shall minimize removal of natural vegetation. Existing native
trees and plants shall be preserved on the site to the maximum extent feasible.
         Program CD.1.11.1: Consider amending the Coastal LUDC to adopt additional design
         standards to protect scenic resources.
Policy CD-1.12 Maintain Unobstructed Views of the Ocean: Require new development north of
Pudding Creek to leave unblocked views to the ocean from Highway One.
Policy CD-1.13: Retain Views North of Pudding Creek. New development north of Pudding
Creek and west of Main Street on parcels with total frontage of more than 135 feet, on either the
Haul Road or Main Street as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be required to
leave a minimum of 30 percent of the project’s total parcel frontage free of view-blocking
development. The area free of view-blocking development shall not include narrow
passageways between buildings on the site, and shall be concentrated.
6 – Community Design Element                   6-5                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy CD-1.14 All new development (including decks and balconies) north of Pudding Creek
shall be set back at least 30 feet from the edge of the Old Haul Road and shall be consistent
with all other applicable LCP setback requirements.
Goal CD-2:        Ensure that new development demonstrates excellence of design and
                  sensitivity to the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Policy CD-2.1 Design Review: All development that has the potential to affect visual resources
shall be subject to Design Review, unless otherwise exempt from Design Review pursuant to
Coastal Land Use & Development Code Section 18.71.050. Design Review approval
requirements shall not replace, supersede or otherwise modify the independent requirement for
a coastal development permit approved pursuant to the applicable policies and standards of the
certified LCP. Ensure that development is constructed in a manner consistent with the Citywide
Design Guidelines.
         Program CD-2.1.1: Establish a procedure for property owners to request that the City
         adopt additional Citywide Design Guidelines and/or measures for the preservation of
         historic structures within their neighborhood or commercial area.
Policy CD-2.2 Large Commercial Development: Ensure that large commercial development,
such as shopping centers, big box retail, and mixed use development, fits harmoniously with the
scale and design of existing buildings and streetscape of the City.
Policy CD-2.3 Second Dwelling Units and Manufactured Units and Single-Family Residential
Development: Ensure that second dwelling units, manufactured units, and single-family
residences are sited and constructed in a manner harmonious with surrounding development.
Policy CD-2.4 Discourage Sameness and Repetitive Residential Designs.
Policy CD-2.5 Scenic Views and Resource Areas: Ensure that development does not adversely
impact scenic views and resources as seen from a road and other public rights-of-way.
         Program CD-2.5.1: Adopt additional Citywide Design Guidelines for scenic views and
         resources identified in Map CD-1. Consider including, at a minimum, the following
         guidelines:
                 a)      Discourage continuous buildings that block scenic views and require view
                         corridors providing unobstructed views of the shoreline and/or the sea
                         from public rights-of-way.
                 b)      Require bluff setbacks for development adjacent to or near public areas
                         along the shoreline.
                 c)      Cluster development to avoid blocking viewsheds to the maximum extent
                         feasible.
                 d)      Minimize the size of advertising, business identification, and directional
                         signs to ensure scenic views are not obstructed.
                 e)      Design night lighting of buildings to be indirect with no source of light
                         visible, and lighting should not intrude on adjacent property or cause
                         glare.
                 f)      Prohibit or require screening of the following uses in scenic view
                         corridors: signs and fencing which block the scenic views, mechanical
6 – Community Design Element                    6-6                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                         equipment, refuse containers such as dumpsters, and the outdoor
                         storage of materials.
     Policy CD-2.6 Property Maintenance and Nuisances: Ensure that properties are well
maintained and nuisances are abated.
         Program CD-2.6.1: Continue to implement and enforce the City’s nuisance abatement
         ordinance, and update it, as necessary, to ensure that property values are maintained
         throughout the City.
         Program CD-2.6.2: Consider adopting regulations in the Municipal Code requiring that
         alleyways in residential areas be kept free of obstructions to ensure unimpeded access
         at all times.
         Program CD-2.6.3: Provide Code enforcement for immediate health and safety
         violations in conjunction with the building inspection process.
Policy CD-2.7 Landscaping: Encourage attractive native and drought-tolerant landscaping in
residential and commercial developments.
Policy CD-2.8 Strip Development: Discourage further strip development along Main Street.
Strip development is typically characterized by street frontage parking lots serving individual or
strips of stores or restaurants, with no provisions for pedestrian access between individual uses
and buildings arranged linearly.
         Program CD-2.8.1: Establish standards regarding site access, separation of vehicular
         and pedestrian movements, signage, landscaping and night-lighting for automobile-
         dependent businesses such as drive-through restaurants and automobile service
         stations.
Goal CD-3          Preserve the Central Business District as the commercial, civic, historic,
                   and cultural center of the community.
Policy CD-3.1 Adaptive Reuse: Facilitate the adaptive reuse of existing older buildings in the
Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.1.1: Consider establishing a low-interest revolving loan fund for the
         renovation and upgrading of older buildings in the Central Business District, with
         incentives for the reuse of vacant or underutilized upper floors for housing.
Policy CD-3.2 Pedestrian Activity: Encourage increased pedestrian movement and activity in
the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.2.1: Implement streetscape improvements such as pedestrian lighting,
         street trees, additional crosswalks, benches, intersection bulb-outs, and other amenities
         that improve the safety and ambiance of the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.2.2: Continue to support the operation of a Farmer’s Market and a
         multitude of street fairs and promotional activities in the Central Business District.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-7                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     Policy CD-3.3 Economic Vitality: Continue to support the economic diversity and vitality of
downtown businesses.
         Program CD-3.3.1: Consider establishing a Business Improvement District (BID) to
         stimulate increased business activity and revenues by helping to fund public
         improvements and loans and/or grants for private improvements in the Central Business
         District.
         Program CD-3.3.2: Consider amendments to the building height regulations in the
         Coastal LUDC to allow for additional height for well designed structures in the Central
         Business District that do not obstruct scenic views and which are compatible with
         existing development on adjoining properties.
Policy CD-3.4 Parking: Improve the availability of public parking facilities in the Central
Business District and other commercial areas.
         Program CD-3.4.1: Implement the recommendations of the Downtown Parking Study to
         provide better signage for off-street parking facilities and to increase the availability of
         on-street parking spaces by changing the time limits.
         Program CD-3.4.2: Implement shared parking agreements wherever feasible. Utilize,
         as appropriate, development agreements, conditions of approval, easements, and other
         means to assure shared parking arrangements.
         Program CD-3.4.3: Consider reduced and/or flexible parking requirements in the
         Coastal LUDC for mixed use developments.
         Program CD-3.4.4: Consider establishing a parking assessment district for the Central
         Business District to help finance the acquisition of property for additional off-street
         parking lots.
         Program CD-3.4.5: Periodically update the Central Business District parking in-lieu fee
         program to ensure that it presents a fair and equitable alternative to the provision of on-
         site parking.
Policy CD-3.5 Strengthen the Distinctive Identity of the Central Business District: Strengthen
the distinctive identity and unique sense of place of the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.5.1: Consider establishing a sign program for the Central Business
         District, with distinctive signs at the entryways to and within the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.5.2: Consider installing street lighting in the Central Business District
         which reflects the historic character of the area, for example, cast-iron standards, lower-
         intensity, warm light fixtures, and spot lighting for key historical buildings.
         Program CD-3.5.3: Locate an area where a pocket park or a small plaza could be
         established for public gatherings, street fairs, concerts, and similar outdoor public
         events.
6 – Community Design Element                      6-8                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal CD-4         Create attractive entryways to the City.
Policy CD-4.1 Entryways: Clearly define the points of entry to the City through the use of
distinctive signs, lighting, and landscaping.
         Program CD-4.1: Maintain, distinctive signs placed in a landscaped area at the south
         entryway at Highway 20/Highway One and at the north entryway on Highway One at the
         City Limits.
                                Oceanfront Park and entrance to Noyo Harbor
Goal CD-5         Improve the appearance and effectiveness of parking facilities.
Policy CD-5.1 Parking Location: Wherever feasible, locate parking facilities to the rear of the
development so that the building facade is contiguous with the street frontage, and parking
areas are hidden from the street.
         Program CD-5.1.1: Consider adopting the following standards for parking facilities:
                 a)      establish standards for shade tree planting;
                 b)      establish an appropriately-scaled landscaped perimeter around parking
                         areas;
                 c)      provide bicycle and motorcycle parking in all new parking facilities that
                         include more than ten spaces.
6 – Community Design Element                      6-9                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal CD-6         Use lighting to create a sense of security and to provide cohesion to the
                  physical structure of the community.
Policy CD-6.1: Security: Establish standards to ensure that on-site lighting is adequate to
provide security while not producing excessive glare.
Policy CD-6.2: Lighting Design Guidelines: Apply lighting design guidelines contained in the
Citywide Design Guidelines.
Goal CD-7         Preserve cultural and historic resources.
Policy CD-7.1 Protect and Preserve Buildings and Sites with Historic and Cultural Significance
to the Community.
              Trestle at Pudding Creek: A historically significant structure at MacKerricher State Park
         Program CD-7.1.1: Update the Historic Building Inventory to include a wider and more
         comprehensive list of culturally and historically significant sites and buildings.
         Encourage property owners to list their buildings in the Historic Building Inventory.
         Program CD-7.1.2: Consider approval of building permits using the State Historic
         Building Code, as appropriate.
         Program CD-7.1.3: Include regulations in the Coastal LUDC which define historic
         resources, historic structure, and building styles and which establish procedures to
         evaluate, protect, and preserve sites, buildings, structures, districts, and objects that
         reflect significant elements of Fort Bragg’s cultural, social, economic, and architectural
         heritage.
         Program CD-7.1.4: Establish incentives for the preservation and restoration of historic
         buildings and sites.       Consider the following incentives: low interest loans for
         rehabilitation consistent with the original character of historic buildings, tax incentives for
         the preservation of historic structures, including the use of Mills Act preservation
6 – Community Design Element                      6 - 10                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         contracts, and awards or grants for the preservation and protection of historic buildings
         and those with cultural significance.
         Program CD-7.1.5: Consider adopting an “Affirmative Maintenance” ordinance for
         buildings in commercial land use designations.
         Program CD-7.1.6: Establish a procedure whereby property owners may initiate a
         program for preservation of historic structures within their neighborhood.
Policy CD-7.2 Discourage Demolitions: Discourage the demolition of historic buildings.
         Program CD-7.2.1: Require archival research be carried out determining the cultural
         and historic significance of buildings proposed for demolition, paid for by the project
         proponent.
         Program CD-7.2.2: Revise the City’s Coastal Land Use & Development Code to require
         the preparation of drawings and/or photographic records and the salvaging or
         preservation of architectural fixtures of historic structures that are demolished.
      Policy CD-7.3      Public Awareness: Increase public awareness and appreciation of the
City’s cultural and historic resources.
         Program CD-7.3.1: Work with the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical Society to
         increase public awareness concerning the importance of historic preservation and the
         location of significant and protected structures in the City.
         Program CD-7.3.2: Prepare a public information package describing available programs
         for property owners to restore and rehabilitate historic structures, including information
         on tax incentives.
         Program CD-7.3.3: Support the activities of the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical
         Society.
                                  Guest House Museum, Main Street
6 – Community Design Element                    6 - 11                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                   The Skunk Train Circa 1940
Goal CD-8         Support Public Art and Open Space.
      Policy CD-8.1 Public Art: Encourage the provision of murals, fountains, sculptures, and
other forms of public art in public spaces and parks.
         Program CD-8.1.1: Consider adopting a One-Percent for Art Program which would
         require one percent of the cost of construction of new public buildings and facilities to be
         allocated for public art.
         Program CD-8.1.2: Consider implementing an ongoing outdoor sculpture exhibit
         adjacent to City Hall and/or in other locations, with an emphasis on supporting and
         showcasing local artists and reflecting the cultural life of the community.
Policy CD-8.2 Provide Public Open Spaces: Encourage the development of public open spaces
for gatherings and fairs in commercial areas of the City.
         Program CD-8.2.1: Consider the purchase of appropriate locations for public open
         space and the enhancement of existing public spaces to accommodate community
         gatherings.
         Program CD-8.2.2: Encourage the inclusion of public open spaces in new commercial
         development that is sufficiently large to accommodate such uses.
6 – Community Design Element                    6 - 12                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

  7.     SAFETY ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Safety Element, pursuant to Government Code Section 65302(g), deals with the protection
of the community from unreasonable risks associated with the effects of earthquakes,
landslides, slope instability, subsidence, other geologic hazards, flood, and fire. Maps
identifying earthquake hazards, unstable soil hazards, landslide hazards, and flood zones are
included in this element.
The geology, topography, soils, hydrology, and fire risk of Fort Bragg pose numerous
constraints on future development. This element guides land use planning and policy decisions
in order to achieve an acceptable level of public protection.
B.       Seismic Safety and Geologic Hazards
There are no active earthquake faults in the City. However, the San Andreas fault is located
approximately 9 miles to the west, and the Maacama fault is 22 miles to the east. Major
earthquakes can occur on these faults. Seismic activities can cause major disruptions of the
City's transportation and emergency services network. Should the Pudding Creek, Noyo River,
and/or Hare Creek Bridges become unusable following a seismic event, people may not be able
to evacuate, and emergency access would be blocked. Potential hazards associated with
earthquakes include: rupture of the ground surface by displacement along faults, shaking of the
ground caused by the passage of seismic waves through the earth, ground failure induced by
shaking, such as landslides, liquefaction and subsidence of unstable ground, and tsunamis.
Non-seismic geologic hazards include the presence of unstable soils on steep slopes and
expansive soils which, in the presence of moisture, will swell and shrink when returning to a dry
condition. Map SF-1: Geologic Hazards identifies areas of potential landslides.
C.       Flooding
Portions of the City have areas subject to potential flooding during severe storms. Because of
the generally flat terrain in the Fort Bragg area, a 100-year storm could exceed the ability of the
City's infrastructure to move runoff water from the City to outfalls into natural drainageways and
the ocean. This drainage overload may result in standing water in low areas. High tides and
severe storms may also cause flooding in low-lying areas near creeks and drainages.
Map SF-2: Flood Hazards shows areas within the 100-year floodplain. Within floodplains
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), property owners may be
required to obtain flood insurance as a condition of mortgage approval. The areas subject to
flooding are shown on maps called the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) that are prepared by
FEMA. The City participates in the FEMA flood insurance program, which allows property
owners to obtain subsidized insurance rates.
7 – Safety Element                             7-1                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

FEMA also requires the City to establish development standards for construction in the 100-year
floodplain. Typically the standards developed by a city or county can range from limits on the
intensity of development to requirements to raise the "habitable floor" of the structure to at least
one foot above the 100-year flood peak elevation. The majority of the City is situated in "Zone
X" which is above both the 100-year and the 500-year floodplains.
D.       Fire Protection
In 1991, the City of Fort Bragg and the Fort Bragg Rural Fire District entered into an agreement
creating the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority. The Authority has primary fire protection
responsibility within the City limits and/or developed lands within the District (the District
includes all of the City's Sphere of Influence). In addition to normal fire calls, the Fort Bragg Fire
Protection Authority has increasingly been called to assist with accidents, hazardous material
spills, medical calls, and to provide personnel and equipment for large wildfires outside of the
area. The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CDFFP) has responsibility for
wildland fires within the Planning Area. The Draft EIR presents a complete description of
staffing, response time, calls for assistance, and other factors related to the Fire Protection
Authority. The primary constraints or issues involving the Fire Protection Authority concern
adequate staffing, adequate equipment, and adequate fireflow to structures.
E.       Police Protection
Within the City, the Fort Bragg Police Department has primary responsibility for police response.
The constraint to providing adequate police response involves the need to ensure that the City
hires sufficient staff to meet the response needs of both the existing and future population.
F.       Emergency Preparedness
California State Law requires that all cities and counties adopt an Emergency Plan. The
purpose of this plan is to outline policies and procedures with respect to significant events
occurring within or threatening the community which would require the deployment of
extraordinary resources for the protection of life and property.
The City has an adopted Emergency Operations Plan. The purpose of this plan is to ensure
that the City will be prepared to respond effectively in the event of emergencies to save lives,
restore and protect property, repair and restore essential public services, and provide for the
storage and distribution of medical, food, water, shelter sites, and other vital supplies to
maintain the continuity of government.
The Mendocino Emergency Services Authority (MESA), a joint powers organization that
includes the County of Mendocino and the incorporated cities within the county, serves as the
coordinating agency for mutual aid services provided by fire departments, law enforcement
agencies, and emergency medical service providers throughout the county. In addition, MESA
reviews and makes recommendations regarding emergency operation plans for public and
private institutions where pre-planning for emergency procedures is advisable. Coordination of
emergency services and planning guidelines is provided for situations including flood, wildland
fires, structure fires, explosions, hazardous material spills, severe weather, and earthquakes.
7 – Safety Element                             7-2                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                            Neptun e              Avenu e
                                                                                                                                                                                     Ocean
                                                                                                                                                       Pacifi c                                   Driv e
                                                    S
                                                       r
                                                    ho                                                                                                                               View
                                                        e lin
                                                                                                     Bayview Avenue
                                                                n.                                                                                                                           Monterey Av .
                                                             eL
                                 Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                     Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                             Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                 Ro
                           Coas t          H ig h w                       ad
                 O ld                                   ay
                                                                                           Ha
                                                                                                re                                                                                           Harbo r                   Avenu e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S t ew
                                               Highway                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rn                                                                       Spruce               Elm St
       Simpson                                                                                           Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o   ad
                                                                                                                                                       V ie w Boat Yard                      an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                        Dr.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
       Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Myr                                                                                                                               St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tl e St           S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Airpor t
       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bush St                                                                              dd
                     Hare Creek Terrac                   e                                                                                                                                                                                   Haz      dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                elw         d St                    S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ood            .                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                                                Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                                         C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e                                                                          Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                                     River D r                                                  S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                    Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DuBois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                                             Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                   re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                            Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Highway         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     John
                                 ek C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H yman
                                                                                                 Babcock Lan                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                                                       Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Minnesota Avenu e                                                                                                                              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Petaluma                                A             v                                               Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Map SF-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Johnson
                                                                                   Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                             Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                               re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                                          s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                            Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Johnson   Ln   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane
                 Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stree t
                                                             Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Denniso n
                 Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                   Benson                                                     W i n d in g
                                                                          Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                               Camille
                 Sears Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                                   Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                             W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
                                                                                                                                                                        Hanso n                                       Roa d
                 A nd r e a                W ay                                                                                                                   Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Puddin g
                 Lahmon Lan            e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Monsen Wa y
                 Tex-Mon t                                                                                  Lane        Tozer                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BaldH ill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                     Benson                           Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Creek
Source: Department of Conservation Division
                                                                          Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Road
         of Mines & Geology Geologic & Geomorphic
                                                         S ummers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           All ocean bluffs contain potentially
                                                                                                                                         Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Slide   Fault
         Features, Fort Bragg 7.5' Quadrangle                                                                                                 ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Slopes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Inner Gorge
         Mendocino County, California, 1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gradational Contact                                 Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           unstable slopes.
Scale 1” = 2300’ (approximate)
For Schematic purposes only

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Map SF-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Flood Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Highway 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                               Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ERWAY                                = Waterway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rgin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Special Flood Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Areas Inundated by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100-Year Flood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cr                        Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZONE A                         = No base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Burrows Ranch Rd
                 AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ZONE AE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = Base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZONE V                         = Coastal flood with velocity
         OCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airpor t                                            Road                                                                                                              Airport                                            Road                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               hazard (wave action); no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hemlock Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Johnson
                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                              Zone A
                                                                                                                             Roa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Johnson                           Ln.
                                                                                                                        Hau
                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                       Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Road
  PA C I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                       g Cr       ing
                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                            dd             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BaldHill Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                          Pu                  k
                                                                                                                                     rt
                                                                                                                                Stewa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr                                                    John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                        Manzanita
                                                                                                                                         St                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln.                                                                                                                                                  Creek                             Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Forster
                                                                                                                                                El m St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pudding
                                                                                                                                                Spr uce              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ro         ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pu                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Country                       Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dd                                                                                 Pudding                                               Creek                                                      Road
                                                                                                                                                                             unk
                                                                                                                                                                                           Tr a
                                                                                                                                                                                               in        Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i                      Zone A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                        Ra
                                                                                                                                                          ilroa
                                                                                                                                                                      Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                              Fir St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Harold Street
                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                        n       Pi n e                                  St
                                                                                                                                                 te r                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                                                               We
                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Alger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Huckleberry Lane
                                                                                                                                                                 Lau rel                                St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Nurnberger                   Dennison                                  Mall Lane
                                                                                                                                                                Redwo od Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Monsen Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                               McPherson St
                                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St                    St                    St                                                                                                       Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Whipple St
                                                                                                                                                                Al d er                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Harrison St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Howland
                                                                                                                                                                                            Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Corry                 Har ol d              Morrow                                                                                 Terrace Ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Court
                                                                                                                                                            STREET
                                                                                                                                                                 Oa k                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Florence St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SwingTree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acorn Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jewett
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Livingston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hocker                                                                                      Sherwood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Park St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Street
                                                                                                                                                                Madr one                                St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane        Street
                                                                                                                                                            MAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Willow                         St                                   Azalea                                                                                                                                                     Way
                                                                                                                                                                 Ma ple                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Alley                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Penitenti                                                                                                                                                  Lyta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Str eet               Str eet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dana St.
                                                                                                                                                                 Hazel                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S. Sanderson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Susie Ct.                                                                                                           Wall St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                            Str eet                     S. Corry                    Har ol d
                                                                                                                                                                 Chestnut                               St                                                                                                                                                                     Chestnut                              St
                  Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ebbing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesota Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S. Harrison                       S. Whipple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Olsen Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Grove St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Drive              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ve
                                  Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Walnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Espey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DuBois                                                                                                                      Rive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         view
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cypr ess Street
                                             Zone V                                                                                                                                                                                                                River Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CIRCL                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sout
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zone A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SEQU
                                                                                                                                Zone                                                                     St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tl e                    dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Stree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d St.
                                                                                                                                 A                                                                     Myr                    ood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  elw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Haz
                                   Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oyo
                                                                                                                                   Zone                                                                                                                                                                                     N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Winding                        Way
                                                                                                                       Avenue       AE
                                                                                          Del Mar Drive
                      Cliff Way
                                                                 Monterey Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Road
Zone V
                                   Avenue        Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                       Harbor
                                                                                                                                                            Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Camille
                                                                                                                                                                     an
                                                                                                                                                                     View Boat Yard
                                             Ocean           View                                           Drive
                                   Neptune                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hanson
                                                                                                                                                                                    Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane
                                                 Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lane                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           res                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Highway 20                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Babcock
                                             Bayview Avenue                                                                                           Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lane
                                                                                                                                                 Ha re
                                                                                                                  Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pine Tree Lane        Gorstrom Lane
                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Olsen Lane
 Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            re                              Zone A                                                                                                                                                        Noyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Summers
                                                                                                                                   Highway 1
                                                                                                         ad
                                                                      Ln.                             Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway 20
                                                                  ine
                                                              rel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Terrace
                                                           ho                                              Hi gh
                                                                                                                 way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W ay
                                                                                Cypress
                                                                                                          Coast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hare Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cr                                                       Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lane                                          Lahmon Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Source: FIRM, Flood Insurance Rate Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Chinquapin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of Fort Bragg, California,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Veronica                                                                       Andrea     Tex-Mont
                                                                                                            Ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sears                                                                                 Mendocino County, Rev. June 16, 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Scale 1” = 2300’ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                 Simpson                                                 Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              For Schematic purposes only

G.       Other Hazards
1.       Hazardous Materials
Various types of chemicals and other potentially hazardous materials are used by Fort Bragg
industries and businesses. Other hazardous substances are transported to and through Fort
Bragg. Finally, residents use various hazardous materials for landscaping, cleaning, and other
residential uses. Improper transport, storage, or use of these substances can result in releases
to the environment with consequent impacts on human health and the environment.
The Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority operates a hazmobile that serves the City.
The Fire Protection Authority maintains a hazardous materials unit behind the main fire station.
This unit is used to respond to hazardous waste spills.
2.       Electromagnetic Radiation
The potentially adverse health effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF) from electrical
transmission lines, substations, and appliances have been documented in many studies.
However, there is no consensus in the scientific community regarding the degree of risk posed
by EMFs. It is not known what levels of exposure to EMFs are safe. The approach taken to this
potential health hazard is one of prudent avoidance – establishing reasonable regulation before
electrical transmission lines are built and discouraging sensitive development from encroaching
in or near electrical transmission line rights-of-way.
3.       Air Quality
Emissions of pollutants from motor vehicles, industrial uses, and other sources can be injurious
to people's health. Policies and programs to protect the City's air quality are included in the
Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element.
H.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:       are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy SF-4.2,
Policy SF-5.3, Policy SF-5.4, Policy SF-6.1, Policy SF-6.2, Policy SF-7.1, Policy SF-7.2, Policy
SF-9.1, and Policy SF-9.2.
Goal SF-1        Reduce and minimize impacts of development on blufftops and shoreline
features.
Policy SF-1.1 Minimize Hazards: New development shall: (a) Minimize risks to life and property
in areas of high geologic, flood, and fire hazard; and (b) Assure stability and structural integrity,
and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of
the site or surrounding area or in any way require the construction of protective devices that
would substantially alter natural landforms along bluffs and cliffs.
7 – Safety Element                              7-3                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy SF-1.2: All ocean-front and blufftop development shall be sized, sited and designed to
minimize risk from wave run-up, flooding, and beach and bluff erosion hazards, and avoid the
need for a shoreline protective structure at any time during the life of the development.
Policy SF-1.3: Geotechnical report required. Applications for development located in or near an
area subject to geologic hazards, including but not limited to areas of geologic hazard shown on
Map SF-1, shall be required to submit a geologic/soils/geotechnical study that identifies all
potential geologic hazards affecting the proposed project site, all necessary mitigation
measures, and demonstrates that the project site is suitable for the proposed development and
that the development will be safe from geologic hazard. Such study shall be conducted by a
licensed Certified Engineering Geologist (CEG) or Geotechnical Engineer (GE) and shall be
prepared consistent with the requirements of Section 18.54.040(C) of the Coastal Land Use and
Development Code. Refer to Map SF-1: Geologic Hazards. Refer to the General Plan Glossary
for definitions of these terms.
Policy SF-1.4: Blufftop Setback. All development located on a blufftop shall be setback from the
bluff edge a sufficient distance to ensure that it will be stable for a projected 100-year economic
life. Stability shall be defined as maintaining a minimum factor of safety against sliding of 1.5
(static) or 1.1 (pseudostatic), as described in Section 18.54.040(F) of the Coastal Land Use and
Development Code. This requirement shall apply to the principal structure and accessory or
ancillary structures. Slope stability analyses and erosion rate estimates shall be performed by a
licensed Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer.
Policy SF-1.5: Siting and design of new blufftop development and shoreline protective devices
shall take into account anticipated future changes in sea level. In particular, an acceleration of
the historic rate of sea level rise shall be considered. Development shall be set back a sufficient
distance landward and elevated to a sufficient foundation height to eliminate or minimize to the
maximum extent feasible hazards associated with anticipated sea level rise over the expected
100-year economic life of the structure.
Policy SF-1.6: Land divisions, including subdivisions, lot splits, lot line adjustments, and
conditional certificates of compliance which create new shoreline or blufftop lots, shall not be
permitted unless the subdivision can be shown to create lots which can be developed without
requiring a current or future bluff or shoreline protection structure. No new lots shall be created
that could require shoreline protection or bluff stabilization structures at any time.
Policy SF-1.7 Alterations to Landforms: Minimize, to the maximum feasible extent, alterations to
cliffs, bluff tops, faces or bases, and other natural land forms in the Coastal Zone. Permit
alteration in landforms only if erosion/runoff is controlled and either there exists no other
feasible environmentally superior alternative or where such alterations re-establish natural
landforms and drainage patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
         Program SF-1.7.1: Establish standards in the Coastal LUDC or Grading Ordinance for
         the alteration and grading of natural landforms taking into account site characteristics,
         the resulting habitat disturbance, drainage modification, or erosion and sedimentation
         resulting from vegetation removal.
Policy SF-1.8 Floodplain Development: Limit new development in floodplains in the Coastal
Zone, including but not limited to those floodplain areas shown on Map SF-2, to those uses
allowed in the Open Space land use designation consistent with all other applicable
requirements of the LCP.
7 – Safety Element                              7-4                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy SF-1.9 Bluff Face and Bluff Retreat Setback: Prohibit development on the bluff face and
 within the bluff retreat setback because of the fragility of this environment and the potential for
 resultant increase in bluff and beach erosion due to poorly-sited development except that the
 following uses may be allowed with a conditional use permit:
          (1) engineered accessways or staircases to beaches, boardwalks, viewing platforms,
              and trail alignments for public access purposes;
          (2) pipelines to serve coastal dependent industry;
          (3) habitat restoration;
          (4) hazardous materials remediation; and
          (5) landform alterations where such alterations re-establish natural landforms and
              drainage patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
Findings shall be made that no feasible, less environmentally damaging, alternative is available
and that feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize all adverse
environmental impacts. Require as a part of the conditional use permit, a full environmental,
geological, and engineering study as specified in Policy LC-6.1. Such structures shall be
constructed and designed so as to neither create nor contribute to erosion of the bluff face and
to be visually compatible with the surrounding area to the maximum extent feasible.
Policy SF-1.10 Seawalls, Breakwaters and Other Shoreline Structures: Prohibit construction of
seawalls, breakwaters, revetments, groins, harbor channels, retaining walls, and other
structures altering the natural shoreline processes unless a finding is made that such structures
are required: (1) to serve coastal-dependent uses; or (2) to protect public beaches in danger
from erosion; or (3) to protect existing structures that were legally constructed prior to the
effective date of the Coastal Act; or (4) that were legally permitted prior to the effective date of
this Coastal General Plan provided that the CDP did not contain a waiver of the right to a future
shoreline or bluff protection structure; or (5) for a development consistent with Section 30233(a)
of the Coastal Act and only when it can be demonstrated that said existing structures are at risk
from identified hazards if no feasible or less environmentally damaging alternative is available
and the structure has been designed to eliminate or mitigate adverse environmental impacts,
including impacts upon local shoreline sand supply. The design and construction of allowed
protective structures shall respect natural landforms and provide for lateral beach access.
“Existing structures” for purposes of Policy LC-6.5 shall consist only of a principle structure, e.g.
residential dwelling, required garage, or second residential unit, and shall not include accessory
or ancillary structures such as decks, patios, stairs, landscaping, etc.
Goal SF-2          Reduce seismic and geologic-related hazards.
Policy SF-2.1 Seismic Hazards: Reduce the risk of loss of life, personal injury, and damage to
property resulting from seismic hazards.
         Program SF-2.1.1: Continue to comply with the provisions of the State Alquist-Priolo
         Act.
         Program SF-2.1.2: Require measures to mitigate potential seismic hazards for
         structures as conditions of project approval.
         Program SF-2.1.3: Monitor and review existing critical, high priority buildings to ensure
         structural compliance with seismic safety standards.
7 – Safety Element                              7-5                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program SF-2.1.4: Provide information to the public on ways to reinforce buildings to
         reduce damage from earthquakes and what to do in the event of an earthquake.
         Program SF-2.1.5: Provide information to educate the public about the availability and
         the benefits of obtaining earthquake insurance.
         Program SF-2.1.6: Encourage residents to consider earthquake insurance for their
         homes and businesses.
         Program SF-2.1.7: Continue to comply with State law regarding reinforcement of
         unreinforced masonry structures.
Policy SF-2.2: Require professional inspection of foundations and excavations, earthwork, and
other geotechnical aspects of site development during construction on those sites specified in
soils, geologic, and geotechnical studies as being prone to moderate or high levels of seismic
hazard.
Policy SF-2.3: Development on Slopes: Require that development in areas with identified slope
stability constraints as shown on Map SF-1 or other areas where City staff determines there is
potential slope stability issues be supervised and certified by a geologist, geotechnical engineer,
or engineering geologist.
         Program SF-2.3.1: Require repair, stabilization, or avoidance of active or potentially
         active landslides, areas of soil creep, or areas with possible debris flow as a condition of
         project approval.
 Policy SF-2.4 Tsunami: Minimize development in areas subject to tsunami.
         Program SF-2.4.1: Request FEMA conduct the necessary studies to accurately map
         areas within the City that are subject to tsunamis.
Policy SF-2.5: Review development proposals to ensure that new development is not in an
area subject to tsunami damage and if such development is otherwise allowable that it is
designed to withstand tsunami damage.
         Program SF-2.5.1: Review local- and distant-source tsunami inundation maps for Fort
         Bragg and adjacent coastal communities as they are developed to identify susceptible
         areas, plan evacuation routes or locations suitable for vertical evacuation and make
         evacuation plans available to all emergency responders and other appropriate parties.
         Program SF-2.5.2: Identify and map potential tsunami inundation zones for land use
         planning. Maps should identify generalized tsunami inundation zones on a probabilistic
         basis (e.g., 100-year event).
         Program SF-2.5.3: Review and update tsunami preparation response policies/practices
         to reflect current inundation maps and design standards, and submit these updated
         policies to the Coastal Commission for certification.
Policy SF-2.6: Avoid siting new critical facilities, including fire and police stations and hospitals
in tsunami inundation zones to the maximum extent feasible. If it is necessary to site such
facilities in tsunami inundation zones to provide adequate population protection, new critical
7 – Safety Element                              7-6                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 facilities shall be located and configured to be functional immediately after a 100-year tsunami
 event.
          Program SF-2.6.1: Develop a local response plan and/or participate in any regional
          effort to develop and implement workable response plans for distribution of information
          on tsunami alerts, watches, and warnings, to appropriate emergency responders and
          City personnel.
          Program SF-2.6.2: Include tsunami evacuation route information as part of any overall
          evacuation route sign program implemented in the City. Evacuation routes shall be
          clearly posted. An evacuation route traffic monitoring system that provides real-time
          information on the traffic flow at critical roadways should be considered.
          Program SF-2.6.3: Develop and implement a tsunami educational program for
          residents, visitors, and people who work in the susceptible areas.
Policy SF-2.7: Require that overnight visitor-serving facilities in susceptible areas provide
tsunami information and evacuation plans.
Goal SF-3          Reduce the risks from flooding.
Policy SF-3.1 Flood Hazards: Ensure adequate standards for development in the 100-year
floodplain. (Refer to Map SF-2: Flood Hazards which shows areas prone to flooding.)
          Program SF-3.1.1: Maintain and update as necessary the zoning and building code
          standards and restrictions for development in identified floodplains and areas subject to
          inundation by a 100-year flood. Use the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
          Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in the review of development proposals.
          Program SF-3.1.2: Ensure all development in flood prone areas meet Federal, State,
          and local requirements.
Policy SF-3.2 Storm Drainage: Continue to maintain effective flood drainage systems and
regulate construction to minimize flood hazards.
          Program SF-3.2.1: Update the City’s Storm Drain Master Plan.
Policy SF-3.3.2: Require, as determined by City staff, analysis of the cumulative effects of
development upon runoff, discharge into natural watercourses, and increased volumes and
velocities in watercourses and their impacts on downstream properties. Include clear and
comprehensive mitigation measures as part of project approvals to ensure that new
development does not cause downstream flooding of other properties.
Policy SF-3.4: Require development to pay for the costs of drainage facilities needed to drain
project-generated runoff. Develop a City-wide drainage policy to assist staff to identify drainage
improvements or impact fees required for development.
Policy SF-3.5: Require, where necessary, the construction of siltation/detention basins to be
incorporated into the design of development projects.
7 – Safety Element                                 7-7                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal SF-4          Ensure emergency preparedness.
       Policy SF-4.1     Coordinate with County: Continue coordination with the Mendocino
County Emergency Services Authority.
       Policy SF-4.2     Maintain an Updated Emergency Plan: Update the City’s Emergency
Operations Plan as needed to take into account the requirements of the California Emergency
Management Systems (SEMS).
         Program SF-4.2.1: Establish an emergency evacuation route system that includes
         standards for street identification, street widths, and grade standards for the evacuation
         route system.
Goal SF-5          Reduce fire hazards.
Policy SF-5.1 Minimize Fire Risk in New Development: Review all development proposals for
fire risk and require mitigation measures to reduce the probability of fire.
         Program SF-5.1.1: Continue to consult the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority in the
         review of development proposals to identify the projected demand for fire protection
         services and implement measures to maintain adequate fire protection services.
         Mitigation measures may include levying fire protection impact fees for capital facilities, if
         warranted.
Policy SF-5.2 Maintain a High Level of Fire Protection: Work with the Fire Protection Authority
to ensure a continued high level of fire protection.
         Program SF-5.2.1: Prepare a cost-benefit assessment of using paid firefighters within
         the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority and determine the appropriate ratio of paid-to-
         volunteer staff.
         Program SF-5.2.2: Continue to use the City’s Municipal Code to require automatic
         sprinkler systems in commercial and industrial development.
         Program SF-5.2.3: Increase water main sizes or loop existing water mains where
         necessary to provide adequate flows for fire protection. The standard for water flow for
         fire protection purposes should be a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute for 2 hours
         with 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.
         Program SF-5.2.4: Develop a plan to provide sprinklers for commercial structures in the
         Central Business District. The plan shall include consideration of City funding to
         construct risers for this area.
         Program SF-5.2.5: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to establish a
         regular schedule for periodic inspections of commercial and industrial premises by the
         Fire Prevention Officer.
       Policy SF-5.3     Mutual Aid Agreements: Continue to maintain mutual aid agreements.
7 – Safety Element                               7-8                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

            Program SF-5.3.1: Coordinate equipment use and purchase and inter-agency
            communications.
            Program SF-5.3.2: Continue to coordinate with the Incident Command System (ICS) of
            Mendocino County.
        Policy SF-5.4        Fire Protection Authority Needs: Anticipate the needs of the Fort Bragg
Fire Protection Authority.
            Program SF-5.4.1: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to review its long-
            term fire plan on an annual basis to identify needed capital equipment and staff.
Policy SF-5.5 Vegetation Management:                        Continue to implement an           effective     and
environmentally sound vegetation management and weed abatement program.
            Program SF-5.5.1: Require a landscaping zone system for defensible space around
            buildings in high fire risk areas.
            Program SF-5.5.2: Continue to require weed abatement to reduce the risk of fire. Use
            mechanical rather than chemical methods wherever possible.
Goal SF-6             Maintain effective police services.
        Policy SF-6.1        Demand for Police Services: Review development proposals for their
demand for police services and implement measures to maintain adequate police services.
            Program SF-6.1.1: Consider the impacts on the level of police services of large
            development proposals in the environmental review and planning process.1
        Policy SF-6.2        Shared Resources: Utilize shared resources to improve police response.
            Program SF-5.2.1: Periodically review shared use of resources such as communication
            facilities and joint use of personnel where feasible with the County Sheriff’s Department.
Goal SF-7             Maintain an effective medical emergency response system.
        Policy SF-7.1        Emergency Medical Response: Ensure that the Fire Protection Authority
and the Mendocino Coast District Hospital continue to maintain a high level of emergency
medical response.
            Program SF-7.1.1: Periodically review the emergency medical response system.
1
  If warranted, mitigation measures may be required that may include the levying of police impact fees for capital
facilities, purchasing equipment, and dedication of land for new facilities.
7 – Safety Element                                      7-9                                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy SF-7.2          Maintain Mendocino Coast District Hospital’s Emergency Facilities:
Continue to encourage the Mendocino Coast District Hospital to maintain its emergency
department and acute care facilities.
         Program SF-7.2.1: Maintain ongoing communication with Mendocino Coast District
         Hospital to identify actions the City can implement to support the Hospital’s Emergency
         Department.
Goal SF-8           Reduce hazards of transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous
                    materials and wastes.
Policy SF-8.1 Protection from Hazardous Waste and Materials: Provide measures to protect
the public health from the hazards associated with the transportation, storage, and disposal of
hazardous wastes (TSD Facilities).
         Program SF-8.1.1: Continue to ensure that use, transportation, and disposal of
         hazardous materials are in accordance with the local, State, and Federal safety
         standards.2
         Program SF-8.1.2: Continue to support and participate in Mendocino County’s
         Hazardous Materials Business Plan which requires all businesses using hazardous
         materials to list the types, quantities, and locations of hazardous materials with the
         County’s Department of Environmental Health.3
         Program SF-8.1.3: Require, as a condition of City approvals of non-residential projects,
         that the Fire Protection Authority be notified of all hazardous substances that are
         transported, stored, treated, or could be released accidentally into the environment.
         Program SF-8.1.4: Require that applications for discretionary development projects that
         will generate hazardous waste or utilize hazardous materials include detailed information
         on hazardous waste reduction, recycling, transportation, and storage, and prepare a
         plan for emergency response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material.
         Program SF-8.1.5: Revise the Coastal LUDC to require secondary containment facilities
         and a buffer zone adequate to protect public health and safety on properties with
         hazardous materials storage and/or processing activities.
Policy SF-8.2 Support Environmental Review of Hazardous Waste Transportation, Storage and
Disposal Facilities: Support a thorough environmental review for Hazardous Waste
Transportation, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities, including waste to energy projects,
proposed in the Fort Bragg area.
2
  Implementation of this program is the responsibility of the Fire Protection Authority
3
  Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code requires businesses with more than 50 gallons, 500 pounds
or 200 cubic feet of hazardous materials to maintain a current Hazardous Materials Business Plan (HMBP). The law
provides for the collection of fees to fund the program.
7 – Safety Element                                       7 - 10                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program SF-8.2.1: Require that the environmental review of proposed Hazardous
         Waste TSD Facilities shall, at a minimum, contain the following analysis and information:
                  a)      A worst-case generic description, estimating the number, type, scale,
                          scope, location, and operating characteristics of proposed TSD
                          Facility(ies) based on the projected volumes and types of hazardous
                          waste. Data from existing facilities regarding the probability of accidents,
                          spills, and explosions should be documented and included;
                  b)      An assessment of risk resulting from the accidental release, fire, and
                          explosion of hazardous waste. This assessment should take into account
                          all phases of operation including transport, storage, and treatment. The
                          assessment of risk should include the probability of occurrence and
                          magnitude of impact;
                  c)      Quantify estimates of air emissions, by applying emissions rates of
                          existing facilities to the future volumes of hazardous waste and identifying
                          emissions for incinerator facilities under worst case circumstances;
                  d)      An assessment of non-incineration alternatives for hazardous waste
                          treatment such as chemical dechlorination for the detoxification of PCBs,
                          dioxins, solvents, and pesticides; photolysis; and biological treatment; and
                  e)      Review of the operating characteristics of proposed TSD Facilities, taking
                          into account maintenance and operating procedures, emissions
                          monitoring, and safety devices to assure the ongoing enforceability of the
                          mitigating measures that are required.
Goal SF-9          Minimize community exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs).
     Policy SF-9.1        Consider EMFs in Land Use Decisions: Consider information regarding
EMF radiation from existing and new electrical transmission lines and substations in making
land use decisions.
         Program SF-9.1.1: Request that PG&E or other electrical energy distributors provide
         information on renovation to existing and proposed new electrical transmission lines and
         substations. Request that information on the EMF radiation levels for proposed new
         facilities be provided.
         Program SF-9.1.2: Request that PG&E or any other electrical energy distributor provide
         a full and public disclosure of existing electrical transmission lines and existing and
         proposed facilities with their anticipated EMF levels within the Fort Bragg Planning Area.
         Program SF-9.1.3: Require that all new electrical transmission projects and facilities
         have an EMF mitigation plan as part of the project’s environmental review.
      Policy SF-9.2       Siting of Schools and Other Sensitive Uses: Minimize and reduce EMF
radiation levels near sensitive uses such as schools, hospitals, and playgrounds.
         Program SF-9.2.1: Work with the School District to continue enforcement of California
         State Board of Education regulations requiring that new schools be sited at least 100
         feet from the edge of the right-of-way of 100-110 kV lines; 150 feet from 220-230 kV
         lines; and 250 feet away from 345 kV lines.
7 – Safety Element                                  7 - 11                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

7 – Safety Element              7 - 12 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

8.       NOISE ELEMENT
The policies of the Noise Element are not part of the City of Fort Bragg certified Local Coastal
Program and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits.
A.       Purpose
The purpose of the Noise Element is to protect the health and welfare of the community by promoting
development which is compatible with established noise standards. This element has been prepared
in conformance with Government Code Section 65302(f) and the guidelines adopted by the State
Office of Noise Control, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 46050.1. Existing and future
noise problems in the Planning Area are identified. Policies and implementation programs are
provided to reduce the community's exposure to excessive noise levels. Accomplishing this task
requires an evaluation of the noise generation from sources such as roads, highways, and stationary
sources such as industrial facilities.
B.       Noise Characteristics
Noise is defined as unwanted sound. Airborne sound is a rapid fluctuation of air pressure above and
below atmospheric pressure. Sound levels are usually measured and expressed in decibels (dB) with
0 dB corresponding roughly to the threshold of hearing. Decibels and other technical terms are
defined in Table N-1.
Most of the sounds which we hear in the environment do not consist of a single frequency, but rather
a broad band of frequencies, with each frequency differing in sound level. The intensities of each
frequency add together to generate a sound. The method commonly used to quantify environmental
sounds consists of evaluating all of the frequencies of a sound in accordance with a weighting that
reflects the fact that human hearing is less sensitive at low frequencies and extreme high frequencies
than in the mid-range frequency. This method is called weighting, and the decibel level so measured
is called the A-weighted sound level (dBA). In practice, the level of a sound source is conveniently
measured using a sound level meter that includes an electrical filter corresponding to the A-weighting
curve.
Although the A-weighted noise level may adequately indicate the level of environmental noise at any
instant in time, community noise levels vary continuously. Most environmental noise includes a
conglomeration of noise from distant sources which create a relatively steady background noise,
often called ambient noise, in which no particular source is identifiable. To describe the time-varying
character of environmental noise, the statistical noise descriptors, L10, L50, and L90, are commonly
used. They are the A-weighted noise levels equaled or exceeded during 10 percent, 50 percent, and
90 percent of a stated time period. A single number descriptor called the Leq is now also widely used.
The Leq is the average A-weighted noise level during a stated period of time.
In determining the daily level of environmental noise, it is important to account for the difference in
response of people to daytime and nighttime noises. During the nighttime, exterior background
noises are generally lower than the daytime levels. However, most household noise also decreases
at night and exterior noise becomes very noticeable. Further, sensitivity to noise increases when
8 – Noise Element                                     8-1                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

people sleep at night. To account for human sensitivity to nighttime noise levels, a descriptor, the Ldn
(day/night average sound level) was developed. The Ldn divides the 24-hour day into the daytime of
7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and the nighttime of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM. The nighttime noise level is
weighted 10 dB higher than the daytime noise level.
                                                    TABLE N-1
                                     DEFINITION OF ACOUSTICAL TERMS
Term                            Definition
Decibel (dB)                    A unit describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the
                                logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
                                measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
                                micronewtons per square meter).
Frequency (Hz)                  The number of complete pressure fluctuations per second above and
                                below the atmospheric pressure.
A-Weighed Sound Level           The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level
(dBA)                           meter using the A-weighting filter network. The A-weighting filter de-
                                emphasizes the very low and very high frequency components of the
                                sound in a manner similar to the frequency response of the human ear
                                and correlates well with subjective reactions to noise.
L01, L10, L50, L90              The A-weighted noise levels that are exceeded by 1%, 10%, 50% and
                                90% of the time during the measurement period.
Equivalent Noise Level          The average A-weighted noise level during the measurement period.
(Leq)
Ldn                             The average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained
                                after addition of 10 decibels to levels measured in the night between
                                10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Lmax, Lmin                      The maximum and minimum A-weighted noise level during the
                                measurement period.
Ambient Noise Level             The composite of noise from all sources near and far. The normal or
                                existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
Intrusive                       That noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at
                                a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon
                                its amplitude, duration, frequency, and time of occurrence and tonal or
                                informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
8 – Noise Element                                          8-2                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

C.       The Existing and Future Noise Environment
Fort Bragg experiences noise from autos and trucks on Highway One, Highway 20, local arterials, the
railroad, and several industrial uses, including the Georgia-Pacific operations and the Baxman
aggregate processing facility. Existing and year 2011 traffic noise ( Ldn) contour distances from major
thoroughfares are shown on Tables N-2 and N-3.
                                                    TABLE N-2
                            EXISTING TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                   Noise Level
                                                    50 ft. from         Contour Distances
                                                   Centerline        (in feet from Centerline)
Roadway                                               (Ldn)     70 Ldn          65 Ldn     60 Ldn
 Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                72         65             140        305
 Hwy One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)               73         75             165        350
 Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                70         50             110        240
 Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                    69         45             100        215
 Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                    69         45              95        205
 Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                 69         40              90        190
 Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                     68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                        68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)               68         35              75        160
 Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                  60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                61         ---             ---        55
 Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)             60         ---             ---        50
 Hwy. (at Hwy. One)                                    62         ---             40         70
 Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                   60         ---             ---        50
 Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                        59         ---             ---        45
 Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                    58         ---             ---        35
 Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                            61         ---        ---             60
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
8 – Noise Element                                           8-3                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                    TABLE N-3
                     FUTURE (YEAR 2011) TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                   Noise Level
                                                    50 ft. from      Contour Distances
                                                   Centerline     (in feet from Centerline)
Roadway                                               (Ldn)       70 Ldn 65 Ldn 60 Ldn
 Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                 73         80         175    380
 Hwy. One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)               74       100          205    450
 Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                 71         55         125    270
 Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                     70         50         115    245
 Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                     70         50         105    225
 Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                  69         45          90    205
 Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                      69         45          90    200
 Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                         69         45          95    195
 Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)                69         45          95    195
 Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                   61         ---         ---     55
 Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                 62         ---         ---     60
 Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                 60         ---         ---     55
 Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)              60         ---         ---     50
 Franklin St. (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                  61         ---         ---     55
 Hwy. 20 (at Hwy. One)                                  63         ---         40      85
 Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                    61         ---         ---     55
 Ocean View Drive (West of Hwy. One)                    61         ---         ---     55
 Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                         60         ---         ---     50
 Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                     61         ---         ---     60
 Oak St. (East of Hwy. One)                             61         ---         ---     60
 Oak St. (East of Franklin St.)                         60         ---         ---     50
 Redwood Ave. (West of Hwy. One)                        64         ---         45    100
 Laurel St. (West of Hwy. One)                          61         ---         ---     55
 Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                             64         ---         45      95
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
Noise from traffic on local roadways, distant industrial activities, and neighborhood activities are the
most significant sources of community noise in the majority of the City.
Noise from industrial uses was audible during the evening and nighttime hours at most noise sites
that were monitored. Background noise levels in the areas of Fort Bragg which generally contain
noise sensitive land uses would be considered to be moderately quiet and compatible with the City’s
noise exposure standards.
The principal areas that are affected by excessive noise are along both sides on Highway One
throughout the City (ranging from 160-350 feet on either side of the highway) and along Franklin
Street and several east-west arterials (ranging from 35-70 feet from the road edge). See the Draft
EIR for a more detailed discussion of the existing and projected noise environment in the City.
8 – Noise Element                                            8-4                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

   D.         Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards
   The standards listed in Table N-4 shall be used to evaluate the compatibility between land uses and
   future noise in Fort Bragg.
                                                         TABLE N-4
                                  NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
                                                               Exterior Noise Exposure
                                                                         Ldn dB
 Land Use Category                                    55      60        65      70        75     80
 Residential, Hotels and Motels
 Outdoor Sports and Recreation,
 Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds
 "Noise Sensitive" - Schools, Libraries,
 Museums, Hospitals, Personal Care,
 Meeting Halls, Churches
 Office Buildings, Business
 Commercial and Professional
 Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
 Amphitheaters
             Normally Acceptable
             Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved
             are of normal, conventional construction, without any special insulation requirements.
             Conditionally Acceptable
             Specified land use may be permitted only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
             requirements and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
             Unacceptable
             New construction or development should generally not be undertaken because mitigation
             is usually not feasible to comply with noise element policies.
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., March, 2002
   8 – Noise Element                                            8-5                                    July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

E.       Explanation of Table N-4: Land Use Compatibility for Community
Noise
1.       Noise Source Characteristics
Table N-4 shows the ranges of exterior noise exposure which are considered acceptable,
conditionally acceptable, or unacceptable for the specified land use. Table N-4 is used to determine
whether the noise exposure requires mitigation in order to achieve a compatible noise environment.
Where the noise exposure is acceptable for the intended land use, new development may occur
without requiring an evaluation of the noise environment.
Where the noise exposure would be conditionally acceptable, a specified land use may be permitted
only after a detailed analysis is made of the noise impacts, and the needed noise insulation features
are included in the design to protect people from exposure to excessive noise. Such noise insulation
features may include measures to protect noise sensitive outdoor activity areas (e.g. at residences,
schools, or parks) or may include building sound insulation treatments such as sound-rated windows
to protect interior spaces in residences, schools, hospitals, or other buildings which are sensitive to
noise. Noise reduction measures should be focused on reducing noise where it would have an
adverse effect for the specified land use, outdoors and/or indoors depending upon the land use.
For areas where the existing noise environment is unacceptable, new development should generally
not be undertaken, because there may not be sufficient noise reduction measures to bring the
development into compliance with the noise policies of this Element.
Sensitive receptors are land uses which are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
homes, schools, and libraries.
2.       Acceptable Noise Environments
Another consideration, which in some communities is an overriding factor, is the desire for an
acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, more restrictive standards for land use
compatibility, typically below the maximum considered normally acceptable for that land use category,
may be appropriate.
The following are the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards for noise exposure:
1.       The standard for maximum outdoor noise level permitted in residential areas is a Ldn of 60 dB.
         This standard is applied where outdoor use is a major consideration, such as backyards in
         single-family housing developments and recreation areas in multi-family developments. This
         standard should not be applied to outdoor areas such as small decks and balconies typically
         associated with multi-family residential developments, which can have a higher exposure of
         65 dB Ldn.
2.       The maximum acceptable interior noise level in new multi-family residential development
         required by the State of California Noise Insulation Standards is a Ldn of 45 dB. This standard
         is also applied to single-family and all other residential development.
3.       For projects occurring within noise environments that are conditionally acceptable, studies
         must be conducted to show how noise levels will be reduced in the areas that people use
         (which is generally the interior of offices, stores, industrial buildings, auditoriums, etc.). For
8 – Noise Element                                        8-6                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Map N-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sensitive Noise Receptors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SENSITIVE NOISE RECEPTORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highway 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.     Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.     County Public Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Airport                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.     Guest House Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.     Town Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5.     City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6.     Cotton Auditorium & Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bragg Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7.     Senior Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.     Mendocino County Libray
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9.     Veterans Building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10.    Lions Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11.    Eagles Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12.    Mobile Home Park
               AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13.    Convalescent Home
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14.    Noyo High School
       OCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                Airpor t                                            Road                                                                                                              Airport                                           Road                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15.    Redwood School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Hemlock Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16.    Dana Gray School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17.    Fort Bragg High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18.    County Courthouse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19.    Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln.                                                                                                                                                                                                     20.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 21.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        College of the Redwoods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mendocino Coast District Hospital
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Johnson
                                                                                                                             d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                                                                          Roa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Johnson                           Ln.
                                                                                                                     Hau
                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                    Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Road
PA C I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                             dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    g Cr       ing
                                                                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                                                                                                         dd             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BaldHill Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                       Pu                  k
                                                                                                                                  rt
                                                                                                                             Stewa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cr                                                    John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                     Manzanita
                                                                                                                                      St                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln.                                                                                                                                                  Creek                            Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Forster
                                                                                                                                             El m St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ro         ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Country                      Road
                                                                                                                                             Spr uce              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pudding                                               Creek                                                      Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                            in        Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                        Tr a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                          unk
                                                                                                                                                                   Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                           Fir St
                                                                                                                                      2              Ra
                                                                                                                                                       ilroa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Harold Street
                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                     n       Pi n e                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                              te r                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                                                            We
                                                                                                                                                         4 59 8
                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Alger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Huckleberry Lane
                                                                                                                                                              Lau rel                                St
                                                                                                                                            3                Redwo od Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nurnberger                   Dennison                                  Mall Lane
                                                                                                                                                            10 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Monsen Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                            McPherson St
                                                                                                                                                                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St                    St                    St                                                                                                      Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Whipple St
                                                                                                                                                             Al d er                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Howland
                                                                                                                                                                                         Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Corry                 Har ol d              Morrow                                                                                Terrace Ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Court
                                                                                                                                                         STREET
                                                                                                                                                              Oa k                                   St
                                                                                                                                                             Madr one                                St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                          Park St.                            Florence St.                         Livingston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jewett
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13               Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Acorn Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SwingTree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hocker
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sherwood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                         MAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Way
                                                                                                                                                              Ma ple                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Willow                        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Alley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Penitenti  Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14                                                                                                                           Lyta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Str eet               Str eet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dana St.
                                                                                                                                                              Hazel                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15                                                        S. Sanderson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Susie Ct.                                                                                                          Wall St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S. Corry
                                                                                                                                                              Chestnut                               St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Street                            Str eet                                                 Har ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Chestnut                             St                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lincoln St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ebbing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Minnesota Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S. Harrison                       S. Whipple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Olsen Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Grove St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Drive              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Walnut                                                                      Street                                                                                                                                                            Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Espey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DuBois                                                                                                                     Rive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     view
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cypr ess Street
                                                                                                                                                         18                                                                                                     River Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CIRCL                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sout                             OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                              h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SEQU
                                                                                                                                                                                                      St.                                                  Stree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     tl e                    dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d St.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Myr                    ood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               elw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Haz
                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Winding                        Way
                                                                                                                    Avenue
                                                                                       Del Mar Drive
                    Cliff Way
                                                              Monterey Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Road
                                Avenue        Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                    Harbor
                                                                                                                                                         Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Camille
                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                                  View Boat Yard
                                          Ocean           View                                           Drive
                                Neptune                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hanson
                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr.
                                              Pacific
                                                                              20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       res                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Highway 20                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Babcock
                                          Bayview Avenue                                                                                           Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane
                                                                                                               Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pine Tree Lane        Gorstrom Lane
                                                                                                                 re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Olsen Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Noyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Summers
                                                                                                                                Highway 1
                                                                                                      ad
                                                                   Ln.                             Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Highway 20
                                                               ine
                                                           rel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Terrace
                                                        ho                                              Hi gh
                                                                                                              way
                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W ay
                                                                             Cypress
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lahmon Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hare Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lane
                                                                                                       Coast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Chinquapin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Veronica                                    Sears                              Andrea     Tex-Mont                                                                              August, 2002
                                                                                                         Ol d
                                                                                                                                              Simpson                                                 Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Scale 1” = 2300’ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        For Schematic purposes only

         non-residential projects, no maximum outdoor standard is established other than the exterior
         environment cannot exceed the lower limit of the unacceptable range, since noise mitigation is
         not feasible at these noise exposure levels. Building construction will incorporate noise
         reduction measures recommended by an acoustic engineer to reduce interior noise levels to
         an acceptable level. For non-residential projects, the interior noise level is what is important.
         The conditionally acceptable noise levels indicate that interior noise levels can be reduced to
         an acceptable level given noise reduction implementation. Non-residential projects may be
         allowed even if the exterior noise environment is within the conditionally acceptable range. No
         standards are established for industrial uses since the exterior noise environment is not
         important for such uses.
4        Sensitive receptors are land uses that are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
         homes, schools, and libraries. Exterior noise levels for these types of uses where the uses
         include outdoor use locations (e.g., such as schools) should not exceed those allowed as
         normally acceptable in Table N-4. For those uses where the use areas are within buildings
         (e.g., hospitals, halls, and churches), interior noise levels should be reduced as described
         under No. 3 above, but projects can be permitted with exterior noise levels within the
         conditionally acceptable range. Map N-1: Noise Sensitive Receptors shows the location of
         some noise sensitive uses in the City.
5.       These standards are not intended to be applied reciprocally. In other words, if an area is
         currently below the desired noise standard, a project that causes an increase in noise up to
         the maximum should not necessarily be permitted. The impact of a proposed project on
         existing land use should be evaluated in terms of the potential for adverse community
         response, based on existing community noise levels, regardless of the compatibility
         standards.
6.       The Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards should be reviewed in relation to the
         specific source of noise. These standards are based on measurement systems which
         average noise over a 24-hour period and do not take into account single-event noise sources.
         Different noise sources yielding the same composite noise exposure do not necessarily create
         the same environment. Additional standards may be applied on a case-by-case basis where
         supported by acoustical analysis to assess the effects of single-event noise sources.
F.       Goals, Polices and Programs
The policies of the Noise Element are not part of the City of Fort Bragg certified Local Coastal
Program and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits.
Goal N-1          Protect City residents from harmful and annoying effects of exposure to
                  excessive noise.
     Policy N-1.1        General Noise Levels: The maximum allowable noise levels are established in
this Element.
      Policy N-1.2       Reduce Noise Impacts: Avoid or reduce noise impacts first through site
planning and project design. Barriers and structural changes may be used as mitigation techniques
only when planning and design prove insufficient.
8 – Noise Element                                      8-7                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program N-1.2.1: Adopt and use a Noise Ordinance in environmental review of all
         development proposals and incorporate project design measures to reduce noise to allowable
         limits. The Noise Ordinance should include the noise standards described in this Element as
         well as consider other noise concerns, including but not limited to, allowable hours for grading
         and construction, allowable noise levels for electronic sound devices (e.g., radios, stereos,
         etc.), time restrictions on the use of mechanical devices (e.g., leafblowers and other power
         equipment), and requirements for the placement of fixed equipment (e.g., air conditioners and
         condensers).
         Program N-1.2.2: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for projects
         that would cause a “substantial increase” in noise as defined by the following criteria or would
         generate unusual noise which could cause significant adverse community response:
                  a)     cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 3 dB or more;
                  b)     cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 2 dB or more if the
                         Ldn would exceed 70 dB; or
                  c)     cause the Ldn resulting exclusively from project-generated traffic to exceed an
                         Ldn of 60 dB at any existing residence.
         Program N-1.2.3: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for
         proposed projects that City staff finds may generate unusual noise that would cause
         significant adverse community response, such as, but not limited to, night-time, single-event
         noise or recurring impulse noise.
      Policy N-1.3       Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards: Ensure that all new noise
sensitive development proposals be reviewed with respect to Table N-4: Noise and Land Use
Compatibility Standards. Noise exposure shall be determined through actual on-site noise
measurements.
      Policy N-1.4       Residential and Noise Sensitive Land Use Standards: Require a standard of 45
Ldn for indoor noise level for all new residential development including hotels and motels, and a
standard of 60 Ldn for outdoor noise at residences. These limits shall be reduced by 5 dB for senior
housing and residential care facilities.
         Program N-1.4.1: Use the standards in Policy N-1.2.2 to determine the need for noise studies
         and require new developments to provide noise attenuation features as a condition of
         approving new projects.
         Program N-1.4.2: Require an acoustical study for all new residential projects with a future Ldn
         noise exposure of 60 Ldn or greater. The study shall describe how the project will comply with
         the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards. The studies shall also satisfy the
         requirements set forth in Title 24, part 2 of the California Code of Regulations, Noise
         Insulation Standards, for multi-family attached dwellings, hotels, motels, etc. regulated by Title
         24.
       Policy N-1.5 Non-Transportation Noise Generation: For new non-transportation noise
generators, Table N-5 describes the maximum noise level at the nearest residential property line:
8 – Noise Element                                       8-8                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                        TABLE N-5
   NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NEW PROJECTS AFFECTED BY OR INCLUDING
                                     NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                 Noise Level                         Daytime                             Nighttime
                  Descriptor                  (7 A.M. to 10 P.M.)                  (10 P.M. to 7 A.M.)
       Hourly Leq dB                                    55                                    45
       Maximum level, dB                                75                                    65
       Note: These noise levels apply to the residential property line nearest the project. Each of the noise
             levels shall be lowered by five dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or
             music, or for recurring impulsive noises. These noise level standards do not apply to residential
             units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings).
      Policy N-1.6          Mitigate Noise Impacts: Mitigate noise impacts to the maximum feasible extent.
         Program N-1.6.1: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures, when warranted,
         for new developments and roadway improvements which affect noise sensitive uses such as
         residences, schools, hospitals, libraries, and convalescent homes.
         Program N-1.6.2: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for any project
         that would potentially generate non-transportation noise levels in a residential area such that
         noise levels would exceed the planning standards set forth in Program N-1.2.2 and/or Table
         N-5.
         Program N-1.6.3: Work with Caltrans to ensure that adequate noise studies are prepared and
         alternative noise mitigation measures are considered when State and Federal funds are
         available.
         Program N-1.6.4: Consider and carefully evaluate the noise impacts of all street, highway, and
         other transportation projects.
         Program N-1.6.5: Recommend acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for all
         projects that would be exposed to noise levels in excess of those deemed normally
         acceptable, as defined in Table N-4.
         Program N-1.6.6: Consider developing an ordinance that regulates the allowable hours of
         construction activities.
         Program N-1.6.7: Consider requiring post-construction testing and sign-off by an acoustical
         engineer for residential projects exposed to an Ldn in excess of 65 dB to ensure compliance
         with applicable exterior and interior standards in the Noise and Land Use Compatibility
         Standards.
         Program N-1.6.8: Restrict truck traffic to designated routes.
8 – Noise Element                                                 8-9                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

8 – Noise Element               8 - 10 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

9.       HOUSING ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Housing Element is a statement of Fort Bragg’s vision regarding existing and future housing
needs. The City’s Housing Element was originally adopted by the City Council in 1993 and was
certified by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). This revised
Housing Element consists of two sections. Section I contains the goals, policies and
implementation programs. Section II contains an analysis of the housing needs of all economic
segments of the community. The goals and policies are based on needs identified in Section II.
An essential goal of the Fort Bragg Housing Element is to achieve an adequate supply of safe,
decent housing for all residents of Fort Bragg. In order to achieve this goal, the policies and
programs of the Housing Element address several major issues:
      Maintaining and preserving the existing housing stock;
      Retaining the character of Fort Bragg's residential neighborhoods;
      Meeting the City's regional housing needs allocations; and
      Providing additional affordable housing, particularly for senior citizens.
The City has a commitment to Fort Bragg residents to maintain the identity and quality of the
residential neighborhoods. At the same time, the City also recognizes that it should meet its
share of regional housing needs. The Housing Element articulates Fort Bragg's housing goals
and establishes policies and programs to guide decision-makers to meet the community’s
housing needs.
B.       Relationship of the Housing Element to the General Plan
Consistency of the Housing Element with the other elements of the Coastal General Plan is
essential to having a complete and legally adequate General Plan. This updated Housing
Element has been prepared in conjunction with a comprehensive revision of the City's Coastal
General Plan.
The Housing Element is one of seven required general plan elements and is an integral part of
the Coastal General Plan. Since the majority of Fort Bragg's land is developed with housing, the
Housing Element is a key component of the City's future plans.
State law provides direction on how cities can maintain the General Plan as a policy guide by
requiring the Community Development Department to report annually to the City Council on "the
status of the plan and progress in its implementation" (Government Code Section 65400 [b]).
State law further provides that the housing element shall be revised periodically.
The analysis section of the Housing Element takes a 10-year perspective, whereas the policies
and programs are based on a five-year time frame. In this fashion, a review of actual results of
the previous housing goals, policies and programs can be developed by the City every five
years.
9 – Housing Element                                 9-1                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

C.       Summary of Findings
Listed below are several principal findings from Section II: Housing Background of this Element:
•    Assuming a two percent growth rate, the 2000 population of 7,026 residents will increase to
     approximately 8,563 residents in 2010 in the City.
•    The average household size in Fort Bragg is 2.38 persons per household. This is smaller
     than the Countywide average of 2.57 persons per household and the Statewide average of
     2.81 persons per household. This reflects the substantial number of elderly residents in the
     City and the aging population.
•    The median household income in Mendocino County was $41,500.00 in 2002.
•    Approximately 29 percent of Fort Bragg's households are very-low income and approximately
     14 percent are low income.
•    Groups with special housing needs include elderly residents, physically and/or mentally
     disabled persons, and single-parent households.
•    In the past 12 years (1995-2007), a total of 303 dwelling units were constructed in the City.
     Based on the regional housing needs allocation of 452 units identified in the 1993 Housing
     Element, there remains an unmet housing need for 70 very-low income, 40 low-income, and
     72 moderate-income units.
•    The existing housing stock in Fort Bragg includes 1,886 single-family residences; 811
     multiple family units; and 138 mobile homes.
•    The City of Fort Bragg contains approximately 103.75 acres of residentially zoned vacant
     land and a number of mixed use, infill parcels located in commercially zoned areas, which
     could accommodate a maximum of 1,192 more dwelling units.
D.       Format and Organization of the Housing Element
The format of the goals and policies of the Housing Element differs from the rest of the General
Plan, in large measure to meet the requirements of State Housing Law.
For every goal there are several policies – each with one or more implementation programs that
contain the following information:
    A concise statement of the specific City actions that will be taken to implement the program;
    The City department or other agency responsible for implementation; and
    The schedule for completion.
Quantified objectives are summarized in Appendix A of the Housing Element.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-2                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

E.        Goals, Policies, and Programs
1.        Housing Goals
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:                      are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy H-1.1,
Policy H-2.3, Policy H-2.8, Policy H-3.1, Policy H-3.3, Policy H-3.7, Policy H-3.9, Policy H-3.10,
Policy H-3.11, Policy H-4.1, Policy H-4.2, Policy H-5.1, and Policy H-5.2.
Goal H-1            Conserve and improve the existing housing supply to provide adequate,
                    safe, and decent housing for all Fort Bragg residents.
      Policy H-1.1          Housing Rehabilitation: Continue and expand the City’s housing
rehabilitation and preservation programs.
          Program H-1.1.1 Funding Housing Rehabilitation: Seek funding through the Community
          Development Block Grant program and other State and/or Federal programs to assist in
          the rehabilitation and conservation of existing residential units.
                     Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                     Financing:          City
                     Scheduling:         Annually as an ongoing program
          Program H-1.1.2 Target Areas: Continue to identify target areas and specific properties
          where housing rehabilitation is most needed.
                     Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                     Financing:          City
                     Scheduling:         Annually as an ongoing program
          Program H-1.1.3 Rehabilitation/Preservation Program: Continue the City’s housing
          rehabilitation program which provides low interest loans for the rehabilitation of homes
          owned or occupied by very-low to moderate-income households. Facilitate citizen
          awareness of this rehabilitation loan program by a) making pamphlets on this program
          available at City Hall and at the public library, b) contacting neighborhood groups in older
          residential areas with this information, and c) continuing building code enforcement in
          cooperation with the Building Department.
                     Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                     Financing:          City, State and Federal funds
                     Scheduling:         Ongoing
          Program H-1.1.4 Housing Rehabilitation in Non-Residential Areas: Continue to permit
          substantial rehabilitation1 of, and additions to, existing housing located in zones where it
          is a nonconforming use consistent with the limitations of Chapter 18.90 (Nonconforming
          Uses, Structures and Parcels) of the coastal Land Use and Development Code. Coastal
          development permits are required for all development not otherwise exempt from permit
1
       Substantial rehabilitation or renovation occurs when 25 percent or more of the floor area is added to a
       structure and/or a building permit for construction valued at 50 percent or more of the assessed value
       of the building is required. A case-by-case review of nonconforming residential uses assures the
       health, safety, and welfare of the community, maintains the neighborhood character, and encourages
       mixed use developments.
9 – Housing Element                                             9-3                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         requirements pursuant to Chapter 18.71.040 and Section 30610 of the Coastal Act.
         require a conditional use permit and Design Review approval for substantial renovations.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Ongoing
         Program H-1.1.5 Capital Improvement Program: Provide for consideration of capital
         improvement projects necessary to maintain the community’s older neighborhoods as
         part of the City Council’s annual review the Capital Improvement Program.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Annually as an ongoing program
         Program H-1.1.6 Standards for Rehabilitation of Buildings: Consider adopting all, or
         portions of, the Uniform Code of Building Conservation establishing standards which
         encourage the rehabilitation of older buildings in the community, and making it less
         burdensome for property owners to perform building maintenance.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
Policy H-1.2 Discourage Conversion of Residential Units: Discourage the conversion of
residential units to other uses.
         Program H-1.2.1 Residential Conversions: Consider revising the Very High Density
         Residential (RVH) and Medium Density Residential (RM) zones to eliminate or reduce
         potential conversion of residential properties to commercial uses, except as home
         occupations in conjunction with residential uses.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
Policy H-1.3 Energy Conservation Improvements: Promote energy conservation improvements
for existing and proposed residential units.
         Program H-1.3.1 Energy Conservation             Program:     Provide energy  conservation
         information for public distribution.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Complete public information by 2009
         Program H-1.3.2 Green Building Program: Provide expedited plan review for green
         building projects and provide green building information for the public.
Goal H-2          Provide a range of housing, including single-family homes, townhouses,
                  apartments, and other housing types to meet the housing needs of all
                  economic segments of the community.
Policy H-2.1 Regional Housing Needs: Ensure that adequate residentially-zoned land is
available to accommodate the City’s Regional Housing Needs Determinations as described in
Section II.
9 – Housing Element                                      9-4                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-2.1.1 Identification of Infill Sites: Develop and maintain an inventory of
         vacant and underdeveloped residentially designated land. Provide copies of the
         inventory for public distribution.
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Ongoing
Policy H-2.2 Mixed-Use Development: Encourage the development of residential uses in
conjunction with commercial enterprises in commercial zones, where the viability of the
commercial activities and visitor-serving uses would not be adversely affected.
         Program H-2.2.1 Mixed Use in the Central Business District: Continue to permit multiple
         family residential units above the ground floor after Design Review in the Central
         Business District (CBD).
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         Program H-2.2.2 Coastal LUDC Revisions: Consider the following Coastal LUDC
         amendments to provide additional housing development opportunities:
                  •         revise the CO and the CG zoning districts to include a maximum allowable
                            residential density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit;
                  •         revise the Highway Visitor Commercial CH District to allow residential uses
                            at a density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit2; and
                  •         revise the Central Business District to allow a residential density of up to
                            40 units per acre as a permitted use above the ground floor.
                  •         establish a procedure which allows for flexibility in applying development
                            standards pertaining to roadways, setbacks, minimum lot standards, and
                            parking requirements for affordable housing developments with continuing
                            affordability requirements.
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         Program H-2.2.3 Adopt revised parking standards to reduce and/or provide flexible on-
         site parking standards for residential uses, in existing residential areas which have
         significant on-street parking capacity that is not needed to serve coastal access use, to
         provide for more effective and affordable development of second/granny units.
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         2
           The conditional use permit requirement is established to ensure the compatibility of multi-family residential
         uses in the Highway Visitor Commercial (CH) District with surrounding land uses, namely that the proposed
         residential development is sited and designed in a manner that ensures the residential uses are adequately
         protected from noise, glare, dust, and odors which may occur in commercial districts. Although most of the
         vacant and underutilized parcels in the CH District would be suitable for multi-family mixed use developments,
         the conditional use permit process would discourage such development on the few parcels in this district not
         suited for this land use, or ensure that they are approved with conditions ensuring overall compatibility of
         mixed use development.
9 – Housing Element                                             9-5                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy H-2.3         Limited Equity Cooperatives: Encourage limited equity residential
cooperatives and other non-profit enterprises such as sweat-equity projects designed to provide
affordable housing, consistent with the City’s zoning regulations.
         Program H-2.3.1 Limited Equity Cooperatives and Sweat Equity Projects: Seek
         sponsors to utilize State funds to develop a limited equity cooperative (LEC). Specific
         City actions to achieve this objective include assessing the viability and process of
         establishing an LEC; making such information available at the Community Development
         Department; identifying potential sites for an LEC; and seeking cooperation and support
         for this program from non-profit housing organizations.
                    Responsibility:     Community Development          Department     and    non-profit   housing
                                        organizations
                    Financing:          City
                    Scheduling:         Ongoing
Policy H-2.4 Large-Scale Commercial and Office Projects: Consider the impacts on housing
demand of large-scale commercial and office projects.
         Program H-2.4.1 Housing Impacts of Employment-Generating Uses: Identify housing
         impacts of new commercial, office, and industrial development that will generate a
         significant amount of housing demand as part of the development review process and
         require appropriate mitigating measures.
                    Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                    Financing:          City
                    Scheduling:         Ongoing
         Program H-2.4.2 Consider a Housing Impact Fee: Consider implementing a housing
         impact fee as condition of specific plan approval and/or annexation of commercial and
         industrial properties.
                    Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                    Financing:          City
                    Scheduling:         2008
Policy H-2.5 Secondary Dwelling Units: Continue to facilitate the construction of secondary
dwelling units on residential properties consistent with Chapter 18.42.170 (Second Units) of the
Coastal Land Use and Development Code.
Policy H-2.6 Manufactured Housing: Continue to allow placement of manufactured housing
units on permanent foundations in residential zoning districts.
Policy H-2.7 Infill Housing: Encourage housing development on existing infill sites in order to
efficiently utilize existing infrastructure. (Refer to Programs 2.2.1 to 2.2.3.)
      Policy H-2.8         Redevelopment Agency: Utilize Redevelopment Agency housing set-aside
funds to implement housing programs for lower- income households.3.
3
         The City had a total balance of $1,099,305 in the Redevelopment Housing Fund as of June 30, 2007.
9 – Housing Element                                            9-6                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-2.8.1 Redevelopment Funds: Use the 20 percent Housing Set-Aside Funds
         and other Redevelopment funds as available to assist with the development,
         conservation, or rehabilitation of affordable housing consistent with community housing
         priorities.
                     Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing.
         Program H-2.8.2 Update the Five-Year Implementation Plan: Revise the Redevelopment
         Five-Year Implementation Plan to include specific criteria for use of the 20 percent of the
         tax increment revenues collected which are allocated to the Housing Fund. Include
         criteria for the provision of full or partial fee waivers for affordable housing projects.
                     Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing.
Goal H-3           Expand affordable housing opportunities for persons with special housing
                   needs such as the elderly, the disabled, households with very- low to
                   moderate incomes, and first time home buyers.
      Policy H-3.1        Available Funding Sources: Utilize County, State and Federal programs
and other funding sources that provide housing opportunities for lower-income households.
         Program H-3.1.1 Available Funding: Seek available State and Federal assistance to
         develop affordable housing for seniors, the disabled, lower-income large households, and
         households with special housing needs. Consider joint applications with the County
         Community Development Commission for HCD programs such as the California Self Help
         Housing Program (CSHHP), the Multi-family Housing Program (MHP), and/or the HOME
         Program.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      State and Federal sources
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-3.1.2 Tax-Exempt Financing: Require developers utilizing tax-exempt
         financing to include language in agreements with the City permitting persons and
         households eligible for HUD Section 8 rental assistance or Housing Voucher Folders to
         apply for below-market-rate units provided in the development.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City and housing developers utilizing tax-exempt revenue bonds
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-3.1.3 School Facility Reimbursement: Encourage developers of affordable
         housing to apply for the Proposition 1A School Facility Fee Reimbursement Program
         (SFFRP) financed by the California Housing Finance Agency. Consider making this a
         requirement for development receiving subsidies or density bonuses for very-low rental
         income units.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City and housing developers utilizing tax-exempt revenue bonds
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing
9 – Housing Element                                         9-7                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy H-3.2 Encourage Senior Housing: Allow senior housing projects to be developed with
density bonuses and flexible parking standards where found to be consistent with maintaining
the character of the surrounding neighborhood consistent with the requirements of Policy H-3.5.
         Program H-3.2.1 Amend the Coastal LUDC to address senior housing developments:
         Revise the Coastal LUDC to establish flexible parking requirements and to allow density
         bonuses for senior housing projects.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Completed Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         Program H-3.2.2 Affordable Senior Housing: Establish and maintain an inventory which
         identifies properties which are potentially well-suited for senior housing funded by HUD
         202 financing or similar program. Work with developers to facilitate obtaining funding and
         construction of senior housing.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Completed
      Policy H-3.3        House Sharing: Encourage and facilitate house sharing programs for
seniors.
         Program H-3.3.1 Senior Shared Housing: Amend the Coastal LUDC to allow for
         conversion of existing residences into shared housing for seniors (i.e., suites with shared
         living/cooking facilities) and separate residential facilities for an on-site manager, with a
         use permit in all residential zones.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City to apply for available funding; non-profit organization to implement
                                     the program.
                     Scheduling:     Completion of the Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
Policy H-3.4 Increase Affordable Housing Development: Encourage the construction of
housing units which are affordable to households with very-low to moderate incomes consistent
with Chapters 18.31 and 18.32 of the Coastal Land Use and Development Code.
         Program H-3.4.1 Implement the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which requires
         residential developments of 7 or more units consistent with Chapters 18.31 and 18.32 of
         the Coastal Land Use and Development Code to:
                  a)      Provide 15 percent of for sale units at prices affordable to moderate and
                          median income households.
                  b)      Provide 15 percent of rental units at prices affordable to very-low, low -
                          income and median income households.
                  c)      Construct all required inclusionary housing on-site unless an alternative
                          equivalent action is approved by City Council.
                  d)      Implement the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which requires the
                          construction of one small secondary unit and/or one inclusionary unit in
                          projects of 4 to 6 units.
9 – Housing Element                                         9-8                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-3.4.2 Inclusionary Housing Standards: Revise the Coastal LUDC to include
         the following performance criteria for inclusionary units:
                  a)     the exterior appearance of inclusionary units shall not be different than
                         other units in the housing development of which they are a part; and
                  b)     inclusionary units shall be dispersed or distributed throughout the
                         development rather than being concentrated in one portion of the
                         development.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Complete 2008
         Program H-3.4.3 Revise the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Revise the Coastal LUDC
         incorporating Programs 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 above establishing income guidelines, in-lieu
         fees, purchase or rent levels, and measures to assure a minimum 30-year affordability of
         inclusionary units.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Complete 2008
Policy H-3.5 Density Bonus Incentives: Continue to provide density bonuses to projects that
provide a required percentage of total units affordable to very-low, low-income, median, and
moderate-income households and for units meeting the special housing needs identified in this
Element and as established in conformance with State law. Density ranges described in land use
designations may be exceeded consistent with the provisions of Government Code Section
65915 to encourage affordable housing production pursuant to §65915 of the California
Government Code (Density Bonuses) provided the density bonus will not have an adverse effect
on coastal resources. Any housing development approved pursuant to Government Code
Section 65915 shall be consistent with all applicable certified Local Coastal Program (LCP)
policies and development standards. In reviewing a proposed density increase, the City shall
identify all feasible means of accommodating the density increase and consider the effects of
such means on coastal resources. The City shall only grant a density increase if the City
determines that the means of accommodating the density increase proposed by the applicant
does not have an adverse effect on coastal resources. If, however, the City determines that the
means for accommodating the density increase proposed by the applicant will have an adverse
effect on coastal resources, the City shall not grant the density increase.
         Program-3.5.1 Density Bonus Regulations: Revise the Coastal LUDC as needed to
         incorporate the Density Bonus provisions of State Law requiring the granting of a density
         bonus and additional incentives. Adopt an ordinance setting forth the requirements of the
         Density Bonus Program and defining affordable sales prices and rents, the affordability
         criteria, and additional incentives.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City and developers
                    Scheduling:     Complete 2008
Policy H-3.6 Resale and Rental Controls on BMR Units: Require resale and rental controls on
all Below Market Rate (BMR) units, which are inclusionary units and units with affordability
restrictions.
         Program H-3.6.1 Adopt Continued Affordability Measures: Prepare deed restrictions
         and/or similar covenants to ensure the continued affordability of Below Market Rate units
9 – Housing Element                                     9-9                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         for a specified minimum period of time for rental and ownership units which implement
         the requirements imposed by State and Federal laws.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City and developers
                   Scheduling:     2008 and ongoing
      Policy H-3.7       Large Families: Encourage housing for large families.
         Program H-3.7.1 County Community Development Commission: Work with the County
         Community Development Commission to obtain and administer a HCD HOME grant or
         CDBG grant specifically to accommodate large families.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     ongoing
Policy H-3.8 Planned Development: The Planned Development Permit process shall be used
to promote flexibility in the application of development standards under limited and unique
circumstances to allow consideration of innovation in site planning and other aspects of project
design to more effectively respond to site features, uses on adjoining properties, and
environmental resources. Planned Unit Development Permit approval does not replace,
supercede or modify the independent requirement for a CDP approved pursuant to the otherwise
applicable policies and standards of the certified LCP.
      Policy H-3.9       Housing for the Disabled: Continue to facilitate barrier-free housing in new
development.
         Program H-3.9.1 Accessible Units for the Physically Disabled: Revise the Coastal
         LUDC to establish requirements that specify a percentage of ground floor and other units
         in new residential projects which must be accessible for physically disabled persons.
         Ensure that these units are barrier-free consistent with the American with Disabilities Act
         (ADA) and State standards.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
      Policy H-3.10      Emergency and Transitional Housing:
         Program H-3.10.1 Ongoing Estimates of the Demand for Emergency Housing: Consult
         with the Fort Bragg Police Department and homeless providers in the community to
         maintain ongoing estimates of the demand for emergency housing in Fort Bragg.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-3.10.2 Inter-Agency Cooperation: Work with private, County, and State
         agencies to provide emergency housing for the homeless.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
9 – Housing Element                                    9-10                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy H-3.11      First Time Home Buyers: Encourage affordable housing for first time home
buyers.
         Program-3.11.1 First Time Home Buyers: Include in the Density Bonus provisions of the
         Coastal LUDC incentives for the provision of housing units affordable to first time home
         buyers who qualify for affordable housing.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     2008
         Program 3.11.2: Funding Sources for First Time Home Buyers: Consider applying for
         funding sources for first time home buyers such as HCD’s HOME Program, and provide
         referrals to FHA programs offered by local lenders and sweat-equity programs operated
         by non-profit housing organizations.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-4          Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender,
                  age, sexual orientation, marital status, or national origin.
      Policy H-4.1       Equal Housing Opportunity: Continue to facilitate non-discrimination in
housing in Fort Bragg.
         Program H-4.1.1 Housing Discrimination Complaints: Facilitate equal housing
         opportunity by referring housing discrimination complaints to the Fair Housing Division of
         HUD. Information regarding equal housing opportunity laws and the equal housing
         opportunities for Fair Housing shall be distributed to the public at City Hall and the public
         library.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-4.1.2 Non-discrimination Clauses: Provide non-discrimination clauses in
         rental agreements and deed restrictions for housing constructed with City assistance.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
      Policy H-4.2       Improve Accessibility to Housing: Make it easier to develop housing for
seniors and persons with disabilities.
         Program H-4.2.1 Use Housing Funds: Consider using the City’s housing funds to
         subsidize the construction of renovations and improvements that improve the accessibility
         to housing for seniors and persons with disabilities.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
9 – Housing Element                                    9-11                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-4.2.2 Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities: Review the
         City’s land use and building regulations to identify constraints that may exist for the
         provision of housing for persons with disabilities, and adopt measures to facilitate
         reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities. Publicize revisions to land
         use regulations providing for reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City Housing Funds, Redevelopment Housing Set Aside Funds
                    Scheduling:     2008
Goal H-5           Adopt and implement a Housing Element that complies with State Law.
      Policy H-5.1        Public Participation: Continue to encourage and facilitate public
participation in the formulation and review of the City's housing and development policies.
         Program H-5.1.1 Workshops: Continue to hold workshops and public hearings to
         discuss proposed revisions to the City’s Housing Element.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department, Community Development
                                    Advisory Board (CDAB)
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Annually (include with the annual review of the CIP by the Planning
                                    Commission)
      Policy H-5.2        Annual Review of Housing Element Implementation: Carry out an annual
progress report on implementation of the Housing Element.
         Program H-5.2.1 Annual Report: Prepare an annual report that describes the amount
         and type of housing constructed, the stock of affordable housing units, demolition
         permits, and conversion of residential units to other uses, and other housing-related
         activities for review by the CDAB, Planning Commission and City Council.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Annually (include with the annual review of the CIP by the Planning
                                    Commission)
9 – Housing Element                                      9-12                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

2.       Previous Housing Element
The policies and implementing actions of the previous Housing Element adopted in 1993
concentrated on preserving existing single-family neighborhoods and encouraging the
construction of secondary dwelling units and multi-family and senior citizen housing.
The City has been quite successful in achieving the goals established by the previous Housing
Element. Since 1991, 268 affordable dwelling units were built in the City. In addition, the City
has met a substantial proportion of its overall regional housing need.
The revised Housing Element builds on the foundation established by the previous Element, but
contains more specific implementation programs and quantified objectives. Priorities of the
revised Housing Element are to conserve and rehabilitate existing homes, provide additional
housing for seniors, and provide programs to advertise, implement and fund these activities.
The revised Element recognizes the need to provide stronger incentives for the construction of
additional affordable housing. See Appendix B for an evaluation of the programs in the previous
Housing Element.
3.       Public Participation
The Housing Element was prepared as a part of a comprehensive revision of the General Plan.
An extensive public participation program was implemented to encourage the involvement of all
economic segments of the community.
A Housing Issues Report was prepared and a public workshop was conducted by the Community
Development Advisory Board. The public workshop was advertised in the local newspaper and
notices sent to affordable housing providers and housing advocates in Mendocino County.
Members of the public, and for-profit and affordable housing developers attended the workshop.
In addition, six public hearings on the Housing Element were conducted by the Planning
Commission and the City Council to solicit public input, all of which were broadcast by MCCET
television station.
F.       Housing Background
The information presented in this section is intended to summarize the following: demographic
characteristics, employment trends, inventory of vacant residential land, and the constraints that
exist to the construction of housing in Fort Bragg. The policies and implementation programs
address housing needs identified by this section.
Information in the Housing Background Section is based on the following sources: the U.S.
Census, the California State Department of Finance, the City’s Community Development
Department, and the Spatial Insights Corporation. While the General Plan takes a ten-year
perspective, the Housing Element projects population and housing needs for a five-year time
span. This is done to comply with State Housing law that requires periodic updating of housing
elements. The feedback obtained from the affordable housing developers resulted in a number
of program changes to the Element.
9 – Housing Element                           9-13                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

1.       Summary of Demographic Trends
a.       Population Growth
The population of the City grew by 2,007 persons between 1980 and 2000, which represents a
39.9 percent increase in 20 years. The population has increased on the average about 1.9
percent per year.
                          TABLE H-1: POPULATION GROWTH 1980 TO 2000
         Year                     1980             1990              1995               2000
         Population               5,019            6,078             6,180              7,026
        Source: U. S. Census, State Department of Finance. (Excludes the Sphere of Influence)
While there are no official population projections for the City, the State Department of Finance
projects that the County of Mendocino as a whole will grow from 87,143 people in 2000 to
105,225 people in 2010. This is an increase of 18,082 people, representing an overall increase
of 20.7 percent, and an average annual increase of approximately 2 percent per year.
It is assumed that the population of the City of Fort Bragg will grow at approximately the same
rate as projected for the County. It is projected that the population in the City will increase by
approximately 1,537 persons between the years 2000 and 2010.
                                TABLE H-2: POPULATION PROJECTIONS
      2000         2001     2002     2003    2004      2005      2006      2007     2008     2009   2010
      7,026        7,166    7,309    7,455   7,604     7,756     7,911     8,069    8,230    8,395  8,563
      Source: PAS & Associates (Excludes the Sphere of Influence)
b.       Household Size
Between 1990 and 2000 the average household size in Fort Bragg has remained stable at 2.38
persons per household for owner-occupied units and 2.39 for renter-occupied units respectively1.
The average household size in the County in 1990 was moderately higher at 2.57 persons per
household.
c.       Female-Headed Households
The number of single parent female-headed households is indicated in Table H-3.
                              TABLE H-3: FEMALE HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD
                                                          1985           1990           2000
               Female Headed Households                   260             323            369
             Source: 2000 U. S. Census and Spatial Insights Corp.
1
         U.S. 2000 Census.
9 – Housing Element                                 9-14                                          November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

The number of female-headed households has increased by 29 percent, which is higher than the
growth of the population during that period of time.
d.       Age Structure
Significant changes are occurring in the age structure of Fort Bragg's population. The City's
proportion of elderly residents (over 65 years old) has decreased from 17.3 percent of the
population in 1990 to 13.9 percent of the population in 2000. This decrease in Fort Bragg's
senior population is accompanied by a commensurate decrease in the proportion of children.
Children 5 to 18 years old constituted 26.8 percent of the population in 1990 and 20.1 percent of
the population in 2000. The U. S. 2000 Census states that the median age of Fort Bragg
residents is 36.2 years.
Table H-4 shows the age structure of Fort Bragg's population in 2000. State projections indicate
that the proportion of the elderly population in Mendocino County is expected to increase in the
next ten years.       Fort Bragg will likely follow this trend, despite the recent reduction in the
proportion of senior citizens between 1990 and 2000. This trend will have an impact on the
provision of health and social services, as well as on the demand for specialized housing for the
growing senior population.
                                   TABLE H-4: AGE STRUCTURE 2000
                       Age Group              Number of People     Percent
                       0 TO 4 YEARS                    475             6.8
                       5 TO 9 YEARS                    473             6.7
                       10 TO 14 YEARS                  490             7.0
                       15 TO 19 YEARS                  489             7.2
                       20 TO 24 YEARS                  457             6.5
                       25 TO 34 YEARS                1,000            14.2
                       35 TO 44 YEARS                1,108            15.8
                       45 TO 54 YEARS                  994            14.1
                       55 TO 69 YEARS                  309             4.4
                       60 TO 64 YEARS                  254             3.6
                       65 TO 74 YEARS                  419             6.0
                       75 TO 84 YEARS                  401             5.7
                       >85 YEARS                       157             2.2
                       TOTAL                         7,026           100.0
                      Source: U. S. Census 2000
e.       Minority Population
The minority population of Fort Bragg represents a relatively small proportion of the total
population. The minority population grew from 11 percent of the total population in 1990 to 26
percent in 2000. The largest increase has come from persons of Hispanic origin. Fort Bragg has
a slightly smaller proportion of minority residents than that of the State, where over one-third of
9 – Housing Element                              9-15                                November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

the population is comprised of minorities. This is probably due to Fort Bragg's relatively isolated
location with respect to the more urbanized portions of California.
      TABLE H-5: POPULATION DISTRIBUTION BY RACE IN FORT BRAGG, 1990 AND 2000
                                                          1990                        2000
             Race                              Number        Percent       Number    Percent
             White                               5,411          89.0        5,863      74.1
             Black                                   29          0.5          107        1.3
             Native American*                        98          1.6          266        3.3
             Asian                                   47          0.8          102        1.2
             Hispanic                               493          8.1        1,596      20.1
             Total                               6,078         100.0        7,934     100.0
            Source: 1990 and 2000 Census. * Includes Polynesian, Hawaiian, Samoan, Tongan,
                       and Guamanian. Note the total population figure differs from Table 1, due to
                       different source data.
f.       Household Income
The 1999 estimated median household income for Fort Bragg was $36,006, while the average
household income was $41,940. Both the median and the average household income levels are
projected to increase significantly by the year 2009. The median income is projected to increase
by 36 percent, while the average income is projected to increase by 37 percent during this
period. The median income for Mendocino County established by HUD in March 2002 was
$41,500.
               TABLE H-6: MEDIAN AND AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD INCOME
        Income                         1999                2004                 2009
        Median income               $36,006           $ 46,102              $48,836
        Average income              $41,940           $ 49,920              $57,629
       Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, Inc. In constant 1999 dollars
The increasing household income projected for the City has important effects on housing
demand. The higher income households will be able to afford new housing built in the
community and will be able to afford to renovate and repair the City’s existing older single-family
homes.
There is, however, the necessity to maintain incentives for the construction of additional housing
units affordable to lower and moderate income households. As indicated in Table H-7,
approximately 43 percent of households in Fort Bragg earn less than $30,000 per year.
9 – Housing Element                                     9-16                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                      TABLE H-7: INCOME DISTRIBUTION
                          Income                Households            Percent
                          < $20K                        706              28.9%
                          $20K to $30K                  344              14.1%
                          $30K to $40K                  313              12.8%
                          $40K to $60K                  473              19.4%
                          $60K to $75K                  238               9.8%
                          $75K to $125K                 264              10.8%
                          > $125K                       101               4.1%
                          Total                       2,439            100.0%
                          Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June, 2000
g.        Employment Trends
The majority of the employment in Fort Bragg is in the trade and services sectors, reflecting the
City’s role as the commercial hub of the coastal area of Mendocino County.
                                   TABLE H-8: EMPLOYMENT BY SECTOR
 Agriculture Constructio ManufactureTransport                   Trade       Finance      Services   Gov’t.
     116           194         910                 49         1,520          120          1,060      625
     3%            4%          20%               1%            32%            3%           23%      14%
Source: Industry Trends and Outlook, California Employment Development Department, July, 2000
Projections indicate the total number of jobs in Fort Bragg will increase by a modest 3.2 percent
between the year 1999 and the year 2009. (See Table H-9.)
It is likely that Fort Bragg will follow the labor force trends projected for the County by the State
Employment Development Department. The largest increase in projected new jobs for the
County is anticipated to be in the tourism, retail sales, and services sectors. Employment in
logging and sawmills is projected to decline by 3.4 percent, and other lumber and wood products
industries by 12.8 percent between 1998 and 2008. This follows a structural change in the
economy of Mendocino County where future job creation is becoming increasingly based on the
growth of the service and retail sectors, rather than on the growth of the manufacturing industry.
           TABLE H-9: FORT BRAGG EMPLOYMENT PROJECTIONS 1999 TO 2009
                                           1999             2004           2009
                  Total Jobs               3,110            3,176          3,210
                 Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June, 2000
Although the projected growth in labor force is modest, the income typically provided by jobs in
the growing services and retail sectors is generally not sufficient to allow households to purchase
or rent a dwelling in the community. Employment trends suggest that housing affordability will be
a continuing problem.
9 – Housing Element                                    9-17                                    November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

2.       Housing Characteristics
Fort Bragg is a predominantly residential community. The existing housing stock defines the
character of the City and its neighborhoods and is the City's most valuable resource. The
relatively high number of older homes in the City underlines the need for policies and programs
which continue to maintain and enhance the quality of older residential areas.
a.       Age of Housing Stock
The majority of homes in the City are older dwellings that were constructed prior to 1970, as
shown in Table H-10. Approximately 14 percent of the City's homes are in need of significant
rehabilitation work, such as repair or replacement of the structure, foundations, mechanical
systems, roof, or windows.2
                                  TABLE H-10: AGE OF HOUSING STOCK
                                                         Number of
                          Year Built                        Units           Percentage
                          1938 or earlier                  1,039                36.8
                          1939 to 1960                       569                20.1
                          1961 to 1975                       292                10.3
                          1976 to 1980                       349                12.4
                          1981 to 1999                       576                20.4
                          Total                            2,825              100.0
                         Source: 2000 Census and the City of Fort Bragg Community Development
                                  Department
b.       Annual Construction of Housing Units by Type, 1991-2001
Fluctuations in the type of housing built reflect not only the relative amount of land zoned for
different types of residential development in the City, but also changes in various economic
factors such as tax codes and the real estate and financial markets. Table H-11 indicates single-
family and multi-family home construction in Fort Bragg during the period 1991 to 2001.
2
         City of Fort Bragg Housing Conditions Survey, Community Development Commission of Mendocino County,
         1996
9 – Housing Element                                 9-18                                      November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      TABLE H-11: ANNUAL CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSING UNITS BY TYPE 1991 TO 2001
                                 Percent of                     Percent of
              Single Family                                                 Demolition
                                   Total        Multiple        Total Units            Net Housing
  Year             Units                                                        s
                                Units Built   Family Units         Built                Increase
  1991                35           19.2               2           3.1          0            37
  1992                34           18.7               3           4.7          0            37
  1993                11            6.0             22           34.4          0            33
  1994                 6            3.3               0             0          0             6
  1995                28           15.4               5           7.8          0            33
  1996                28           15.4             10           15.6          0            38
  1997                19           10.4               0             0          0            19
  1998                 5            2.8               7          10.9          1            11
  1999                16            8.8             15           23.4          2            29
  2000                 9          100.0               0             0          0             9
  2001                16          100.0               0             0          3            13
  Total            207             76.0             64             24          6           265
 Source: City of Fort Bragg Community Development Department, June 2002
As shown in Table H-11, 76 percent of new housing construction during the period 1991 to 2001
was single-family units. The rate of new residential construction fluctuates significantly from year
to year, averaging 27 units per year.
c.       Housing Types and Tenure
As indicated in the tables below, Fort Bragg remains predominantly a single-family residential
community. The large proportion of single-family homes is typical for a small coastal city located
in a predominantly rural county. In addition, a relatively high proportion of housing in Fort Bragg
is renter-occupied.
                                        TABLE H-12: HOUSING TYPES
                           Type of Housing                   Number         Percent
                           Single-family                       1,886          66.5
                           Multi-family                          811          28.6
                           Mobile Home, Trailer, Other           138           4.9
                           Total                               2,835         100.0
                          Source: State Department of Finance, 1999
9 – Housing Element                                 9-19                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                         TABLE H-13: HOUSING TENURE
                            Type of Housing                Number          Percent
                            Owner Occupied                 1,218                42.9
                            Renter Occupied                1,622                57.1
                               Total                       2,840               100.0
                            Source: U. S. 2000 Census
 According to the State Department of Finance, 4.9 percent of Fort Bragg's housing units were
 vacant in 1999. The U. S. 2000 Census reports a rental vacancy rate of 2.5 percent. Real
 estate brokers and property managers in the community report a shortage of rental units and
 rental vacancy rates of less than 2 percent. It is generally accepted that an overall vacancy rate
 of 4 percent is needed to provide for normal turnover in housing units. Despite the official
 vacancy rate figure, there appears to be a tight housing market in the community.
 3.       Special Housing Needs
 a.       The Elderly
 A relatively large proportion (21.6 percent) of Fort Bragg’s housing units is occupied by persons
 65 years of age or older. Table H-14 below shows the affordable housing developments for
 senior citizens.
                                TABLE H-14: AFFORDABLE SENIOR HOUSING
                                                                         Number of   Income Category
 Development                                                               Units
 Moura Senior Housing                                                        41      Very-Low
 Duncan Place (disabled persons and seniors)                                 43      Very-low to Low
 River Garden Apartments (2 ADA-compliant apartments)                         2      Very-Low and
                                                                                     Low
 Walnut Apartments (56 apartments, mixed family and seniors)                  2      Very-Low
 Total                                                                       88
Source: Community Development Department, City of Fort Bragg, June 2001.
 The 88 housing units currently set aside exclusively for seniors do not meet the need for this type
 of housing. There is a 2-year waiting list comprised of 80 households for the Moura Senior
 Housing. Similar waiting lists exist for other affordable senior housing developments in the
 community. At present, 26 percent of Fort Bragg’s population is comprised of persons aged 55
 or older. The median age of the community is projected to increase from 47.5 years in 1999 to
 51.1 years in 20093. The State Department of Finance projects a doubling in the number of
 seniors in Mendocino County between 1999 and the year 2010.
 The 2000 Census data indicate there were 465 elderly owner households and 221 elderly renter
 households, representing 16.3 and 13.3 percent of each elderly housing type respectively.
 Several factors will affect the future number of senior housing and care facilities that can be built:
 3
          Spatial Insights Corp. June, 2000
 9 – Housing Element                                 9-20                                   November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

    There has not been a commensurate increase in Federal and State funding to provide
     additional affordable housing for seniors.
    There are vacant bedrooms in the City. It is difficult to quantify accurately the number of
     such under-utilized housing units. The diminishing household size since the 1960s combined
     with the large number of existing single-family homes indicates that there could be significant
     source of additional housing for seniors dispersed throughout existing neighborhoods. An
     acceptable housing program for seniors could be implemented to utilize this extra housing
     capacity.
Programs to assist seniors who wish to continue living in their own homes would not only provide
important psychological and social benefits, but also reduce the need to build additional housing.
Examples of such programs include low interest loans to qualifying seniors for maintenance and
repair of their homes and matching seniors with spare capacity in their homes with other seniors
looking for housing.
In addition, this Element recognizes the urgency of providing additional senior housing and
includes new programs to meet this need. The City is working with community groups such as
Redwood Coast Seniors Inc. and the Coast Senior Housing Assistance Corporation to locate a
site and obtain funding for a senior housing development.
b.       Disabled Persons
The number of disabled persons in a city has important planning and social implications and will
affect the demand for specialized handicapped access and transportation facilities, certain social
services, and specialized housing.
The U.S. Census collects information on disabled people based on work disabilities and public
transportation disabilities. The most recent 2000 Census information regarding disabled people
indicated there were 1,467 persons with one or more disabilities of which 447 were 65 years and
older.
The Redwood Coast Seniors Inc. provides scheduled and on-demand transportation services for
disabled persons, including seniors, throughout the community and to other locations along the
coast under contract with the Mendocino Transportation Authority. This service provides a
monthly average of 38 one-way trips per day for persons with wheelchairs, of which 18 are for
non-seniors.
The affordability of housing for disabled people is an important concern for Mendocino County.
According to the Community Development Commission, most disabled persons entitled to SSDI
(Social Security Disabled Insurance) and SSI (Social Security Insurance) benefits receive only
$652.00 or less each month from these sources. The average rent in Fort Bragg is $700.00 per
month, an amount that exceeds the total monthly benefits typically received by disabled persons.
Persons receiving Section 8 housing assistance would receive assistance in meeting the market
rate rents.
9 – Housing Element                            9-21                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

c.       Single-Parent Households
Single-parent households, particularly those headed by women, are likely to have greater
demand than two-parent households for child care and other social services. There is an
obvious need for more affordable housing for this sector of the community. The waiting list for
Section 8 housing at the Community Development Commission of Mendocino County is over 600
persons, and it typically takes more than two years to obtain housing.
                TABLE H-15: SINGLE-PARENT HOUSEHOLDS IN FORT BRAGG
              Head of Household                              Number       Percent
              Male-Headed Households                           65           23.5
              Female-Headed Households                        212           76.5
              Total                                           277          100.0
             Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June 2000
d.       Farm and Fisheries Workers
There exists no data identifying the number of farm or fisheries workers in the community. There
are a number of farmworkers employed in nurseries surrounding the City and fisheries workers in
Noyo Harbor. There is no housing in the area specifically designed for migrant workers.
Although the 2000 Census indicated there were 259 persons working in agriculture, forestry,
fishing and hunting, there are no farmworkers in Fort Bragg, since there is no agriculture in the
Planning Area. The workers identified by the Census are employed in the fishing and forestry
sectors, and are therefore not eligible for farmworker housing subsidies, such as from CDBG
grants.
e.       Large Households
Large households are defined as households with five or more members. The market does not
provide sufficient housing for large households who often have limited income and require
additional rooms. The table below shows that there are 188 large households in Fort Bragg.
                                       TABLE H-16: HOUSEHOLD SIZE
                                                      Number of
               Household Size                        Households   Percent
               1 person                                  815        32.5
               2 persons                                 844        33.6
               3 persons                                 361        14.4
               4 persons                                 303        12.0
               5 or more persons                         188         7.5
               Total                                   2,511      100.0
             Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June 2000
The 2000 Census data indicate there were 53 large owner-households and 199 large rental-
households in Fort Bragg.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-22                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Demographic trends indicate that family size will continue to decrease, thereby reducing the
demand for housing units with more than four bedrooms.
4.       At Risk Units
There are affordable housing units throughout California which were built 30 years ago with
Federal low-interest mortgages from the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
with an agreement that the rents of these units be kept at a level affordable to low income
households.
State Government Code Section 65863.10 requires owners of such projects to provide at least
nine months notice of contract termination or prepayment of Federal assistance to tenants and
public agencies. Owners who are proposing to sell or dispose of those properties must also
provide first right of refusal to purchase those properties to those agreeing to maintain the
affordability of the units.
There are no housing units in Fort Bragg listed by the California Housing Partnership Corporation
inventory of Federally subsidized housing at risk of conversion to market rate during the next five
years.
5.       Ability to Pay for Housing
In analyzing the ability of different economic sectors of the community to pay for housing costs,
four income categories are commonly used: above-moderate, moderate, low, and very-low. The
following brief definitions explain each of these income categories expressed in dollar amounts
as of March 2002 for a four-person household:4
Above-Moderate Income: Household income which exceeds 120 percent of the median income
for Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of $49,801 or more.
Moderate Income: Household income between 80 and 120 percent of the median income for
Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of $33,201 to $49,800.
Low Income: Household income between 50 and 80 percent of the median income for
Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of $20,751. to $33,200.
Very-Low Income: Household income not exceeding 50 percent of the median income for
Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of up to $20,750.
Table H-17 presents the distribution of households by these four income categories in the City.
                TABLE H-17: DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSEHOLDS BY INCOME CATEGORY
                             Very-Low         Low        Moderate      Above-Moderate         Total
          Households             706          344            313            1,076             2,439
          Percent               28.9          14.1          12.8             44.1             100.0
         Source: Spatial Insights Corporation and HUD Income Limits 2000. Note the household figures are
                   based on HUD 2000 figures and the 1999 household income figures from Spatial Insights
4
         According to data developed by the State Department of Housing and Community Development, under the
         direction of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), March 2002.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-23                                     November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                 Corporation and are therefore approximate. These figures are used to provide an
                 approximate estimate of the proportion of households in each income category.
The average rent paid by households in Fort Bragg in the first six months of 2000 for a typical
two bedroom apartment was $700 a month, and for a two-bedroom, single-family house the
average rent was approximately $850, as reported by property managers and real estate brokers
in the community.
In addition, rents have increased by approximately 20 percent during the past two years. This
rent increase is more than five times the rate of inflation and substantially larger than the growth
in household income observed for this period.
The significant rise in rental costs is in part a reflection of the limited supply of rental units in the
community, in relation to the large demand. Property managers report having waiting lists of 40
to 50 households for available rental units. Few of the rental units that do come on the market
are advertised, since there is such a large pent-up demand.
In order to afford an average rent for an apartment in Fort Bragg of $700 per month, a household
must have an annual gross income of $25,200, assuming that a maximum of 30 percent of
household income is allocated for rent. This level of rent is affordable for above-moderate and
moderate income households in the City. It is not affordable, however, to the approximately 43
percent of households in the community with very-low and low incomes. Until additional
construction of rental units occurs, the combination of strong demand and low vacancies will
contribute to an increasingly severe shortage of rental units and a decrease in their affordability.
The situation for home ownership is similar. The average sales price of a single-family house in
Fort Bragg was $163,000 in 2000. In order to qualify for a mortgage to purchase this home, a
household would require a gross annual income of $55,869. This assumes a 20 percent cash
down payment of $13,040 and a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage at an interest rate of 8.0 percent
costing 2 points, including taxes and insurance.
The 1999 estimated median household income for Fort Bragg was $36,006, which is less than
the minimum income required to purchase an average-priced home within the City. (Note this
figure is different from the HUD 2002 median income figure for Mendocino County of $41,500).
Although many Fort Bragg residents purchased their homes many years ago, before the time
when affordability became an issue, it is evident that the majority of these people could no longer
qualify to purchase a home in their community.
Overpayment is clearly an acute problem for renters as well as for those seeking to purchase
homes. The policies and programs section of the Housing Element contains actions that seek to
address this situation.
According to the 2000 Census, the median household income for Mendocino County was
$35,996. Estimates of overpayment by owners and renters reveal 56 percent of lower-income
owner households pay over 30 percent of their household income on housing, and 69 percent of
lower-income renter households overpay for housing.
In addition, the 2000 Census data indicated that occupants of 33 owner occupied units (1.15
percent), and 94 renter households (5.6 percent) in Fort Bragg reside in overcrowded conditions.
It should be noted that 49 renter occupied units are quite overcrowded, with two or more
occupants per room.
9 – Housing Element                                  9-24                                      November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

6.       Regional Housing Needs Determinations
State legislation enacted in 1980, AB 2853, mandated that the Mendocino Council of
Governments (MCOG) determines the existing and projected regional housing needs and
determines each city’s share of the regional need for housing by housing type and cost in
Mendocino County.
The Housing Element must consider the local share for regional housing assigned to Fort Bragg
by MCOG which takes into consideration employment opportunities, the availability of suitable
sites and public facilities, market demand for housing, and the type and tenure of housing.
   TABLE H-18: REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATIONS FOR THE CITY OF FORT BRAGG
                                     JANUARY 2001 – JULY 2008
                                           Total Housing
                         Income Category   Need            Percent
                         Very-Low (0-50)   85              22
                         Low (50-80)       74              19
                         Moderate          66              17
                         (80-120)
                         Above-Moderate    163             42
                         (>120)
                         Total             388             100
  Source: Mendocino County Housing Needs Plan, Mendocino Council of Governments, as amended December
            2003.
The Housing Element must demonstrate that there is sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land
to meet Regional Housing Needs and to accommodate a range of housing for all income groups.
Table H-19 indicates that there are 103.79 acres of vacant residentially-zoned land which could
accommodate development of approximately 1,192 housing units during the time frame of this
Housing Element.
A total of 268 dwelling units, of which 84 were affordable units, were constructed in the City since
the 1991 Housing Need Allocations. Significant progress has been made towards alleviating the
shortage of affordable housing through the collaborative efforts of the City and nonprofit housing
organizations. Nonetheless, there continues to be a large unmet need for this type of housing in
the community.
a.       Residential Development Potential
Table H-19 shows remaining vacant or underdeveloped land that could accommodate housing
development within the City of Fort Bragg by General Plan designation. Total residential
development potential figures that include the Sphere of Influence are presented in the Land Use
Element.
The development potential figures shown in the table are based on a parcel-by-parcel analysis of
the number of dwelling units that could be constructed, taking into account the residential
densities permitted by the General Plan. Refer to Appendix C for a parcel-specific residential
9 – Housing Element                           9-25                                     November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

land use inventory5. All of the residential units indicated in Table H-19 can be served by City
services and infrastructure.
Several conclusions can be drawn from Table H-19. First, the City has sufficient vacant and
underdeveloped land to meet its remaining regional housing allocation of 187 units, since 1,192
units could be built within City limits. The majority (1,087) of these units would be higher-density
housing in multi-family housing and mixed use Zoning Districts.
Despite sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land, there exist constraints to increased
residential development which are discussed in the Constraints to Housing Development section.
State legislation (SB 1019) requires the City to ensure that there are adequate sites with zoning
that permits multi-family residential uses without a conditional use permit to allow the City to
meet its housing need for very-low and low income households. The RM, RH and RVH zoning
districts permit multi-family housing without a conditional use permit as indicated in Table H-19:
therefore the majority of multi-family housing can be developed as a use by right, without a
conditional use permit: namely, 40 units in the RM District, 186 in the RH District, and 520 units
in the RVH District.
                          TABLE H-19: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
       General Plan Designation            Acres of Vacant Land
                                                                                     Maximum Units
       Low Density Residential (RL)               18.45                                     75
       Medium Density Residential (RM)             4.55                                     40
       High Density Residential (RH)              16.58                                    186
       Very-High Density Residential (RVH)        31.67                                    520
       General Commercial (CG)                     5.67                                     63
       Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)            26.53                                    298
       CBD                                         0.34                                     10
       Total                                     103.80                                  1,192
      Source: Community Development Department, City of Fort Bragg, December 2001 and Buildout Projections for
               the 2001 Draft City of Fort Bragg General Plan, September 2001 LCA & Associates. Note the latter
               counts mixed use units as commercial square footage, rather than as dwelling units.
b.       Emergency and Transitional Housing
Accurate information on the number of homeless persons is impossible to obtain. No official
counts of the homeless exist. Only a small proportion of the homeless population contact
government and private agencies that provide assistance. Estimates of the number of homeless
vary greatly because this population is transient, often moving from place to place every night
seeking shelter.
The Police Department does not have statistics on the homeless population in the City. There
are several organizations in the community that provide transitional housing facilities, notably the
5
         The residential development figures in the Housing Element are different that the total buildout figures in the
         Background Report and in other parts of the General Plan. They are more conservative (i.e., assume less
         units per acre than would be allowed under the designation).
9 – Housing Element                                   9-26                                            November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Ford Street Project, the Yellow House, and the Hospitality House. They report that the demand
 for temporary housing exceeds the supply. A summary of emergency and transient housing
 facilities are presented in Table H-20.
                       TABLE H-20: TRANSITIONAL AND EMERGENCY HOUSING
 Organization                             Type of Shelter Provided                 Units/Size
 The Ford Street Project                  Emergency Housing                        3 beds
                                          Transitional Housing                     5 beds
 Hospitality House                        Emergency Housing                        15 individual beds, 9
                                                                                   family beds
 Yellow House                             Transitional Housing for families with   12 beds
                                          children and disabled individuals
 Community Development Commission         Shelter Plus Care voucher program        variable
Source: PAS & Associates
 According to Mendocino County’s Homeless Services Planning Group which coordinates public
 and private resources, the majority of homeless are County residents. In most cases,
 homelessness has occurred because local people are unable to afford housing, rather than as
 the result of an influx of homeless persons from other areas.
 The magnitude of this problem far exceeds the resources of local government, particularly
 smaller cities. The City, however, has complied with Government Code Section 65583(a)(6) and
 (c)(1) regarding the identification of adequate sites to facilitate the development of emergency
 shelters and transitional housing with programs which identify an area suitable for this use.
 Programs contained in this Housing Element require a Zoning Ordinance amendment to allow
 transitional and emergency housing as a permitted use in the CG: General Commercial district.
 The CG zoning district is an appropriate location for such a facility because:
     There are several underutilized sites within this district;
     There already exist transitional housing facilities in this zoning district;
     This area is centrally located and near public services and stores; and
     Infrastructure, such as water, sewer, roads, and sidewalks, is in place.
 The County has taken the initiative in identifying the extent of the problem locally and has
 established an organizational framework to coordinate funding and implementation of programs
 for the homeless. The policies of the Housing Element relating to homelessness are based on
 facilitating and cooperating with this County effort, commensurate with the City's population and
 resources.
 9 – Housing Element                             9-27                                        November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

7.       Constraints to Housing Development
a.       Annexation Standards
An important land use regulation affecting development in Fort Bragg, as well as other cities in
Mendocino County, is the policy adopted by the Mendocino County Local Agency Formation
Commission (LAFCO) regarding annexation proposals.
The standards and procedures set forth in the LAFCO policy affect its review of requests for City
annexation of lands proposed for development. The application of these standards does not
constitute a constraint to housing development since they do not exceed the annexation
requirements contained in State law.
b.       Land Use Controls
The Fort Bragg Zoning Ordinance, contained within the City's Municipal Code, sets forth land
use designations and development requirements for construction activity within the City. State
law requires that the Zoning Ordinance be consistent with the General Plan. The Fort Bragg
Zoning Ordinance is being comprehensively revised to be consistent with the General Plan. The
following changes to the Land Use Designations of the General Plan promote housing
development by establishing the following maximum residential densities:
    24 units per acre in the General Commercial (CG) land use designation. The previous
     General Plan specified density by means of an FAR of 0.4 and a maximum building height of
     25 feet for this designation;
    40 units per acre for the Central Business District; and
    24 units per acre for the Highway Visitor Commercial (CH) land use district. The current
     Zoning Ordinance and previous General Plan do not establish residential density limits for
     this land use designation.
    The City's zoning and development standards do not constitute a constraint to housing
     development. Regulations for residential development (e.g. required setbacks, maximum lot
     coverage, height limits, and minimum lot sizes) are no more restrictive than those of
     surrounding jurisdictions. Indeed, the Zoning Ordinance and related land use regulations
     serve to promote, rather than constrain, housing development in the following ways:
    The RM-Medium Density Residential zoning district allows up to 2 units on a lot size of 7,500
     square feet with a maximum building height of 35 feet pursuant to a conditional use permit.
     In addition, existing buildings can be divided into 3 units subject to the Subdivision Map Act
     and building code compliance. This zoning district has encouraged the restoration of older
     homes and the creation of additional infill housing units. Requiring a conditional use permit
     has not restricted the development of duplex and triplex units, and has served the function of
     ensuring that this type of residential development fits harmoniously with surrounding land
     uses.
    The RH-High Density Residential zoning district has a maximum density for 15 units per acre
     within the Coastal Zone and can be increased elsewhere in the City according to the density
     bonuses contained in the Housing Element when providing affordable housing and meeting
     other criteria. Flexible lot configuration and other site design standards provide an incentive
9 – Housing Element                             9-28                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     for the development of rental and multi-family housing.
    The RVH-Very High Density Residential zoning district permits up to 24 units per acre in the
     Coastal Zone. In addition, this zoning district allows zero lot lines within Planned Unit
     Developments and a maximum building height of 45 feet. These regulations have resulted in
     the construction of a significant number of multi-family dwellings.
    Programs in this Housing Element and the General Plan would revise the Zoning Ordinance
     to permit multi-family residential densities in the CG-General Commercial and the CH-
     Highway Visitor Commercial zoning districts with a conditional use permit.
    The Zoning Ordinance encourages the Planned Development concept. Fort Bragg’s PD
     process permits housing developments to be built with flexible setbacks and zero lot lines.
    The Central Business District permits a residential density of up to 40 units per acre.
The standards for on- and off-site improvements contained in the Subdivision Ordinance do not
constitute a constraint to housing development. These standards are summarized below and are
no more restrictive than those typically found in other Mendocino County jurisdictions. Indeed, in
some cases, less restrictive standards exist in Fort Bragg, since sidewalks with full curb and
gutters are not required for all types of residential subdivisions.
                      TABLE H-21: ON-AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
  Sidewalks                       Sidewalks are required on both sides of the street in residentially zoned
                                  areas, with the exception that the RS district does not require a sidewalk
                                  for lots equal or larger than 15,000 square feet.
  Sidewalk Width                  Sidewalks shall be at least 4 feet with 1/2 foot. for curb, and not less than
                                  3 5/8 inches thick. Sidewalks shall be adjacent to curbs unless the
                                  conditions of tentative map approval provide otherwise.
  Curbs                           Curbs shall be provided in all residential areas with sidewalks.
  Minimum Street Widths           The minimum width of pavement for lots 6,000 square feet - 24 feet with
                                  curb, gutter and sidewalk; for lots 6,001 to 15,000 square feet - 40 foot
                                  curb-to-curb is required; for lots >15,001 square feet - 18 feet paved with
                                  a 2 foot rocked shoulder.
  Cul-de-sacs                     A paved turn around shall be provided at the ends of cul-de-sac streets.
                                  The radius for the edge of pavement or curb line shall be 50 to 30 feet
                                  depending on lot size. A hammerhead turnaround is allowed on a case-
                                  by-case basis with approval of the Fire Department.
  Standard Radii for Curb         All residential street intersections: 20 foot minimum
  Returns at Street Corners
The revised Housing Element contains many incentives that would reduce the cost of providing
inclusionary units, such as density bonuses, a higher density mixed-use land use designation,
and use of redevelopment and other housing funds.
The Inclusionary Housing Program does not constitute a constraint to housing development and
is an established and proven method to ensure the construction of affordable housing. There are
approximately 48 jurisdictions in California with inclusionary housing programs that have led to
the production of over 20,000 affordable below market rate units.6 The cost of providing
6
          Inclusionary Housing Survey Report, San Diego Housing Commission, 1992.
9 – Housing Element                                    9-29                                       November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

inclusionary units would either be passed on to the market rate units, reduce the profit margin of
the developer, be reflected in a reduction in the value of the land, be partially compensated by
density bonuses, fee reductions, or other government incentives, or a combination of these
effects. The allocation of this burden would depend on general market conditions and the
relative bargaining power of the parties.
c.       Secondary Dwelling Units
Section 18.72.200 of the Municipal Code sets forth regulations for secondary dwelling units in the
RL, RS, RR1, and RR2 single-family residential districts subject to an administrative review by
the Community Development Director. These regulations allow secondary dwelling units on
single-family residential lots provided the following conditions are met
    There may be only one secondary dwelling unit per single-family parcel.
    Secondary dwelling units must meet all standards of the zoning district.
    The secondary dwelling unit shall not exceed 960 square feet in the RL and RS Zoning
     District; 1,000 square feet in the RR1 zoning district; and 1,250 square feet in a RR2 zoning
     district.
    Impermeable surfaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area.
    Secondary dwelling units are not permitted where access is provided from streets less than
     36 feet wide.
Policies and programs of this updated Housing Element call for Design Review of the site and
design of second dwelling units to ensure neighborhood compatibility.
d.       Site and Design Review
Residential development of two or more units requires Design Review. The intent of the Design
Review process are to preserve and improve the natural beauty of the City’s setting and ensure
that the new development is visually harmonious with its surroundings. The Design Review
Guidelines establish criteria for site and building design and landscaping, with emphasis on
preserving designated scenic corridors. The Guidelines do not represent a constraint to housing
production in Fort Bragg.
e.       Development Fees
The City requires payment of different fees as a condition of development approval. All fees are
tied to the City's actual costs of providing necessary services such as project review and plan
checking fees. These fees are reviewed and adjusted periodically.
Fees for planning applications (e.g. design review, use permit, variance, rezoning, annexation,
and subdivision map approval) range from $300 to $1,500. Additional fees, including school
impact and parkland dedication fees and charges levied for building, electrical, plumbing, and
other permits apply to construction of individual housing units. For a typical three-bedroom, two-
bathroom single-family home, the City water, sewer, drainage, and water retrofit fees total
approximately $7,500.
Fee schedules are available at the Community Development Department. The fees required for
residential development are based on meeting actual costs of providing City services such as
fire, police, and potable water and wastewater treatment. The fees charged by the City staff to
9 – Housing Element                             9-30                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

process and review development applications are lower than comparable market-rate fees for
technical plan review tasks.
The fees levied for a typical 1,500 square foot single family dwelling, including all water retrofit in
lieu fees are $15,120. For a multifamily dwelling unit in a typical fourplex, fees total about $6,520
per unit. For multiple family projects, water retrofits must be performed, as in lieu fees may only
be paid for projects requiring six or fewer retrofits.
                                      1500 SF SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE
                                                ON 7500 SF CITY LOT
         FEE TYPE                                                       COST
         building permit including plan check                 $               1,700.00
         water retrofit (5 retrofits req'd or in lieu fees)   $               2,500.00
         water capital                                        $               4,070.00
         sewer                                                $               3,302.00
         storm drain service (.0388/SF)                       $                 291.00
         fire dept                                            $                  50.00
         school impact ($2.14/SF)                             $               3,210.00
         TOTAL                                                $              15,123.00
                                         TYPICAL 3800 SF MULTIFAMILY
                                                     4-PLEX UNIT
         building permit including plan check               $           2,750.00
         water retrofits (16 retrofits required)
         water                                              $           8,535.00
         sewer                                              $           6,175.00
         storm drain service                                $             400.00
         fire dept                                          $              91.00
         school impact ($2.14/SF)                           $           8,132.00
         TOTAL FOR ENTIRE COMPLEX                           $          26,083.00
         TOTAL PER UNIT                                     $           6,520.75
f.       Building Codes
Building codes and enforcement do not constrain housing development in Fort Bragg. As the
City of Fort Bragg does not maintain its own Building Department, the Mendocino County
Building Inspection Department provides building inspection and code enforcement service.
New construction is required to meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
The County Building Department inspects housing units when an owner seeks a building permit
for additional construction, or when a specific complaint relating to the health and safety of the
building occupants is received. In conformance with the UBC, the County requires new
construction to meet all building codes in effect today, but does not typically require previous
work that was completed with the necessary permits to comply with current standards.
9 – Housing Element                                     9-31                            November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

g.        Processing Time
The time taken to process development applications affects housing costs, since interest on
loans must continue to be paid and the longer it takes for the development to be approved, the
higher the costs will be. The time to process residential developments does not constitute a
constraint in Fort Bragg.
The following are estimated processing times for residential development applications for a
building permit on a dwelling with no special permit or exception to the standards required:
    Community Development Department - 1/2 to 1 hours.
    Building Department - 2 hours to 2 weeks.
Review requiring a discretionary permit involving one or more public hearings (e.g. Variance,
Design Review, and Use Permit):
    Community Development Department and Planning Commission - 3 to 8 weeks.
    Building Department - 2 hours to 2 weeks.
Review requiring a change of zoning, major subdivision approval, or preparation of an
Environmental Impact document:
    Community Development Department, Planning Commission, or City Council - 12 weeks to 1
     year.
    Building Department - 2 hours to 2 weeks (Includes code compliance, structural, grading, and
     Title 24 review. Does not include back-up time, rework by applicant, or field inspections and
     varies with the complexities of the plan. Back-up time varies with volume of applications in
     the department and can be as long as two to three weeks.)
Single-family units are a permitted use by right and do not require a conditional use permit, and
as indicated above, can take up to two months for approval, depending on whether Design
Review or another discretionary permit such as a Variance are required. The City has adopted
Architectural Review Guidelines with clear illustrations and text to streamline and facilitate this
process.
Multi-family housing is a permitted use in all multifamily residential districts. Multi-family housing
in mixed use districts requires a conditional use permit, which typically takes two months where
no other entitlements, such as a major subdivision are required.
Second dwelling units are approved administratively. The typical administrative approval time for
a second dwelling unit is less than three weeks. The time to obtain approvals for single and
multi-family housing does not constitute a constraint on housing development in Fort Bragg.
These processing times are comparable to the time taken for processing similar projects in
surrounding jurisdictions. It is anticipated that implementation of the policies contained in this
Housing Element, combined with the increased staff in the Community Development
Department, will further shorten processing time.
9 – Housing Element                           9-32                                       November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

h.       Infrastructure Constraints
Despite the development potential figures mentioned earlier, there are potentially significant
constraints to increased housing development related to the adequacy of the City’s
infrastructure. These include:
    The City’s water capacity needs to be increased to meet current and anticipated growth.
     Residential development is currently limited to projects that can meet the requirements of the
     City’s Water Retrofit Program designed to optimize existing capacity. The City is currently
     planning to make improvements to its Noyo River diversion facility. The improvements
     include adding larger pumps and a new pipeline that would deliver water to Sherwood Road
     and reconstructing the City's raw water ponds. These improvements will provide the
     necessary infrastructure to allow the City to pump its full entitlement of up to 3.0 cubic feet
     per second. Once these improvements are made, the City will have the ability to pump
     sufficient water from the Noyo River and its other two sources to meet existing and projected
     demand resulting from new development allowed under the General Plan. Once the
     improvements are completed, the City can then apply for a permanent license to divert water
     from the Noyo River. If this permanent license is granted, then the City can meet with the
     State Department of Health Services (DHS) to amend the existing limits in its Water Permit
     on how much water the City can divert from the Noyo River.
    Several areas have inadequate storm drains and others are in need of repair. This problem
     is being actively assessed by the City.
    The sewer system was found to have infiltration problems affecting approximately 146
     properties. The Municipal Improvement District is currently designing a new sand filter. The
     District is also planning to install a new secondary digester at the plant and make
     improvements to the collection system to address infiltration and inflow problems.
    Financial limitations exist, since the City has a limited retail sales tax base and relies heavily
     on transient occupancy and property taxes for its revenue.
The City's infrastructure problems have received considerable attention in the last two years.
Fort Bragg adopted a Redevelopment Plan in 1987 and a Five-Year Implementation Plan was
adopted in 1997 with a specific projects list designed to remedy many of the City's infrastructure
problems which include:
    Replace and reconstruct storm drains and sidewalks in coordination with street
     reconstruction projects on Main, Oak, Chestnut, Franklin, and Harold Streets.
    Improve traffic, parking, and pedestrian circulation in the Central Business District and
     General Commercial districts.
    Relocate the Police Station.
    Construct the North Fort Bragg water and wastewater extension.
    Implement water system improvements: develop new sources and improve the distribution
     system and the water treatment plant.
    Construct a new recreation center and rehabilitate City Hall and other public facilities.
9 – Housing Element                             9-33                                    November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Because of these actions, the City's infrastructure problems will be remedied and Fort Bragg will
have the infrastructure in place to accommodate its housing development potential well within
the five-year time frame of this Element.
i.       Market Constraints
Market constraints include the cost of land and improvements, construction costs, interest rates,
profit, property taxes and the wide range of factors which determine consumer preference in the
housing market. Most of these factors are beyond control of local governments, although
occasionally the cost of land and interest rates can be reduced in order to encourage affordable
housing production.
The availability of financing is a key component in determining the affordability of homes. Small
increases in the interest rates can have a significant impact on the amount of monthly mortgage
payments and thereby limit many people from qualifying for a home loan.
The cost of land and housing construction in Fort Bragg is generally less than in other coastal
areas in the County. An informal survey of local real estate brokers and developers indicated the
following range of costs for construction of a single-family home in the City:
Land costs               $50,000 to $55,000 for a 6,500 to 7,000 square foot lot.
Construction costs       $80 to $90 per square foot.
The cost of a typical single family lot in Fort Bragg ranged from $50,000 to $80,000. In 2002.
Construction costs for a 1,700 square foot, 3 bedroom, 2-bathroom home vary from $110 to $125
per square foot. Rising insurance costs and sharply increased worker’s compensation insurance
for contractors statewide mean that these construction cost figures will increase by
approximately 4 to 6 percent next year.
There exist little data regarding land and construction costs for multi-family housing, because few
market-rate multi-family units have been developed in Fort Bragg in recent years. One local
developer estimates that land costs (including wastewater, water, grading, and drainage
improvements) for a typical townhouse development are in the range of $25,000 to $30,000 per
unit, and that construction costs average approximately $85 per square foot.
Financing for housing development is relatively easy to obtain and there is no shortage of
construction or mortgage financing in Fort Bragg for new construction or rehabilitation. There is
no evidence of mortgage deficient areas or "redlining" practices in Fort Bragg. Interest rates are
consistent with those found throughout Mendocino County.
j.       Community Sentiment
Community attitudes toward housing play a crucial role in determining the type and cost of
housing that will be built in the City. A key to obtaining development approvals is to secure the
support of the local neighborhood. Developers of potentially controversial housing projects
should make the effort to address the legitimate community concerns regarding the type of
housing proposed, the characteristics of the potential occupants of the housing units, noise,
increases in traffic, and the impact that the proposed development will have on City services.
9 – Housing Element                           9-34                                    November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Involving the community in the early phases of a project is essential for creating the basis for
cooperation and constructive participation in the planning process.
The community of Fort Bragg values the historic character of the Central Business District and
the quietness of its residential neighborhoods. Most residents would concur that housing should
be available to all economic segments of the community, and there has been little opposition to
the many affordable housing units built to date.
k.       Opportunities for Energy Conservation
The City encourages energy conservation in residential projects. The building orientation, street
layout, lot design, landscaping, and street tree configuration of all residential projects are
reviewed in order to maximize solar access and energy conservation. Residential structures
must meet the requirements of Title 24 relating to energy conservation features of the Uniform
Building Code.
9 – Housing Element                          9-35                                 November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX A: QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES BY HOUSING UNIT
                                    Very             Moderate Above
                                    Low       Low    Income   Moderate
Program                             Income    Income          Income   Total
H-1.1.3 Rehabilitation/Preservation   20        35     15                70
H-2.2.1 Mixed Use                     10        10                       20
H-2.2.2 Zoning Ordinance Revisions    20        20                       40
H-2.5.1 Second Dwelling Units         15        25     40                80
H-2.8.1 Redv’t. Housing Set-Aside     15        15     25                55
H-3.1.4 School Facility Reimburs’t.    5         5     15                25
H-3.2.2 Senior Housing                25        35     40         80    180
H-3.4.3 Inclusionary Housing           5        15     15                35
H-3.5.1 Density Bonus                  2         5      5                12
H-3.9.1 Emergency & Transitional      49                                 48
9 – Housing Element                        9-36                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX B: EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
  Program                             Purpose                           Evaluation
  1.1.a Continue to obtain a Facilitate the construction of a Program is general and has no
  mixture of dwelling unit types variety of housing types.              quantitative objectives. The City
  through the administration of                                         has administered its General
  the General Plan, including                                           Plan, but it is not clear that this
  newly annexed areas.                                                  alone results in a variety of
                                                                        housing types (delete)7
  1.1.b Amend the Zoning              To provide a location where State law allows manufactured
  Map to include a                    manufactured homes and homes in residential zoning
  Manufactured Housing                mobile homes could be districts. The Mobile Home Park
  /Mobile Home Park Zone              constructed.                      Zone was not implemented and is
                                                                        not necessary (delete)
  I.1.c     Amend the Zoning To increase residential density While the City has a –PD overlay
  Ordinance        for     planned and thereby encourage the district, the regulations are so
  developments which will construction                  of   additional vague that there is little incentive
  allow for greater flexibility in affordable housing.                  for property owners to use the
  encouraging and approving                                             tool. We recommend that this
  higher densities, smaller lot                                         policy be refined and imple-
  sizes, manufactured housing                                           mented to encourage flexibility
  and alley homes.                                                      and creativity in providing higher
                                                                        density housing. (revise)
  1.1.d     Conduct an annual To identify public land where There is no undeveloped public
  inventory of public land below market rate housing land within the City which is
  available for below market could be constructed.                      suitable for affordable housing
  rate housing.                                                         development. (delete)
  1.1.e The City shall request Work with the County to The County has implemented this
  the County to give notice to ensure that the City’s housing policy. (delete).
  the City for all rezoning and other land use policies are
  projects within the City’s considered in the Sphere of
  Sphere of Influence.                Influence.
  1.1.f Allow second units on To increase the supply of Implemented.                      A total of 19
  single-family lots as a affordable housing and make second dwelling units were
  permitted use, subject to better use of existing stock of constructed since 1994. There
  appropriate        development land and housing.                      may be need for policy revision to
  standards for size, 7 and                                             ensure       compatibility      with
  setbacks.                                                             neighboring uses. (revise)
  1.2.a Increase base density Encourage the construction of This program is vague and its
  allocations for the ability of a variety of housing types and implementation requires a general
  proposed developments to increase housing affordability. plan amendment. The City will
  fulfill a need for a variety of                                       consider the need for increasing
  housing types.                                                        base densities as part of its
                                                                        General Plan update process.
                                                                        This is unnecessary as an on-
                                                                        going program. (delete)
7
           Delete means the program was eliminated form the Draft Housing Element; revised means the program was
           revised and included in the Draft Housing Element.
9 – Housing Element                                     9-37                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                            Purpose                           Evaluation
 1.2.b     Amend the Zoning Encourage the development of              Refer to Program 1.1.f for
 Ordinance to allow second second dwelling units.                     discussion of secondary units.
 residential     units     as    a                                    The City has amended the
 permitted       use      in    all                                   secondary          dwelling      unit
 residential zones.                                                   regulations since this policy was
                                                                      adopted. (delete)
 1.3.a Amend the General            Facilitate the conservation and Not implemented. This policy was
 Plan to allow a one-time           renovation of existing housing adopted without a full analysis of
 division of parcels which can      stock.                            potential impacts to existing
 provide two existing homes                                           roads,      infrastructure,    public
 on a residential lot with                                            services, neighborhood character,
 separate utility connections                                         etc. (delete)
 and meet the development
 standards in the particular
 zoning district.
 Program 1.4.a. Identify and        Promote       higher     density This activity is a long-range
 designate on the General           housing.                          planning effort and is part of the
 Plan and Zoning Maps                                                 City’s current General Plan
 priority sites for higher                                            update process.           It is not
 density               residential                                    necessary or appropriate as an
 development which could                                              on-going       housing      program.
 include alley houses, smaller                                        (delete)
 lot sizes, etc.
 Program 1.6a Apply to the          Facilitate    the    expeditious The City has not applied for a
 Coastal      Commission        to  approval       of     residential Categorical Exclusion order from
 exempt proposed residential        development.                      the Coastal Commission. It is
 structures situated in the                                           noted that there is only one
 Coastal Zone from obtaining                                          residential neighborhood in the
 a     Coastal     Development                                        Coastal Zone and it is nearly built-
 Permit.                                                              out. (retain)
 Program 1.7.a Continue to          Promote a variety of housing Program is general and has no
 obtain a mix of dwelling unit      types.                            quantitative objectives. (delete)
 types         through         the
 administration of the General
 Plan,      including        newly
 annexed areas.
 Program 1.8.a           Increase   Promote a variety of housing Review of residential densities is
 base density allocations for       types.                            part of the General Plan update
 the ability of proposed                                              process. (delete)
 developments to fulfill the
 need for a variety of housing
 types.
 Program 1.9a Allow renters         To protect existing mobile Not implemented. (delete)
 to convert to owning their         home           parks        from
 mobile        home          space  redevelopment to other uses.
 irrespective of rental vacancy
 rates.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-38                                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                         Purpose                       Evaluation
 2.1.a       Adopt a tiered      Reduce the cost of developing Not implemented. The City has
 infrastructure rate policy      affordable housing.           been advised that a tiered rate
 which charges lower fees for                                  base may violate Prop 218
 sewer and water hook-ups                                      requirements. (delete)
 and drainage improvements
 to developers of low and
 very-low income housing and
 higher fees to developers of
 market rate housing.
 2.1.b Waive Use Permits and     Reduce the cost of developing In the past, the City has provided
 Variance fees for projects      affordable housing.           assistance to housing developers
 involving very low and low                                    in the form of fee waivers and
 income housing.                                               infrastructure development using
                                                               Redevelopment funds. (retain)
 2.1.c Continue to assist Reduce the cost of developing See 2.1.b above (retain)
 housing for very low to low affordable housing.
 income households within
 new      developments     from
 portions of development fees
 as specified by the City
 Council.
 2.1.e      Continue to give Reduce the cost of developing The City’s permit-processing load
 priority processing to those affordable housing.              is not so substantial that a policy
 very low and low income                                       for “priority” processing makes a
 developments.                                                 difference. (delete)
 2.1.f Correlate the vacant Ensure that adequate sites for Implemented as a part of the
 land inventory with existing the development of affordable General Plan revision process.
 needs of low and median housing continue to exist.            (delete)
 income households, and
 determine the need to
 redesignate land for specific
 housing types.
 2.1.g      Apply for CDBG Reduce the cost of developing The City has a very successful
 subsidies     to   assist    in affordable housing.           Community Development Block
 providing           necessary                                 Grant program and has received
 infrastructure improvements                                   three housing related CDBG
 in developments with below                                    grants in the past five years. In
 market rate housing, and                                      addition, the City presently
 leverage these subsidies.                                     administers Federal Emergency
                                                               Shelter Grants for two local non-
                                                               profits      providing   homeless
                                                               services. (retain)
9 – Housing Element                              9-39                                     November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                           Purpose                         Evaluation
 2.1.h     Amend the Zoning Increase the amount of land Not implemented. This policy will
 Ordinance to permit housing available           for    housing be re-evaluated in the current
 in all commercial zones as a development.                         General Plan update process and
 permitted use.                                                    is unnecessary as an on-going or
                                                                   long-term policy. (delete)
 2.1.i Create a vehicle, such Facilitate the implementation The Community Development
 as an outreach program, of housing element policies Department assists local groups
 nonprofit authority, planning and programs.                       in planning for affordable housing
 commission, redevelopment                                         projects. (delete)
 agency or corporation, to
 locate, assist and plan such
 activities as below market
 rate housing for low and
 median income households.
 2.1.j     The     City      shall Facilitate housing availability This program is vague and
 acknowledge single parent for single parent households.           unimplementable. (delete)
 households as viable families
 when applying for subsidized
 housing programs.
 2.2.a. Developers of planned Facilitate housing for lower The City has not adopted an
 residential developments of 5 income households.                  inclusionary zoning ordinance,
 units or more shall provide                                       however, inclusionary units have
 10 to 15% of their units as                                       been required since enactment of
 affordable in one of the                                          this policy. (retain/revise)
 following ways: 1. 10-15% of
 the units for rent shall have
 rents affordable to very low
 and low income households;
 10 – 15% of ownership units
 shall     be   affordable     to
 households with incomes at
 or below the county median.
 Adopt       an     Inclusionary
 Housing Ordinance
 Program 2.2.b Provide a Facilitate housing for lower City has implemented this policy
 bonus to developments that income households.                     as required by State law. (retain)
 incorporate below market
 rate units in the same
 development;        to     those
 developments that exceed
 the requirements of the
 inclusionary         ordinance;
 provide      density      bonus
 increases up to 25 % for
 below market rate housing in
 designated areas.
9 – Housing Element                                9-40                                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                          Purpose                      Evaluation
 2.3.a Schedule an annual         Facilitate housing for lower The      City  conducts      annual
 meeting       with    nonprofit  income households.           meetings regarding the CDBG
 housing developers to assist                                  grant program and works with
 identifying appropriate sites                                 non-profit housing developers on
 and to encourage the                                          an on-going basis. (retain)
 development        of     rental
 housing and rehabilitation.
 2.4.a     Amend the Zoning       Facilitate housing for lower See 1.1.f and 1.2.b above (delete)
 Ordinance to allow second        income households.
 residential    units    as    a
 permitted      use     in    all
 residential zones.
 2.4.c Use readily available      Facilitate housing for lower Program is general and has no
 methods to encourage a full      income households.           quantitative objectives. (delete)
 range of housing types, such
 as developer agreements
 and      mortgage      revenue
 bonds.
 2.4.d Continue to participate    Increase the amount       of Implemented       and      ongoing.
 in and promote the Section 8     affordable housing units.    (retain)
 Existing Housing Program.
 The City will annually monitor
 the status of the River
 Gardens Apartments.
 2.4.e           Expand      the  Increase the amount       of Expanding the agency boundaries
 redevelopment boundaries         affordable housing units.    will not accomplish this purpose.
 for     the      purpose      of                              Housing set-aside funds can be
 encouraging the construction                                  spent outside of the RDA
 and/or      improvement       of                              boundaries. (delete)
 housing       affordable     by
 households of very low, low
 and median income.
 2.5.a     Develop an impact      Mitigate the housing impacts The scale of commercial and
 threshold level to determine     of new commercial and industrial projects within the City
 the impacts on the City’s        industrial developments.     is not large enough to justify this
 housing supply associated                                     type of program (delete)
 with new commercial and
 industrial        development.
 Those            developments
 exceeding the threshold must
 mitigate those impacts.
 2.5.b Continue to participate    Increase the amount       of Implemented and ongoing.        See
 in and promote the Section 8     affordable housing units.    2.4.d (retain)
 Existing Housing Program
9 – Housing Element                                9-41                                   November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                           Purpose                          Evaluation
 3.1.b       Annually monitor      Ensure that there will be As noted above, City has
 statistics for police, county     adequate emergency and coordinated with emergency and
 agencies         or       private transitional housing facilities. transitional housing providers to
 organizations          regarding                                   obtain grants for homeless
 emergency shelter needs,                                           shelters and services. (retain)
 and cooperate with or
 support public and private
 efforts to respond to those
 needs
 3.1.c Consider waiving the        Ensure that there will be Not implemented. Not included in
 City’s Bed Tax fees for           adequate emergency and the revised Housing Element.
 individuals      using       paid transitional housing facilities. May be considered with the
 vouchers      for     temporary                                    update of the City’s fee structure.
 shelter in City motels.
 4.1.a Apply for CDBG funds        Preserve and enhance the The City has applied for
 of other available state and      existing housing stock.          Community Development Block
 Federal funding for housing                                        Grants annually.
 rehabilitation.
 4.2.a Apply portions of the       Preserve and enhance the The RDA housing set-aside fund
 Redevelopment           Agency’s  existing housing stock.          only      recently    has    accrued
 20% housing allotment for                                          sufficient funds for establishment
 funding      to      rehabilitate                                  of a program such as this. The
 needed homes.                                                      Housing Element update should
                                                                    identify recommended uses of
                                                                    RDA housing set-aside funds.
 4.3,a Develop a voluntary         Preserve and enhance the Not implemented. City presently
 code inspection program           existing housing stock.          contracts with Mendocino Co. for
 emphasizing        rehabilitation                                  building      inspection    services.
 and energy features.                                               (delete)
 4.3.b Initiate a voluntary pre-   Preserve and enhance the Not implemented.                  See 4.3.a.
 sale      code        inspection  existing housing stock.          (delete)
 program
 5.1.a Continue to regulate        Preserve and enhance the This is an on-going responsibility
 aesthetics      through       the existing housing stock.          of the Planning Commission and
 Planning          Commission,                                      staff and is fully implemented.
 building      code,       zoning                                   (delete)
 ordinance,        Site       and
 Architectural            Review
 Committee.
 5.1.b        Permit housing       Preserve and enhance the The City’s non-conforming use
 rehabilitation in zones where     existing housing stock.          regulations would allow for this
 housing is a nonconforming                                         activity.    The program is not
 use, considering on a case-                                        necessary. (delete)
 by-case         basis         the
 neighborhood character and
 the desirability of mixed use
 developments.
9 – Housing Element                                 9-42                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                           Purpose                         Evaluation
 6.1.a Continue to provide         Increase energy efficiency of Not implemented. (delete)
 density incentives for the        housing.
 installation    of      specified
 energy conservation features
 which exceed the required
 building standards in new
 housing.
 6.2.b           Establish       a Increase the energy efficiency Not       implemented.          PG&E
 weatherization        assistance  of housing.                     operates a zero interest program
 program.                                                          and either performs the work itself
                                                                   or contracts out to a local
                                                                   nonprofit housing corporation.
                                                                   (delete)
 7.1.a           Prepare        an Increase the energy and The City has a mandatory water-
 informational          pamphlet   resource efficiency of housing. retrofit    program      for    water
 demonstrating procedures to                                       conservation purposes. A street
 obtain landscaping, well, use                                     tree list identifies drought-tolerant
 of gray water in landscaping,                                     tree species and the Planning
 list of native-drought tolerant                                   Commission routinely requires
 vegetation        and      water                                  that all landscaping be drought-
 conserving plumbing that can                                      tolerant. (delete)
 reduce water consumption in
 a residence.
 7.1.b Establish a permitting Conserve water.                      Implemented. (delete)
 process on all residential lots
 to allow domestic wells
 where water supply can be
 proven safe. Periodic testing
 of wells will be instituted.
 8.1.a Continue to educate Conservation of resources.              This program is not housing-
 citizens on recycling and                                         related and should be relocated to
 provide new information as                                        another element of the General
 necessary.                                                        Plan. (delete)
 9.1. a Establish a permitting Improving air quality.              This program is not housing-
 procedure on all residential                                      related and should be relocated to
 lots to regulate wood burning                                     another element of the General
 stoves consistent with State                                      Plan. (delete)
 standards.
Comments
Government Code Section 65583(a)(3) requires “an analysis of the differences between what
was projected or planned in the earlier element and what was achieved." The table above
indicates that a number of programs in the previous element were not implemented. This was
due in part to the City’s limited financial resources. Land prices and construction costs limit
development of affordable single-family dwellings.
The revised element has recognized these limitations and contains several new programs which
will result in the construction of additional affordable housing units, a more stringent inclusionary
housing ordinance; establishment of a housing fund; establishment of a density bonus program;
9 – Housing Element                                 9-43                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

and other programs to meet special housing needs. These programs recognize that the majority
of additional units will occur at multi-family densities and includes requirements for affordable
housing development as a condition of approval. This approach effectively utilizes the limited
remaining developable land in the City toward achieving the City’s housing goals.
9 – Housing Element                           9-44                                 November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX C: PARCEL-SPECIFIC INVENTORY OF VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED
LANDS
This appendix lists vacant and underutilized lands, and shows development potential for those
lands.
APN                  Address                         Area GP       Density     Units
018-090-13           330 Cypress Street              2.0  CG   15 du/ac        22
008-163-10           102 South Main Street           0.25 CG   15 du/ac         3
008-172-09           251 South Franklin Street       1.03 CG   15 du/ac        11
008-172-10           210 South Main Street           0.34 CG   15 du/ac         4
018-040-27           711 South Franklin Street       0.21 CG   15 du/ac         2
018-040-28           721 South Franklin Street       0.21 CG   15 du/ac         2
018-040-29           731 South Franklin Street       0.26 CG   15 du/ac         3
018-040-45           191 South Street                0.35 CG   15 du/ac         4
018-210-32           810 South Franklin Street       0.51 CG   15 du/ac         6
018-210-33           830 South Franklin Street       0.34 CG   15 du/ac         4
018-210-34           840 South Franklin Street       0.17 CG   15 du/ac         2
                     Subtotal CG                     5.67                      63
008-162-06           126 North Main Street           0.17 CBD  40 du/ac         5
008-162-07           120 North Main Street           0.17 CBD  40 du/ac         5
                     Subtotal CBD                    0.34                      10
008-010-31           1020 Glass Beach Drive          3.3  RH   15 du/ac        37
018-113-03           970 Chestnut Street             2.28 RH   6-15 du/ac      25
018-113-01           552 Lincoln Street              3.7  RH   6-15 du/ac      42
018-210-29           860 Hazelwood Drive             3.03 RH   6-15 du/ac      34
018-230-32           425 North Harbor Drive          4.27 RH   6-15 du/ac      48
                     Subtotal RH                    16.58                     186
069-232-06           1301 North Main Street          2.25 CH   15/ac           25
069-232-07           1291 North Main Street          2.55 CH   15/ac           29
008-034-12           855 Main Street                 0.13 CH   15 du/ac         1
008-034-07           801 North Main Street           0.34 CH   15 du/ac         4
008-044-15           734 North Main Street           0.45 CH   15 du/ac         5
018-120-47           851 South Franklin Street       0.21 CH   15 du/ac         2
018-450-39           1250 Del Mar Drive             20.6  CH   15 du/ac       232
                     Subtotal CH                    26.53                     298
008-042-01           260 Spruce Street               0.17 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-041-02           745 West Street                 0.17 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-041-01           749 West Street                 0.17 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
018-120-40           320 North Harbor Drive          0.13 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-01           1010 Glass Beach Drive          0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-08           978 Stewart Street              0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-38           950 Glass Beach Drive           0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-39           960 Glass Beach Drive           0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-40           964 Glass Beach Drive           0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-290-76           371 Osprey Court                1.0  RL   3-6 du/ac        3
008-290-78           351 Osprey Court                1.0  RL   3-6 du/ac        3
020-470-21           1405 Cedar Street               1.16 RL   3-6 du/ac        3
9 – Housing Element                            9-45                            November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APN                    Address                                   Area      GP           Density         Units
020-520-22             1600 Oak Street                           5.15      RL       3-6 du/ac           23
020-530-03             21200 California                          4.7       RL       3-6 du/ac           21
018-100-42             485 South Lincoln Street                  0.78      RL       3-6 du/ac            1
018-310-54             126 Lonne Way                             0.16      RL       3-6 du/ac            1
018-310-39             119 Noyo Heights Drive                    0.11      RL       3-6 du/ac            1
                       Subtotal RL                              18.45                                   75
018-440-50             200 West Ocean View Drive                 0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-49             250 West Ocean View Drive                 0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-39             300 Ocean View Drive                      0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-38             350 Ocean View Drive                      0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-29             400 Ocean View Drive                      0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
                       Subtotal RM                               4.55                                   40
008-350-60             920 Stewart Street                        3.8       RVH      15-24 du/ac         68
018-150-57             None                                      0.8       RVH      15-24 du/ac         14
018-150-56             None                                      0.65      RVH      15-24 du/ac         12
018-150-58             None                                      1.32      RVH      15-24 du/ac         14
018-150-59             None                                      5.86      RVH      15-24 du/ac         66
018-220-02             440 South Street                         11.3       RVH      15-24 du/ac        203
018-340-04             441 South Street                          7.94      RVH      15-24 du/ac        143
                       Subtotal RVH                             31.67                                  520
                       TOTAL                                   103.8                                  1192
Note: The data in this Appendix are different than the residential buildout figures contained in the Background Reports
and in references to residential buildout in other Elements of the General Plan since it uses more conservative
assumptions for calculating buildout (i.e., it reduces the development potential of multi-family properties by about 75
percent); it includes underutilized parcels; and it includes the residential component of mixed use development. The
unit development potential for underdeveloped sites was further reduced on a case-by-case basis taking into account
the existing development on the site and other constraints.
The Zoning Ordinance is being revised to ensure consistency with the updated General Plan and Housing Element.
No Zoning Ordinance or General Plan amendments would be needed to achieve the densities noted above.
9 – Housing Element                                      9-46                                           November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 APPENDIX D: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
 Listed below are the affordable housing units built in the City.
                                        AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
                                                             No. of  At Risk
Development                      Location        Year Built  Units   Status      Income Category
Habitat for Humanity             Oak Street        under           2   Protected Very Low
                                                  const’n.
Rural Communities Housing        Stewart Street    2000           10   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Rural Communities Housing        Stewart Circle    2000            6   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Community Development            John Cimolino     2000           14   Protected Very Low
Commission                       Way
Rural Communities Housing        Holmes Lane       1999            7   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Habitat for Humanity             Maple Street      1998            2   Protected Very Low
Community Development            South             1997            9   Protected Very Low
Commission                       Sanderson Way
Habitat for Humanity             South Corry       1996            2   Protected Very Low
                                 Street
Rural Communities Housing        Howland Court     1995           10   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Habitat for Humanity             Oak Street        1994            2   Protected Very Low
Community Development            Cypress Street    1993           19   Protected Very Low/Low
Commission
Habitat for Humanity             South Harold      1991            1   Protected Very Low
                                 Street
Moura Construction               South Street      1990           38      Not    Senior Housing
                                                                       Protected Very Low/Low
Private/Federal Home             Walnut Street     1986           56      Not    Very Low
Mortgage Association                                                   Protected
 9 – Housing Element                            9-47                             November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Rural Communities Housing        Cypress Street       1980              43        Protected Very Low
Development Corporation
River Gardens                    South Street         1979              48         Pending  Very Low
Total Affordable Housing Units                                         269
 Protected means rental or resale controls are in effect for at least the next ten years.
 9 – Housing Element                              9-48                                      November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX E: SB 520 COMPLIANCE ANALYSIS
The City of Fort Bragg’s existing review procedures regarding housing for persons with
disabilities is summarized below.
1        General
•    Does the City have any process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for
     reasonable accommodation with respect to zoning, permit processing or building laws?
There exists no special permit process for housing accommodating individuals with disabilities.
•    Has the City made any effort to remove constraints on housing for persons with disabilities?
Group homes with less than six residents (exclusive of staff) are allowed in all residential zoning
districts as a use by right. Group homes for 6 or more residents are allowed in all residential and
commercial zoning districts with a conditional use permit. ADA retrofits, such as a ramp or lift,
require a building permit, or if they substantially change the appearance of the structure, staff
approval or Design Review and Planning Commission approval may be required.
•    Does the City make information available about requesting a reasonable accommodation
     with respect to zoning, permit processing, or building laws?
A program addressing this requirement is included in the Draft Housing Element.
2        Zoning and Land Use
•    Has the City reviewed all of its zoning laws, policies, and practices with compliance with fair
     housing law?
The City is completing a comprehensive revision of its Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances which
includes compliance with fair housing laws.
•    Are residential parking standards for persons with disabilities different from other parking
     standards?
There are no residential parking standards for persons with disabilities different from other
parking standards. The City complies with the UBC and CALDAG for the number and
configuration of handicapped parking spaces.
•    Does the City have a policy or program for the reduction of parking requirements for special
     needs housing if a project can demonstrate a reduced need for parking?
The Zoning Ordinance provides for flexible parking standards which would allow a reduction in
parking requirements for persons with disabilities, emergency and transitional housing, and other
special housing needs, such as senior housing.
•    Does the City restrict the siting of group homes?
9 – Housing Element                             9-49                                 November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

No. As indicated above, group homes of less than six residents are permitted as a use by right
in all residential zoning districts. Group homes of six or more residents are allowed with a
conditional use permit in all residential and commercial zoning districts.
•    Does the City have occupancy standards in the zoning code that apply specifically to
     unrelated adults and not to families?
No. Fort Bragg does not have occupancy standards in its Zoning Ordinance.
•    Does the land use element regulate the siting of special needs housing in relationship to one
     another? Specifically, is there a minimum distance required between two (or more) special
     needs housing?
Neither the Land Use Element nor the Zoning Ordinance contains any regulations addressing
spacing or siting of special needs housing nor the location of such facilities with regard to one
another.
3         Permits and Processing
•    How does the City process a request to retrofit homes for accessibility?
A building permit would be required for a ramp or a lift. This is done administratively. Where
substantial modifications to the exterior appearance of a commercial or residential structure of
more than two units are needed, Design Review approval by the Planning Commission may be
required. The discretionary approval by the Planning Commission would be limited to the
exterior appearance of the structure, and not to the use or to mechanical equipment required to
improve accessibility.
•    Does the City allow group homes with fewer than six persons by right in single-family zones?
     What permits, if any are required?
This use is allowed by right in all residential zoning districts. A building permit would be required
for one dwelling, and Design Review and Planning Commission approval for design related
issues would be required for two or more dwellings.
Does the City have a set of particular conditions or restrictions for group homes with greater than
six persons? What are they? How do they affect the development of housing for persons with
disabilities?
Group homes for six or more persons are permitted with a conditional use permit in all residential
and commercial zoning districts. There no are special standards, requirements, or performance
standards applicable to group homes or for persons with disabilities. The use permit requirement
does not act as a detriment to development for persons with disabilities in Fort Bragg: two such
facilities are already located in the City; and the typical conditions of approval are no more
stringent than for other similar residential land uses requiring a conditional use permit.
•    What kind of community input does the City allow for the approval of group homes? Is it
     different than for other types of residential development?
Group homes of six or fewer residents require no public hearing or special permits. Group
homes with seven or more residents require a conditional use permit that is subject to a public
9 – Housing Element                              9-50                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

hearing. The public input for group homes is no more stringent or different than for any other
type of residential development, and indeed is less than for a major residential subdivision.
•    Does the City have particular conditions for group homes which will be providing services on
     site?
No. The Zoning Ordinance is silent with regard to this matter.
4        Building Codes
•    Has the City adopted the Uniform Building Code? What year? Has the City made
     amendments that might diminish the ability to accommodate persons with disabilities?
The City has adopted the most recent UBC dated 1998. No amendments to the UBC have been
made by the City affecting housing for persons with disabilities.
•    Has the City adopted any universal design elements in the building code?
No.
•    Does the City provide reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in the
     enforcement of building codes and the issuance of building permits?
There are no special provisions, standards, or performance criteria in the Zoning Ordinance or
the Building Codes applicable to persons with disabilities.
The City will add the following program under the Special Housing Needs goals and policies:
         Program H-4.2.2 Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities:
         Review the City’s land use and building regulations to identify constraints that may
         exist for the provision of housing for persons with disabilities, and adopt measures
         to facilitate reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities. Publicize
         revisions to land use regulations providing for reasonable accommodation for
         persons with disabilities.
9 – Housing Element                             9-51                                   November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 APPENDIX F – RESIDENTIAL LAND USE REGULATIONS
 The following table shows land use regulations for existing zoning districts.
Zoning District                Setbacks        Lot Coverage   Building       Maximum
                                                              Height         Density
Rural Residential (RR)         Front-25’;      Max. 10,000 sf 35’            1 unit/acre
                               rear-20’; side-
                               20’
Suburban Residential (SR)      Front-25’;      25%            35’            1 unit/40,000 sf
                               rear-20’; side-
                               10% of lot
                               width (min
                               10’/max 20’)
Low Density Residential        Front-25’;      40%            35’            6 units/acre
(RL)                           rear-20’; side-
                               10% of lot
                               width (min
                               5’/max 12’)
Medium Density                 Front-25’;      50%            35’            6-12 units/acre
Residential (RM)               rear-20’; side-
                               10% of lot
                               width (min 5’)
High Density Residential       Front-20’;      As determined  45’            6-15 units/acre
(RH)                           rear-10’; side- by Planning
                               10’             Commission
Very High Density              Front-20’;      No limitation  45’            15-24 units/acre
Residential (RVH)              rear-10’; side-
                               10’
Central Business District      None            No limitation  35’            40 units/acre
(CBD)                                                                        (use permit
                                                                             req’d)
General Commercial (CG)        Front-3’; rear- No limitation  35’            As determined
                               0’; side-0’                                   by Planning
                                                                             Commission
                                                                             (use permit
                                                                             req’d)
Neighborhood Commercial        Front-10’;      No limitation  25’
(CN)                           rear-15’; side-
                               0’
Office Commercial (CO)         Front-15’;      No limitation  25’            As determined
                               rear-10’; side-                               by Planning
                               10’                                           Commission
                                                                             (use permit
                                                                             req’d)
 9 – Housing Element                              9-52                                  November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

2.       LAND USE ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Land Use Element is the heart of the Coastal General Plan since it has the broadest scope
of the required elements and provides an overview of the long-term development and
conservation goals and policies of the City. Map LU-1: Land Use Designations describes the
desired types and intensity of land use for the City and its Sphere of Influence. The goals,
policies, and programs in this element should be considered in relation to this map.
This Element covers the following policy areas:
        Sphere of Influence and Annexation
        Redevelopment
        Land Use Designations
        Residential Land Uses
        Commercial Land Uses
        Recreation & Visitor-Serving Facilities
        Industrial Land Uses
        Commercial & Recreational Fishing and Boating
        Aquaculture Development
The Land Use Element establishes policies and programs to maintain the existing pattern of
land uses within the City while anticipating and providing for future growth and development. It
is expected that growth will continue to occur at a slow but regular pace (i.e., one to two percent
per year) as experienced in the last decade.
Commercial land uses in the City are located along the Highway One and Franklin Street
corridors. The central business district, located between Oak and Pine Streets, is the historic,
civic, and cultural core of the community. Industrial lands are located on the Georgia-Pacific
timber mill property west of Highway One, on North Franklin Street immediately north of the
central business district, and on Highway One north of Pudding Creek.                    Residential
neighborhoods are located east of the commercial core and in the west Fort Bragg
neighborhood.
Land Use Element policies support a concentrated development pattern by encouraging infill
development on vacant and underutilized sites throughout the City.
The most significant policy change in the Land Use Element is the reclassification of the
Industrial Lands which lie west of Highway One between Noyo River and Elm Street. The
newly-created Timber Resource Industrial land use designation is intended to support the
continued use of this area for timber processing activities and to establish a clear planning
process for the transition of this land to other uses, as initiated by the property owners.
2 – Land Use Element                            2-1                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

B.       The Sphere of Influence and Annexation
The Coastal General Plan applies to both publicly and privately owned land within the City’s
boundaries and its broader Planning Area. State law permits the City to plan for areas outside
of its boundaries if the City determines those areas have a relationship to the City’s planning
needs. The Planning Area is defined in this Plan as lands within the City and the City’s
designated Sphere of Influence (as approved by the Mendocino County Local Agency
Formation Commission or LAFCO) which represents areas that may be annexed to the City and
for which urban services may be provided. The purpose of a Sphere of Influence is twofold: to
ensure that urban development takes place in an orderly manner, and to allow for land use and
development policies of a city to be recognized in areas that will eventually be part of the City.
The Coastal General Plan establishes policies for the Sphere of Influence which ensure that
development requiring annexation can be adequately served by infrastructure and that the costs
associated with annexations are fairly allocated. It provides for the orderly development and
extension of City services within the Sphere of Influence. Map LU-2 indicates the boundaries of
the City and its Sphere of Influence. Map LU-3 indicates the Annexation Areas within the
Sphere of Influence, as defined by the City Council.
Areas within the Sphere of Influence are currently under County jurisdiction and are regulated
by the Mendocino County General Plan and Zoning Ordinance. Although the County is not
bound by Fort Bragg’s Coastal General Plan, the City will work with the County to assure that
County land use decisions in Fort Bragg’s Sphere of Influence are compatible with this Coastal
General Plan. Furthermore, if and when lands within the City’s designated Sphere of Influence
are annexed to the City, the land use designations assigned by the City’s Coastal General Plan
provide guidance for future development densities, and the policies and land use designations
established by the Coastal General Plan become effective upon annexation to the City.
C.       Redevelopment
The California Community Redevelopment Law enables local jurisdictions to establish a
Redevelopment Agency to eliminate blighted areas, stabilize the tax base, and improve the local
economy. Redevelopment plans must be consistent with local General Plans.
The City adopted the Fort Bragg Redevelopment Project in 1987 which provides a framework
for redeveloping about 1,130 acres of the City. The Project was established to address a
number of adverse conditions and to achieve the following goals:
•    Promote the economic health of the City;
•    Renovate and/or redevelop the residential, commercial, and industrial properties
     characterized by blight;
•    Improve the City’s infrastructure such as roads, parking facilities, storm drainage, water and
     sewer capacity, pedestrian paths, and parks;
•    Carry out improvements to enhance the functioning, appearance, and economic strength of
     the Central Business District; and
•    Implement the City’s housing policies described in the Housing Element.
The Redevelopment Agency can fund improvements through its ability to collect a portion of the
increase in property tax revenues within the Redevelopment Area above the 1987 base figure
established by the County (i.e., the tax increment), rather than sharing this tax growth with other
agencies.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-2                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

D.       Land Use Designations
The Coastal General Plan establishes land use designations shown on Map LU-1: Land Use
Designations. Each land use designation is described relative to the development density or
intensity, and the types of activities or land uses permitted. Residential density is defined by
dwelling units per net acre.
E.       Applying Land Use Designations to Specific Properties
The Land Use Element provides the primary basis for City decisions on development
applications. Privately and publicly-sponsored projects must be consistent with all parts of the
Coastal General Plan, but the Land Use Element is the first place to find out what type of
development would be appropriate in a specific location, or what location would be suitable for a
particular development type.
Densities described under the applicable land use designations are maximums; maximum
densities can only be achieved after meeting all of the other policies and goals of the Coastal
General Plan. The City does not guarantee that an individual project will attain the maximum
density indicated by the Coastal General Plan land use designations. The Coastal General
Plan includes maps identifying hazards and constraints, floodplains, street systems, parkland,
and trails which are an integral part of the Coastal General Plan and which must be consulted in
order to obtain a complete interpretation of Coastal General Plan policies and goals applicable
in a given area or parcel of land. Other elements of the Coastal General Plan contain specific
policies to preserve Fort Bragg's character and appearance, and to protect sensitive
environmental resources.
F.       Residential Land Use Designations
Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings on the northern fringe of the City where
the existing development pattern is comprised of one- to two-acre parcels and where
infrastructure is inadequate to support higher development densities. The maximum allowable
density is 1 unit per 2 acres.
Rural Residential (RR1)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings in a semi-rural environment. The RR1
designation is located primarily on the eastern edge of the City, where larger lots serve as a
transition between the RL neighborhoods of the City and the rural lands in the unincorporated
areas. The RR1 designation in the Todd Point and Noyo Heights neighborhoods acknowledges
the existing pattern of parcelization. The maximum allowable density is 1 unit per acre.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-3                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Suburban Residential (RS)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings and is assigned to areas where
infrastructure limitations and/or environmental constraints inhibit the establishment of urban
development densities. The allowable density range is 1 to 3 units per acre.
Low Density Residential (RL)
This designation is intended for single-family residences on standard City lots in residential
neighborhoods surrounding the more densely developed core of the City. With issuance of a
conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as
convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small
clusters of retail establishments. The allowable density range is 3 to 6 units per acre.
Medium Density Residential (RM)
This designation is intended for a variety of housing types, including duplexes, triplexes,
townhouses, and apartment units located in proximity to parks, schools, and public services.
With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are
permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual
parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments. The allowable density range is 6 to 12 units
per acre.
High Density Residential (RH)
This designation is intended to allow a variety of higher density housing types, including
townhouses, apartments, and mobile home parks on sites that are large and provide important
open space or large properties where the City wishes to see creative planning and design. It is
assigned primarily to larger parcels where innovative site design can provide for a mix of
housing types, aesthetic and functional open space areas, and other features that enhance the
development and the neighborhood. With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited
neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés and
restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments.
The allowable density range is 10 to 15 units per acre. Residential densities above 6 units per
acre may only be permitted for projects which include open space, provide affordable housing,
clustered housing, energy conservation, and/or aesthetically pleasing design features.
Very High Density Residential (RVH)
This designation is intended to allow high density multi-family housing on sites that are close to
commercial areas and public services. Apartments, mobile home parks, and similar types of
residential uses are allowed in this designation. With issuance of a conditional use permit,
limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores,
cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail
establishments. The allowable density range is 12 to 24 units per acre.
2 – Land Use Element                            2-4                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

G.       Commercial and Industrial Land Use Designations
Central Business District (CBD)
This designation applies to the core of the downtown which is the civic, cultural, and commercial
center of the community. Uses and site development patterns in the Central Business District
are typically pedestrian-oriented. This designation is intended to accommodate government
and professional offices, retail stores, theaters, and other similar uses. Residential uses on
upper floors or on the ground floor at the rear of buildings are encouraged at a density of up to
40 units per net acre.
Neighborhood Commercial (CN)
This designation provides small-scale, convenience shopping and services for surrounding
residential neighborhoods. Retail and service businesses such as grocery stores, laundromats,
restaurants, beauty salons, and similar types of uses are allowed in this designation.
General Commercial (CG)
The General Commercial designation is intended for a less compact and intensive type of
development than found in the Central Business District. Typical land uses in this designation
depend more on vehicular than pedestrian access and include automotive and service-related
outlets, retail sales, home improvement, paint or carpeting sales, offices, apparel stores, and
food stores. Shopping centers are allowed with approval of a conditional use permit.
Residential uses are permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear of
buildings at a maximum density of up to 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)
This land use designation applies to land uses serving residents and visitors on sites which are
located along Highway One and arterials at the entry points to the community. Typical uses
allowed in this designation include motels and other lodging enterprises, restaurants, and retail
outlets. Residential uses are permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear
of buildings at a maximum density of up to 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Office Commercial (CO)
This designation is intended to serve the office and institutional needs of the community and
permits such uses as professional offices, hospitals, medical clinics, and banks. Commercial
uses supportive of the office and institutional uses, such as blueprint and copy shops, cafés and
restaurants, pharmacies, and similar retail establishments are permitted. Residential uses are
permitted at a maximum density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Heavy Industrial (IH)
This designation is intended for a range of heavy industrial uses including manufacturing,
assembly and processing, and the storage and distribution of raw materials, aggregate plants,
and related heavy industrial uses which are generally incompatible with and require locations
removed from residential and visitor serving uses.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-5                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Timber Resources Industrial (IT)
   This designation is intended primarily for timber resource and forest products related
   manufacturing. It allows a variety of industrial uses relating to forest products processing such
   as log yards, manufacturing wood products, planing mills, storage of forest by-products,
   commercial seedling nurseries, and related support activities including railroad lines, truck
   shipping facilities, boiler and powerhouse operations, and related uses. In addition, it allows
   aquaculture with issuance of a conditional use permit. Open space, public parks, and
   recreation use types and public facilities are also permitted in this district.
   The uses listed below are examples of the types of uses which may be allowed in this
   designation. Refer to the Coastal LUDC for a more precise definition of permitted and
   conditional uses.
   •        Log Yard Activities - unloading, loading, and storage of logs.
   •        Storage and Inventory of finished product and forest by-products, and storage of finished
            goods inventory, including chips, bark, and hog fuel. Storage includes indoor and
            outdoor storage.
   •        Manufacturing and Remanufacturing: sawmills, studmills, veneer plants, plywood and/or
            layup plants, fence plants, planing mills, portable or fixed wood chip or hog fuel
            manufacture, dry kilns, and air dry yards.
   •        Product Shipping Operations: includes trucking, rail shipping, and maritime operations,
            wholesale distribution, re-loading facilities and operations.
   •        Remanufacturing and Secondary, Value-Added Manufacturing of forest products:
            includes, but not limited to, finger jointing, molding and pattern plants, sash and door
            plants, window plants, gluelam beams, truss and joint fabrication, engineered forest
            products such as laminated veneer lumber, particleboard or oriented strand board and
            pallet plants.
   •        Commercial Seedling Nursery Operations.
   •        Related Support Facilities and Activities Required to Maintain Manufacturing Operations
            including: railroad lines that include areas for car storage, boiler and powerhouse
            operations for timber product manufacture, warehousing of products produced on site,
            maritime docks, shops for maintenance, fabrication and fueling, water collection,
            storage, transport, and treatment, fire alarm and control systems, security systems,
            areas for storage of salvage and/or recycling of metals, wood, wire, rubber and other
            materials, and buffer areas or screening used for industrial purposes but which enable
            the operation to comply with noise, air quality, water quality, and other environmental
            standards.
   •        Aquaculture with a conditional use permit.
   •        Public parks and recreation facilities, open space and conservation uses, and public
            facilities such as stormwater retention ponds and wetland treatment systems.
   2 – Land Use Element                            2-6                                       July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Light Industrial (IL)
   This designation is intended for a variety of commercial, manufacturing, wholesale and
   distribution, and industrial uses which do not generate a significant amount of on-site customer
   traffic or high levels of noise, dust, odors, or other potential off-site nuisance characteristics.
   Manufacturing uses are permitted provided they occur within an enclosed structure. Other uses
   permitted in this designation include offices ancillary to permitted uses, agricultural product
   sales and services, construction yards, and automobile repair shops.
   Harbor District (HD)
   This designation is intended for land uses that support Noyo Harbor’s functioning as a
   commercial fishing center with a mix of commercial and industrial activities. Typical uses
   include activities that support Noyo Harbor’s function as a commercial fishing village and which
   protect and preserve parcels on, or adjacent to, the sea for coastal-dependent and coastal-
   related uses, such as: fish processing, aquaculture, boat sales, construction and service, boat
   chartering, restaurants, gift shops, marine hardware, and retail fish sales.
   H.       Other Land Uses
   Parks and Recreation (PR)
   This land use designation is intended for public parks and recreational facilities. Typical uses
   include passive and active recreational facilities, including trails, playgrounds, parking lots,
   interpretive facilities, restrooms, storage sheds, and other structures needed to accommodate
   public use or provide for maintenance of the land and recreational facilities.
   Agriculture (A)
   This land use designation is assigned to land in the Sphere of Influence which is similarly
   designated by the Mendocino County General Plan. The lands which are designated
   Agriculture are within the floodplain of the Noyo River and are well-suited and appropriately
   retained for the production of crops or livestock grazing. The allowable density is one unit per
   40 acres.
   Open Space (OS)
   This land use designation is intended for areas of land which are largely unimproved and used
   for the preservation of natural resources and habitats, passive outdoor recreation, scenic
   resources, or for the protection of public health and safety (e.g., preservation of floodplains).
   Allowable uses include restrooms, storage sheds, and other structures required to provide for
   maintenance of land and/or in support of recreational uses.
   Public Facilities and Services (PF)
   This land use designation is intended for existing and proposed public buildings, utility facilities,
   water and wastewater treatment plants, and related easements.
   2 – Land Use Element                          2-7                                          July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

I.       Population Density and Building Intensity
State law mandates that general plans include standards of population density and building
intensity for all of the territory covered by the plan. To satisfy this requirement, the Coastal
General Plan includes building intensity for each of the land use designations, expressed in
units per acre for residential uses.
Population densities for residential land use designations are based on an average household
size of 2.5 persons, except for Very High Density Residential which is based on an average of
2.1 persons per household. If there is a discrepancy between dwelling units per acre and
persons per acre, the dwelling units per acre measure (e.g., building intensity) shall govern.
The population densities are:
Large Lot Rural Residential (RR5)             up to 0.5 persons per acre
Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)            up to 1.25 persons per acre
Rural Residential (RR1)                       up to 2.5 persons per acre
Suburban Residential (RS)                     up to 7.5 persons per acre
Low Density Residential (RL)                  up to 15 persons per acre
Medium Density Residential (RM)               up to 30 persons per acre
High Density Residential (RH)                 up to 37.5 persons per acre
Very High Density Residential (RVH)           up to 50 persons per acre
Goals, Policies and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:        are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Map LU-3
Sphere of Influence, and Policy LU-2.1 through Policy LU-2.5.
Using the Land Use Designations and Map
Goal LU-1         Promote development and conservation of land in Fort Bragg according to
                  the pattern shown on the Land Use Designations Map.
Policy LU-1.1 Implementation of the Land Use Designations Map: Implement the Land Use
Designations Map by approving development and conservation projects consistent with the land
use designations, and ensure consistency between the Coastal General Plan and the Coastal
Land Use & Development Code.
         Program LU-1.1.1: Request that the County of Mendocino maintain or, if warranted,
         revise its General Plan in accordance with the land use designations of the Fort Bragg
         Coastal General Plan for the area within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
Policy LU-1.2: Require that development on APNs 018-440-38, -39, -49, -50, & -59 in excess
of one dwelling per existing lot obtain a Planned Development approval that minimizes access
2 – Land Use Element                          2-8                                           July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The following properties are owned by the City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                             HW
                                                                                                                               Y1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and are not contiguous to the City limits. They have been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             annexed to the City and are assigned the General Plan land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             use classification of Public Facilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             APN                                     PURPOSE
                                                                                                                                                                                              AIRPORT                                        ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            018-391-07                                               Hwy 20 Water Tank (fire station)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            019-070-01                                               Newman Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            019-460-21                                               Waterfall Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            019-470-08
       N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    020-270-48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            020-480-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Madsen Hole
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Water Treatment Plant/Corp. Yard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            020-500-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Revision date: July 200
                                                                                                     Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                     Cr                   ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                      ELM ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PERKINS
                                                                                                      SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                                   CREEK                        RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.                              BRANDON
                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PINE STREET
                                                                                                                               STREET                                                  STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P E T E R S O N L N.
                                                                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D E N N IS O N L A N E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MA L L L A N E
                                                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                             REDWOOD AVENUE
       an
                                                                                                                               FRANKLIN                                                HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ALDER STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MO N S O N W A Y
                                                                                                                    MAIN
   Oce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  MADRONE                                         ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                      WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CORRY ST.                                                                                                               WALL ST.
                                                                                                                                          HAZEL ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                              STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                          CHESTNUT ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GROVE
                                                                                                                              FRANKLIN
                                                                                                                                           WALNUT                                                     ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MI N N E S O T A
                                                                                                               MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HAU                                                                              D.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LR                                                                          LR                                                                             IV E      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D.                                                     AU                                                                            OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NO Y
    Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D O L P H IN IS L E                                                                Map LU-1
                                                                                                                                           MYR
                                                                                                                                              TLE                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R                                                                                            Residential Land Use Designations                                                                                               Industrial Land Use Designations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RI
                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR5                              Large Lot Rural Residential                                                                                          IL                   Light Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1 unit per 5 acres)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       YO
                                                                                                  HWY 1                                                                                           NO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Medium Lot Rural Residential                                                                                                              Heavy Industrial
                                                                          HARBOR AVENUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR2                              (1 unit per 2 acres)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR1                              Rural Residential                                                                                                    IT                   Timber Resources Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1 unit per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Suburban Residential
                                                     OCEAN VIEW         DRIVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SR                               (1-3 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Other Designations
                                                                                                                                                                  SOUTH HARBOR DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RL                               (3-6 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HD                   Harbor District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RM                               (6-12 units per acre)
                                                                                                  HWY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           High Density Residential                                                                                             PR                   Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                             WILLITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RH                               (6-15 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                  OLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Very High Density Residential                                                                                        PF                   Public Facilities and Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HW                                                                        RVH                              (6-24 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OS                   Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Commercial Land Use Designations                                                                                                                     A                    Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CBD                              Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CN                               Neighborhood Commercial
                                                                                          HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CG                               General Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CH                               Highway Visitor Commercial                                                                                                                Redevelopment Agency
                                                                                                      SIMPSON LANE
he boundaries of the Land Use Designations are general and schematic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CO                               Office Commercial                                                                                                                         Coastal Zone
ustrating the policies of the General Plan. Refer to the Assessor's                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        within City of Fort Bragg
arcel Maps at the Community Development Department for updated parcel
oundary maps.
                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                        HWY 1
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                          Map LU-2
                                                                                                                                                                            CITY BOUNDARY, SPHERE OF INFLUENCE,
                                                                                                                                                                                     AND COASTAL ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Coastal Zone Boandary
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
                                                                                   Y1
                                                                                  HW
                                                                                                                              AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                            Pudding
                                                                                                                   Cr   ee
                                                                                                                              k
                                                             ELM ST.
                                                             SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                              BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                              FIR STREET
                                                                                                                              PINE STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                   2
                                                                                  STREET                           STREET
                                                                                                McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                               LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                         STREET
                                                                                                                          REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                  FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CEDAR ST.
                                                                         MAIN
                                                                                                                              ALDER STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                              OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CT.
                                                                                                                              MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                             HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                       WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                             LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                        MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                  WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                CORRY ST.                                          WALL ST.
                                                                                              HAZEL ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                   STREET
                                                                                              CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                   FRANKLIN
                                                                                               WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                      MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                               5                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                     7
                                                         HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Map LU-3
                        8                                                                                                                                                                                                  ANNEXATION AREAS
                            OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #    Annexation Areas
                                                 HWY 1
                                                             SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
driveways onto Ocean View Drive and includes design and site planning features to ensure
compatibility with the surrounding single-family residential neighborhood.
Sphere of Influence
       Policy LU-2.1 through Policy 2.5 and associated Programs are not part of the certified LCP
and shall not govern the review and approval of Coastal Development Permits
Goal LU-2         Establish and maintain clear boundaries and guidelines for the future
                  expansion of Fort Bragg.
      Policy LU-2.1      Boundaries of the Sphere of Influence: Revise the existing Sphere of
Influence boundaries, as submitted to Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO).
       Policy LU-2.2 Annexations to the Municipal Improvement District Boundary: Require
annexation approval prior to permitting new connections to the sanitary sewer system operated
by the City’s Municipal Improvement District in the Sphere of Influence. Out-of-area service
agreements may be approved for new connections to the sanitary sewer system for
development proposals that comply with the policy of the Municipal Improvement District
regarding projects that provide affordable housing per Resolution No. ID 230-2003, adopted on
December 8, 2003.
      Policy LU-2.3      County Referrals: Review and comment on development projects in the
City’s Sphere of Influence which are under the jurisdiction of Mendocino County.
         Program LU-2.3.1: Establish a Memorandum of Understanding between the City and
         Mendocino County regarding procedures for project review within the Fort Bragg Sphere
         of Influence.
      Policy LU-2.4      Annexation Standards: Require annexations to the City to meet all of the
following standards:
•        Areas annexed must be able to be served by existing City facilities and by facilities
         provided by other agencies, or by environmentally and economically feasible
         improvements to these facilities. Prior to City approval of an annexation application,
         findings shall be made indicating that: necessary public and private infrastructure to
         support the development is available, or that a development plan for extending or
         upgrading the infrastructure has been adopted, and that the annexation would not result
         in a substantial reduction or deterioration of public services and facilities, including
         streets, water supply, wastewater treatment, storm drainage facilities, fire, police,
         schools, and other public services and facilities.
•        Proposed annexations must be contiguous to existing developed areas. Annexation
         proposals that “leapfrog” over vacant and undeveloped land shall not be approved.
2 – Land Use Element                          2-9                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

•        Based on a cost-revenue analysis, annexations shall have a cumulative net positive
         fiscal effect on the City within fifteen years of approval.       The fiscal analysis must
         demonstrate that annexed properties would generate sufficient City revenues to pay for
         ongoing services to the annexed area and infrastructure cost benefiting annexed area
         borne by City – such as public safety, road maintenance, street lighting, etc. To achieve
         this, property owner(s) may be required to establish Mello-Roos districts and/or other
         forms of benefit assessment districts as a condition of, and at the time of, annexation to
         the City.
•        All annexation applications shall include an environmental review document which
         provides full disclosure of any potential adverse environmental impacts. To the
         maximum extent possible, annexations that would result in significant environmental
         impacts will not be approved.
•        A development plan, including maps and text, showing how existing and proposed future
         development within the annexation area contributes to the attainment of Coastal General
         Plan goals and policies, shall be submitted with an annexation application.
•        All proposed future development within an annexation area shall be consistent with the
         land use designations shown on the Land Use Designations Map and all other
         requirements of the Coastal General Plan and the Fort Bragg Municipal Code.
•        A cost-revenue analysis is not required for parcels that are annexed by the City of Fort
         Bragg for public purposes.
         Program LU-2.4.1: Require a fiscal impact analysis of proposed annexations, at the
         applicant’s cost, as deemed appropriate by the City. The fiscal impact analysis shall
         include, at a minimum, the cost of providing City services on a per capita basis for
         residential projects, or per square foot of building for commercial and industrial projects,
         the impact on existing and future property owners, and a comparison of the potential
         revenues anticipated from the proposed annexation versus the cost to the City of
         providing services for a period of at least five years from the date of project completion.
      Policy LU-2.5      Discourage Piecemeal Annexations: Discourage annexations of small,
individual parcels of land in a piecemeal fashion.
         Program LU-2.5.1: Consider revising the Coastal LUDC to establish a minimum area for
         an annexation request or a process for pre-approval of the annexation area by the City
         Council prior to accepting an annexation application as complete.
         Program LU-2.5.2: Annexation applications should include, to the maximum feasible
         extent, the entire annexation area as shown in Map LU-3: Annexation Areas.
         Annexation applications for smaller subareas may be allowed for parcels that are
         annexed by the City of Fort Bragg for public purposes and for projects that provide
         affordable housing consistent with the criteria established in Resolution No. ID 230-
         2003, adopted on December 8, 2003.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 10                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Commercial Land
The goals and policies in this section ensure that the Central Business District remains the
historic, civic, cultural, and commercial core of the community. There are also policies
encouraging mixed use and infill development to strengthen the other commercial areas of the
City. The Circulation and the Community Design Elements provide goals and policies
addressing parking, alleyways, and the overall appearance of commercial development.
Goal LU-3         Ensure that the Central Business District remains the historic, civic,
                  cultural, and commercial core of the community.
Policy LU-3.1 Central Business District: Retain and enhance the small-scale, pedestrian-
friendly, and historic character of the Central Business District (CBD).
         Program LU-3.1.1: Develop streetscape and landscape requirements to enhance the
         pedestrian environment, encourage an active commercial setting, and reduce traffic
         congestion in the Central Business District.
         Program LU-3.1.2: Consider revisions to the Coastal Land Use & Development Code
         (LUDC) requiring buildings in the Central Business District be located adjacent to the
         sidewalk with parking to the rear or to the side of buildings.
         Program LU-3.1.3: Utilize all feasible funding sources to implement the public
         improvements and to establish organizational support for businesses in the Central
         Business District as identified in the Downtown Revitalization Plan.
         Program LU-3.1.4: Utilize City-owned land at the Guest House Museum, Town Hall, and
         City Hall for historic and cultural uses, public assembly, and entertainment.
         Program LU-3.1.5: Residential uses will be permitted only above the ground floor or at
         the rear of buildings on the ground floor.
Policy LU-3.2 Mixed Uses: Support mixed use development (i.e., a combination of residential
and commercial uses) in the Central Business District that does not conflict with the primary
retail function of this area.
Policy LU-3.3: Historic Buildings and Mixed Uses: In the Central Business District and in other
commercial areas with historic residential structures, encourage residential uses, mixed
residential, and commercial uses, and the preservation of historic structures.
Policy LU-3.4 Encourage Infill Development: Encourage infill development of vacant and
underdeveloped land in the Central Business District and adjacent commercial areas before
amending the Coastal General Plan and rezoning to obtain additional commercial land
elsewhere.
Policy LU-3.5 Re-Use of Existing Buildings: Encourage the adaptive re-use and more complete
utilization of buildings in the Central Business District and other commercial districts.
         Program LU-3.5.1 Consider establishing incentives such as low-interest loans for
         rehabilitation and installation of fire sprinklers in buildings to encourage the reuse of
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 11                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         upper floors of existing buildings in the Central Business District for housing, offices, and
         other uses.
Goal LU-4         Promote the economic vitality of the City’s existing commercial areas.
Policy LU-4.1 Formula Businesses and Big Box Retail: Regulate the establishment of formula
businesses and big box retail to ensure that their location, scale, and appearance do not detract
from the economic vitality of established commercial businesses and are consistent with the
small town, rural character of Fort Bragg.
Policy LU-4.2: Require that a fiscal and economic analysis be performed as part of the
conditional use permit process for big box retail projects. The analysis shall evaluate the
economic effects of the project for a minimum five-year time frame. A consultant selected by
the City and paid for by the project proponent shall carry out the analysis.
Policy LU-4.3 Large-Scale Commercial Development: To maintain scenic views of the coast
and to ensure that building sizes at the City’s gateways are in scale with the community, no
commercial building shall exceed the following limitations on the gross floor area:
         a)      between the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges - maximum 50,000 square
                 feet;
         b)      east of Highway One and north of Pudding Creek Bridge - maximum 30,000
                 square feet;
         c)      west of Highway One and north of Pudding Creek Bridge and south of the Noyo
                 River Bridge - maximum 15,000 square feet; and
         d)      east of Highway One and south of Noyo River Bridge – maximum 40,000 square
                 feet.
Policy LU-4.4 Standards for Commercial Uses in Residential Areas: Commercial uses in and
adjacent to residential areas shall not adversely affect the primarily residential character of the
area.
         Program LU-4.4.1: Consider revisions to the Coastal LUDC to require a conditional use
         permit for commercial uses in residential land use designations and to establish design
         standards addressing architectural design, landscaped buffers, lighting, signage, noise,
         and other features to ensure neighborhood compatibility.
         Program LU-4.4.2: Amend the Coastal LUDC to allow existing Bed & Breakfasts in R1
         neighborhoods to rebuild and expand with City approval of a conditional use permit.
Recreation and Visitor-Serving Facilities
The Coastal Act gives priority to recreational and visitor-serving uses in the Coastal Zone. The
goals established by the State for the Coastal Zone include reserving upland areas for
recreational uses, protecting an adequate amount of oceanfront land for recreational use, and
focusing recreational facilities in selected areas, rather than spreading them out along the entire
coastline.
Fort Bragg serves as the regional service center for the Mendocino coast and many support
services needed for recreation and tourist-oriented businesses on the coast are located here.
No shortage of visitor-serving land use exists in the City.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 12                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

All commercial land use designations in the City allow visitor-commercial uses, and there are
many vacant parcels available for this use.
Goal LU-5          Maximize public recreational opportunities in the Coastal Zone consistent
                   with sound resource conservation principles and the constitutionally
                   protected rights of property owners.
Policy LU-5.1 Additional Sites for Visitor-Serving Commercial: Continue to provide for and
encourage additional visitor-serving commercial facilities.
Policy LU-5.2: Ensure that there are adequate sites for visitor-serving land uses by:
         a) Maintaining existing areas designated for Highway-Visitor Commercial uses;
         b) Maintaining the Highway Visitor Commercial land use designation as one
             allowing primarily recreational and visitor-serving uses; and
         c) Reserving adequate infrastructure capacity to accommodate existing,
             authorized, and probable visitor serving uses.
Policy LU-5.3: Lower Cost Facilities: Protect, encourage, and, where feasible, provide lower-
cost visitor and recreational facilities for persons and families of low and moderate income. If
and when average annual occupancy rates at Fort Bragg visitor facilities exceed 70%, removal
or conversion of existing lower cost facilities shall be prohibited unless the use will be replaced
with another facility offering comparable visitor serving or recreational facilities.
         Program LU-5.3.1: Create an inventory and monitor lower-cost visitor recreational
         facilities in the City.
         Program LU-5.3.2: Encourage lower-cost visitor and recreational facilities during
         the project review process with private developers and work with State Parks to expand
         such facilities on State land.
Policy LU-5.4: Oceanfront land suitable for recreational use shall be protected for recreational
use and development unless present and foreseeable future demand for public or commercial
recreational activities that could be accommodated on the property is already adequately
provided for in the area.
Policy LU-5.5: Lower cost visitor and recreational facilities shall be protected, encouraged, and,
where feasible, provided. Developments providing public recreational opportunities are
preferred.
Policy LU-5.6: The use of private lands suitable for visitor-serving and commercial recreational
facilities designed to enhance public opportunities for coastal recreation shall have priority over
private residential, general industrial, or general commercial development, but not over
agriculture or coastal-dependent industry.
Policy LU-5.7: Adequate parking should be provided to serve coastal access and recreation
uses to the extent feasible. Existing parking areas serving recreational uses shall not be
displaced unless a comparable replacement area is provided.
Policy LU-5.8: Coastal areas suited for water-oriented recreational activities that cannot readily
be provided at inland water areas shall be protected for such uses.
2 – Land Use Element                            2 - 13                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Industrial Land
The lumber and fishing industries have played an important role in the formation and growth of
Fort Bragg. Both of these industries are in transition, and the local economy is evolving from a
natural resource-based economy to a more service-oriented economy. Fort Bragg is the
commercial, educational, medical, and professional service center for a large portion of the
Mendocino coast. Future growth in the local economy is projected to occur in the retail, tourism,
and service sectors.
The Coastal General Plan is intended to support the growth and vitality of existing industries
while ensuring that the community is prepared to actively participate in the decision-making
process as new industries develop in Fort Bragg and as current industrial lands transition to
other uses. This Coastal General Plan requires that specific plans be prepared when different
land uses are proposed for large areas of industrial land. This offers the community the
opportunity to: plan for its future, engage in consensus building, and develop comprehensive
land use and economic development strategies.
Goal LU-6          Support industrial development which is consistent with the
                   protection, enhancement, and restoration of coastal resources.
Policy LU-6.1: Standards for Noyo Harbor Industrial Development: Limit industrial development
in the Noyo Harbor to uses which:
         a)      are coastal-dependent uses or aquaculture, giving priority to commercial fishing
                 activities;
         b)      do not generate excessive traffic on City streets, such as South Street, North
                 Harbor Drive, and Cypress Street;
         c)      do not interfere with existing coastal-dependent industry, especially commercial
                 fishing; and
         d)      are consistent with applicable LCP policies, including but not limited to LCP
                 policies regarding the protection of public access and recreation, visual
                 resources, and environmentally sensitive habitat areas, and Coastal Act public
                 access policies.
         Program LU-6.1.1: Work with the County of Mendocino, the Noyo Harbor District and
         other agencies to develop and adopt a Noyo Harbor Plan establishing standards for
         conservation and development for the entire Noyo River drainage area.
         Program LU-6.1.2:      Offshore Oil Drilling: Support Mendocino County's LCP policy to
         request that the Federal government be requested to establish all underwater land within
         the Outer Continental Shelf as a petroleum reserve to be used only in a national
         emergency and that the Mendocino Coast be deleted from any Outer Continental Shelf
         gas development licensed by the Federal government.
Policy LU-6.2: In areas designated for industrial land uses, coastal-dependent and coastal-
related industrial uses shall have priority over other industrial uses on or near the shoreline.
Policy LU-6.3: Pipeline, Electrical, and Telecommunications Transmission Corridors:         Consoli-
date new pipeline, electrical, and telecommunications transmission corridors within existing
pipeline or electrical and telecommunications transmission corridors, wherever feasible, unless
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 14                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                              LU-4
                                                                                SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS IN THE
                                                                            TIMBER RESOURCES INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                      LAND USE DESIGNATION
  2
    1                                                 3                                                                      5
4
                                                        For planning purposes only; not intended to be accurate as regards legal parcels
     CITY OF FORT
       Lateral Public Coastal Access (Revise LCP Map)
         

there are overriding technical constraints or significant social, aesthetic, environmental, or
economic concerns.
Policy LU-6.4: Electrical and telecommunications transmission rights-of-way and pipelines shall
be routed to minimize impacts to scenic resources and to Environmentally Sensitive Habitat
Areas according to the following standards:
         a)      Require underground installation of electrical and telecommunication lines where
                 technically and economically feasible, unless it can be shown that other options
                 are less environmentally damaging.
         b)      Scarring, grading, or other vegetative removal shall be minimized and
                 construction areas shall be revegetated with plants native to the area.
         c)      Where above-ground electrical or telecommunications transmission lines are
                 necessary, the design and color of the support towers shall be compatible with
                 the surroundings to the extent feasible.              Avoid locating above-ground
                 transmission lines along the crests of hills, bluffs, and in scenic resource areas.
Goal LU-7         Support industrial development which is consistent with the protection,
                  enhancement, and restoration of coastal resources.
Policy LU-7.1 Changes in Industrial Land Use: Require that any Local Coastal Program (LCP)
amendments and rezoning of lands which are designated Timber Resources Industrial be
subject to a specific plan process. The portions of a Specific Plan that meet the definition of
“Land Use Plan” as defined by Coastal Act Section 30108.5 and “Implementing Actions” as
defined by Coastal Act Section 30108.4 shall be submitted to, and effectively certified by, the
Coastal Commission as an LCP amendment before those portions of the Specific Plan become
effective.
Policy LU-7.2: In order for LCP amendments and rezoning of lands designated Timber
Resources Industrial to be considered, a specific plan shall be prepared which addresses, at a
minimum, an area approximating one or more of the subareas as shown on Map LU-4: Specific
Plan Areas in the Timber Resources Industrial Land Use Designation. Specific plans shall meet
the following minimum criteria:
         a)      The specific plan shall make provisions for existing and future infrastructure
                 connections such as roads, utilities, and coastal access to surrounding
                 developed and undeveloped areas.
         b)      The specific plan shall contain financing methods to provide infrastructure and
                 public amenities based on a nexus between development exactions being
                 imposed and the development-induced needs being met by those exactions,
                 establish an orderly phasing of development, and include other measures as
                 needed to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the community.
         c)      The specific plan, and environmental studies required for that plan, shall be paid
                 for by the applicant who may be repaid by future developers of other portions of
                 the specific plan area on a pro rata basis.
         d)      The specific plan shall be consistent with the Chapter 3 policies of the Coastal
                 Act.
Policy LU-7.3 Siting New Industrial Development: Site new industrial development so that it is
contiguous with, or in close proximity to, existing developed areas able to accommodate it, or
where such areas are not able to accommodate it, in other areas with adequate public services
and where it will not have significant adverse effects on coastal resources, either individually or
cumulatively.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 15                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy LU-7.4: Where feasible, locate new hazardous industrial development away from
existing developed areas.
Policy LU-7.5 Industrial Land Use Standards: Require that industrial development avoid or
minimize creating substantial pollution, noise, glare, dust, odor, or other significant adverse
impacts.
         Program LU-7.5.1: Continue to enforce, and revise as needed, Coastal LUDC standards
         with regard to noise, glare, dust, odor, and other potentially adverse impacts of industrial
         activity.
Commercial & Recreational Fishing and Boating
Commercial fishing and recreational boating and fishing are located in Noyo Harbor. It is an all-
weather port and the most active and important harbor between Bodega Bay and Eureka. The
Noyo Harbor District has constructed 256 berths since 1968. Those berths are nearly always
occupied, and approximately 43 percent of the boats moored there are commercial craft. The
lower harbor area also contains parking and ship building areas, boat launching and repair
facilities, fish processing plants, and marine supply stores. Commercial outlets, including
visitor-oriented restaurants, are clustered on the north bank of the harbor. About a half-mile
upriver, on the south side of the river, the Dolphin Cove private commercial marina provides
berths for about 150 boats, most of which are recreational.
Several jurisdictions share responsibility for the Noyo Harbor, which is largely located in the
County's jurisdiction but is within the City's Sphere of Influence. The U. S. Army Corps of
Engineers is responsible for maintaining the channel. The Noyo Harbor District operates the
harbor, docks, and related facilities and prepares long-term plans for facilities expansion. The
State Department of Fish and Game, the State Department of Boating and Waterways, the
California Coastal Commission, the County of Mendocino, and the City of Fort Bragg have
partial responsibility and jurisdiction in the area.
The Coastal Act gives priority to coastal-dependent development such as commercial fishing
and recreational boating over other types of land use on or near the shoreline.
Goal LU-8          Encourage a mixture of commercial fishing, recreational boating and
                   fishing, mixed commercial and visitor-serving uses consistent with
                   coastal access policies.
Policy LU.8.1: Annexation of Noyo Harbor: Consider annexation of the Noyo Harbor.
         Program LU-8.1.1: Encourage the preparation of a specific plan for the Noyo Harbor
         with the cooperation and involvement of the Noyo Harbor District, the County of
         Mendocino, local property owners, and appropriate State agencies. Include in the
         specific plan policies that continue to give priority to coastal-dependent land uses such
         as commercial fishing, recreational boating, and related commercial uses, while
         increasing the range of visitor-serving uses on parcels not located directly on the coast
         or the Noyo River.
         Program LU-8.1.2: Work with the County of Mendocino to improve emergency vehicle
         access and to establish a secondary access route to Noyo Harbor.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 16                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy LU-8.2: Facilities serving the commercial fishing and recreational boating industries shall
be protected and, where feasible, upgraded. Existing commercial fishing and recreational
boating harbor space shall not be reduced and shall be protected unless written findings are
made that present and foreseeable future demand for the facilities that could be accommodated
on the property is already adequately provided for in the area. Proposed recreational boating
facilities shall, where feasible, be designed and located in such a fashion as not to interfere with
the needs of the commercial fishing industry.
Policy LU-8.3: Increased recreational boating use of coastal waters shall be encouraged, in
accordance with this division, by developing dry storage areas, increasing public launching
facilities, providing additional berthing space in existing harbors, limiting non-water-dependent
land uses that congest access corridors and preclude boating support facilities, providing
harbors of refuge, and by providing for new boating facilities in natural harbors, new protected
water areas, and in areas dredged from dry land.
Policy LU-8.4: The economic, commercial, and recreational importance of fishing activities shall
be recognized and protected.
Aquaculture Development
Goal LU-9         Minimize impacts of aquaculture development on coastal resources.
Policy LU-9.1: Aquaculture Development. All aquaculture development or facilities shall require
a coastal development permit and shall be consistent with all policies and standards of the
certified LCP, including but not limited to policies regarding the protection of public access,
water and marine resources, environmentally sensitive habitat areas, hazards, water quality,
archaeological resources, and visual resources.
Policy LU-9.2: No intake or discharge lines shall be placed above ground in the Timber
Resources Industrial District in any Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas as defined in Policy
OS-1.2 and Section 30107.5 of the Coastal Act, including but not limited to, along portions of
any coastal bluff that constitute ESHA, or within any rocky intertidal habitat area.
Policy LU-9.3: No intake or discharge lines shall be placed above ground within the Harbor
District, the adjoining tidelands and submerged lands of the Noyo River, or on the face of
coastal bluffs within the Timber Resources Industrial district, unless all other alternatives have
been demonstrated to be infeasible or more environmentally damaging. Alternatives to be
evaluated shall include, but not be limited to, (1) placing lines underground through use of
directional drilling or trenching, (2) using closed-loop aquaculture systems that do not require
offshore intake and discharge lines, and (3) connecting discharge lines to the existing sanitary
sewer system. If all other alternatives have been demonstrated to be infeasible or more
environmentally damaging and intake or discharge lines must be placed above ground within
the Harbor District and the adjoining tidelands and submerged lands of the Noyo River, or on
the face of coastal bluffs within the Timber Resources Industrial district, the lines shall be placed
in the least environmentally damaging feasible location and in a manner that will not interfere
with Noyo River navigation, existing recreational boating facilities, and coastal dependent
industry, especially commercial fishing facilities.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 17                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy LU-9.4: Any intake or discharge lines allowed to be placed above ground within the
Harbor District and the adjoining tidelands and submerged lands of the Noyo River shall be
removed upon abandonment of the aquaculture development or facility it was installed to serve.
Policy LU-9.5: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to be
visually compatible with the character of surrounding areas, and shoreline facilities shall be
screened.
Policy LU-9.6: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to prevent
impacts which would significantly degrade environmentally sensitive habitat areas, as defined in
Policy OS-1.1 and section 30107.5 of the Coastal Act, and shall be compatible with the
continuance of biological and ecological values in those habitat areas.
Policy LU-9.7: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to avoid
encroachment of aquaculture operations into adjacent recreational areas.
Policy LU-9,8: No aquaculture development or facilities shall interfere with the public’s right of
access to the sea. All aquaculture development or facilities shall ensure adequate provision of
lateral and vertical access.
Policy LU-9.9: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to: (1)
minimize risks to life and property from geologic and flood hazards, including but not limited to
bluff erosion, slope stability, seismic events, liquefaction, tsunamis, floods, and wave attack;
and (2) assure stability and structural integrity, and neither create nor contribute significantly to
erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of the site or surrounding area or in any way require
the construction of protective devices that would substantially alter natural landforms along
bluffs and cliffs.
Policy LU-9.10: Availability of adequate water to serve all aquaculture development or facilities
shall be demonstrated prior to approval of such aquaculture development or facilities.
Policy LU-9.11: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to minimize
the chances for release of non-native species, pathogens, and parasites into the aquatic
environment.
Policy LU-9.12: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to ensure
that waste discharges will comply with all applicable water quality regulations, including, but not
limited to, any applicable regulations contained within (1) the State Water Resources Control
Board’s “Water Quality Control Plan, Ocean Waters of California” Ocean Plan, (2) the State
Water Resources Control Board’s “Water Quality Control Plan for Control of Temperature in the
Coastal and Interstate Waters and Enclosed Bays and Estuaries of California” (Thermal Plan),
and (3) the North Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board’s (RWQCB) “Water Quality
Control Plan for the North Coast Region” (Basin Plan).
Policy LU-9.13: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be sited and designed to minimize
the discharge of pollutants to water, including but not limited to substances in concentrations
toxic to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
Policy LU-9.14: All aquaculture development or facilities shall implement Best Management
Practices (BMPs) to ensure the number and quantity of pollutants discharged or potentially
discharged from the facility shall be minimized to the maximum extent feasible. BMPs shall
2 – Land Use Element                            2 - 18                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

specifically address adequate cleaning, feeding, transfer and importation of species, husbandry
practices, removal of dead species, storage and handling of raw material, drugs and chemicals,
and disposal of solid waste.
Policy LU-9.15: All aquaculture development or facilities shall be carried out in a manner that
will sustain the biological productivity of coastal waters, protect human health and maintain
healthy populations of all species of marine organisms for long-term commercial, recreational,
scientific and educational purposes.
Policy LU-9.16: Aquaculture facilities sited within the Harbor District shall not interfere with
existing recreational boating facilities and existing coastal-dependent industry, including fishing.
Policy LU-9-17: Ocean front land that is suitable for coastal dependent aquaculture shall be
protected for that use, and proposals for aquaculture facilities located on those sites shall be
given priority, except over other coastal dependent developments or uses.
Residential Land
The residential neighborhoods of Fort Bragg are one of its most precious assets. Due to the
layout of the City, most residential neighborhoods are relatively separated from commercial,
retail, and industrial developments. Homes are typically located on local and collector streets,
rather than on the busier arterial streets, thereby minimizing the number of residents exposed to
heavy traffic and noise.
Many of the residences in Fort Bragg were built more than thirty years ago and ongoing repair
and renovation are required to maintain these older homes. It is a priority of this Coastal
General Plan to promote the preservation and rehabilitation of these older neighborhoods.
Other priorities include maintaining the character of existing residential areas and providing
additional areas for affordable housing, particularly for senior citizens. More detailed policies
and programs regarding housing and enhancing the quality of the City’s residential
neighborhoods are contained in the Housing and the Community Design Elements.
Goal LU-10        Provide adequate land to accommodate the housing needs of all income
                  groups.
Policy LU-10.1 : Preserve Neighborhoods: Preserve and enhance the character of the City’s
existing residential neighborhoods.
         Program LU-10.1.1: Use the minimum density indicated by the Land Use Designations
         Map as a starting point when determining specific density for a residential project.
         Densities above the minimum may be achieved only through a combination of the
         following: excellence of design, provision of affordable housing, effective mitigation of
         environmental constraints and impacts, demonstrated ability to provide services, and
         compatibility with adjacent development.
         Program LU-10.1.2: Revise the Coastal LUDC to provide more refined Design Review
         Guidelines, which address the design, size, bulk, and scale of residential development
         and ensure that new residences are compatible with and enhance the character of the
         neighborhoods in which they are located.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 19                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program LU-10.1.3: Revise the Coastal LUDC regulations for Planned Development
         (PD) to establish standards and procedures which encourage the use of the PD process
         in new residential development.
Locating New Development
Policy LU-10.2: Locating New Development. New residential, commercial, or industrial
development, except as otherwise provided in the LCP, shall be located within, contiguous with,
or in close proximity to, existing developed areas able to accommodate it or, where such areas
are not able to accommodate it, in other areas with adequate public services and where it will
not have significant adverse effects, either individually or cumulatively, on coastal resources.
Where feasible, new hazardous industrial development shall be located away from existing
developed areas.
Policy LU-10.3: The location and amount of new development shall maintain and enhance
public access to the coast by: (1) facilitating the extension of transit services where feasible; (2)
providing non-automobile circulation within the development that includes circulation
connections outside of the development; (3) assuring that the recreational needs of new
residents will be supported by onsite recreational facilities and/or off-site local park recreational
facilities to ensure that coastal recreation areas are not overloaded; and (4) utilizing smart
growth and mixed-use development concepts where feasible to improve circulation and reduce
auto use, where such auto use would impact coastal access roads.
Policy LU-10.4: Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for New Development.
Development shall only be approved when it has been demonstrated that the development will
be served with adequate water and wastewater treatment. Lack of adequate services to serve
the proposed development shall be grounds for denial of the development.
Policy LU-10.5: Minimize Impacts on Air Quality and Green House Gasses. New development
shall: 1) be consistent with requirements imposed by an air pollution control district or the State
Air Resources Control Board as to each particular development, and 2) minimize energy
consumption and vehicle miles traveled.
Policy LU-10.6: Protect Special Communities. New Development shall, where appropriate,
protect special communities and neighborhoods which, because of their unique characteristics,
are popular visitor destination points for recreational uses.
Policy LU-10.7: Priority for Coastal Dependent Uses. Coastal-dependent           developments shall
have priority over other developments on or near the shoreline. Except as        provided elsewhere
in this division, coastal-dependent developments shall not be sited in           a wetland. When
appropriate, coastal-related developments should be accommodated                  within reasonable
proximity to the coastal-dependent uses they support.
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 20                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

3.       PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
This Element is intended to identify essential public facilities, buildings, and services and to describe
policies and programs that will ensure that the existing and future population of Fort Bragg is provided
the best feasible level of public services and infrastructure. Although not required as a separate
Coastal General Plan element, this element compiles the public facilities planning requirements of the
circulation, conservation, and open space elements in Government Code Section 65302.
B.       Water Supply and Distribution
The City's current water supply system consists of the Newman Reservoir, the Simpson diversion,
and a direct diversion in the Noyo River (which includes a wet well in the Noyo River, a pump station
at the Noyo River, and various conveyances to the water treatment plant).
The City currently obtains about 50 percent of its water from the Noyo River. Under its existing
temporary license, the City is entitled to draw up to 1,500 acre feet of water per year from the Noyo
River so long as withdrawals do not exceed 3.0 cubic feet per second and specified amounts are
maintained in the river to meet the needs of the fish population. The City currently uses about 36
percent of this entitlement. The City's Water Permit contains limits on how much water can be
pumped from the Noyo River. These conditions were established in the past by the State
Department of Health Services because, at the time, it was concluded that the City could not
withdraw sufficient water from the Noyo River to meet its needs while retaining the required flows
within the river necessary to support the fish population. To comply with these Permit conditions, the
City requires that new development implement measures that limit new water demand.
The City is developing new water storage facilities to ensure adequate water during years of severe
drought, including the installation of a new 45-acre foot reservoir at Newman Gulch. The City is also
seeking additional water storage capacity to meet the needs of a buildout development scenario in
the City of Fort Bragg. The City will apply for a permanent license to divert water from the Noyo River
by 2009.
In the year 2007, the City produced 291,423,000 gallons of water from its three sources, or 113.6
gallons per day per person. Buildout over the next 10 years would generate a projected 1,900
additional people which would require production of an additional 200,000 gallons of water per day.
The City will have sufficient water supply to meet this demand, though it may not have sufficient water
storage. New development in the City will be required to pay its fair share of new water system
improvements.
3 – Public Facilities Element                         3-1                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

C.       Sewer System
Sewage treatment and disposal are provided by the Fort Bragg Municipal Improvement District No. 1.
The District is larger than the City; it includes much of the proposed Sphere of Influence. The District
accepts septage from residences and businesses outside the City boundaries but within the District
boundaries. Currently, the District facility serves residences and businesses within the City plus 102
septic tanks spread throughout the District plus septage from the area north of Pudding Creek.
The treatment and disposal facility currently disposes of about 640,000 gallons of treated wastewater
per day (Average Dry Weather Flow - ADWF). The projected increase in population of about 1,900
people over the next ten years will increase wastewater flows to the plant by about 173,000 gallons
per day ADWF.
The plant has a rated capacity of 1,000,000 gallons per day ADWF which is sufficient to meet the
demand of the projected population increase. However, due to spikes in the inflow to the facility
during wet weather (caused by infiltration and inflow into the collection lines), the plant's wet weather
capacity is frequently exceeded, resulting in violations of the facility's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
The City has installed a new secondary digester at the plant and will make additional improvements
to the collection system to address infiltration and inflow problems. The new digester will allow closing
down of the primary digester to allow cleaning and maintenance of this digester. Until the necessary
improvements to the plant are fully funded and constructed, wet weather capacity at the plant will
continue to be limited. The District is able to meet projected wastewater treatment and disposal
demands. Future development will need to pay its fair share of any additional improvements that are
needed.
D.       Storm Drain System
Based on a Storm Drain Master Plan developed in 1985, the City adopted the "Drainage Facility
Improvements and Drainage Fees" chapter (Chapter 12.14) of the City's Municipal Code. This
Chapter allows the City to review new development proposals and condition those proposals to
ensure that adequate on-site and off-site drainage is included in the development.
The priority storm drain improvements in the 2004 Master Plan have been implemented, although
there are additional problems identified in that report that still need to be addressed. In addition,
much of the area north of Pudding Creek, and south of the Noyo River generally do not have
improved drainage systems in place. Drainage in these areas is generally provided by natural
channels. Additional development per the Coastal General Plan would increase the amount of
impervious surfaces in these areas, and unless adequate storm drains are provided, there will be
localized flooding. New development will be required to pay for improvements necessary to ensure
adequate capacity within the storm drain system.
3 – Public Facilities Element                          3-2                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

E.       Schools
Education in the area is provided by the Fort Bragg Unified School District. Within the Fort Bragg
Planning Area, the District operates two elementary schools (Dana Gray Elementary School and
Redwood Elementary School), one middle school (Fort Bragg Middle School), one high school (Fort
Bragg High School), one continuation high school (Noyo High School), and one adult school (Coastal
Adult School). The student capacity of the District's schools is 2,460 students. The history of student
enrollment is shown in Table PF-1 below.
                                                  TABLE PF-1
                ENROLLMENT AT FORT BRAGG UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT FACILITIES
  Type of School            1992   1993      1994   1995    1996  1997  1998    1999   2000     2001
  Elementary Schools 1,206        1,170     1,128  1,141   1,128  1,080 1,023   1,022    996     906
  Middle School               576   583       604    624      607   578   525     528    509     509
  High School                 770   792       803    731      777   750   769     746    729     721
  TOTAL                    2,552  2,545     2,535  2,496   2,512  2,408 2,317  2,296   2,234   2,136
 Source: Fort Bragg Unified School District CBEDS Enrollments
Development over the next ten years would generate 562 additional students. Given declining
enrollment, the District believes it will have capacity for these students within existing school
buildings. The 562 additional students are only 146 more students than District schools housed in
1992. Even if there is insufficient permanent classroom capacity and/or capacity at existing
relocatable classrooms, the District could add additional relocatables and/or construct new
permanent classrooms on existing campuses. In addition, there is no guarantee that District
enrollment would actually increase by 562 students. Given recent declines in enrollment, it is
possible that the student enrollment from existing residences in the District would continue to decline
so that the student population in 2011 may be less than 562 new students. The District currently
receives developer mitigation fees of $2.24 per square foot for new residential construction and $0.36
per square foot for new nonresidential construction. These fees are used to purchase and/or lease
additional portable classrooms as needed and to repair or renovate existing schools.
F.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:             are not part of the certified LCP
and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy PF-1.5 through
Program PF-1.5.2; Policy PF-2.1 through Program PF-2.1.2; Policy PF-2.7; Policy PF-2.8; and Policy
PF-2.9 through Program PF-2.9.1.
Goal PF-1            Ensure that new development is served by adequate public services and
                     infrastructure.
Policy PF-1.1: All new development proposals shall be reviewed and conditioned to ensure that
adequate public services and infrastructure can be provided to the development without substantially
reducing the services provided to existing residents and businesses.
3 – Public Facilities Element                               3-3                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program PF-1.1.1: New development shall be responsible for any improvements or
         extensions of infrastructure or the service capacity necessary to serve the development.
Policy PF-1.2: Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for New Development. No permit for
development shall be approved unless it can be demonstrated that such development will be served
upon completion with adequate services, including but not limited to potable water; wastewater
collection, treatment and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical response; police
protection; transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal; as applicable to the
proposed development.
         a. Demonstration of adequate water and sewer facilities shall include evidence that
               adequate capacity will be available within the system to serve the development and all
               other known and foreseeable development the system is committed to serving, and that
               the municipal system will provide such service for the development;
         b.   Demonstration of adequate road facilities shall include information demonstrating that (i)
               access roads connecting to a public street can be developed in locations and in a manner
               consistent with LCP policies; and (ii) that the traffic generated by the proposed
               development, and all other known and foreseeable development, will not cause Levels of
               Service (LOS) of roads, streets, and intersections within the City to reduce below LOS
               standards contained in Policy C-1.1 of the Circulation Element of the Coastal General
               Plan.
Policy PF-1.3: Ensure Adequate Service Capacity for Priority Uses.
         a. New development that increases demand for new services by more than one equivalent
               dwelling unit (EDU) shall only be permitted in the Coastal Zone if,
                     Adequate services do or will exist to serve the proposed development upon
                      completion of the proposed development, and
                     Adequate services capacity would be retained to accommodate existing, authorized,
                      and probable priority uses upon completion. Such priority uses include, but are not
                      limited to, coastal dependent industrial (including commercial fishing facilities), visitor
                      serving, and recreational uses in commercial, industrial, parks and recreation, and
                      public facilities districts. Probable priority uses are those that do not require an LCP
                      amendment or zoning variance in the Coastal Zone.
          b. Prior to approval of a coastal development permit, the Planning Commission or City
               Council shall make the finding that these criteria have been met. Such findings shall be
               based on evidence that adequate service capacity remains to accommodate the existing,
               authorized, and probable priority uses identified above.
Policy PF-1.4: New or expanded public works facilities shall be designed and limited to accommodate
needs generated by development or uses permitted consistent with the provisions of this division;
provided, however, that it is the intent of the Legislature that State Highway Route 1 in rural areas of
the coastal zone remain a scenic two-lane road. Special districts shall not be formed or expanded
except where assessment for, and provision of, the service would not induce new development
inconsistent with the certified LCP. Where existing or planned public works facilities can
accommodate only a limited amount of new development, services to coastal dependent land use,
essential public services and basic industries vital to the economic health of the region, state, or
3 – Public Facilities Element                                3-4                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

nation, public recreation, commercial recreation, and visitor-serving land uses shall not be precluded
by other development.
      Policy PF-1.5         Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for Annexations:               Review
annexation requests to ensure that the area can be served with adequate potable water; wastewater
collection, treatment, and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical response; police
protection; transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal.
         Program PF-1.5.1: Areas to be annexed must be able to be served by existing City services
         or by services provided by other districts or agencies, or by environmentally and economically
         feasible extensions of these services. Any improvements or extensions required to serve the
         annexation area shall be paid for by property owners of the annexation area. The City will
         support annexations only upon a finding that infrastructure is available or that a specific
         development plan for extending or upgrading the infrastructure has been adopted by the City
         or other appropriate public service provider.
         Program PF-1.5.2: Require that property owners requesting annexation for vacant parcels of
         land which do not propose any development and connections to City services enter into a
         recorded agreement with the City stating all annexation fees applicable for the density of the
         proposed development shall be paid in full prior to approval of any land use or building
         permits for the subject property.
Goal PF-2            Assure that the City's infrastructure is maintained and expanded to meet the
                     needs of the City's residents.
     Policy PF-2.1          Development Pays Its Share: Require that new development pay its share of
capital improvements and the cost of public services to maintain adequate levels of service.
         Program PF-2.1.1: Maintain development impact and mitigation fees at a level adequate to
         finance infrastructure costs. Periodically review the City’s fee structure to ensure that it
         accurately reflects the actual cost of providing services.
         Program PF-2.1.2: Consider revising the Coastal LUDC to require property owners seeking
         annexation approval to enter into a pre-annexation agreement stating that they will not oppose
         assessment districts, including lighting and street maintenance districts.
Policy PF-2.2: Potable Water Capacity: Develop long-term solutions regarding the supply, storage,
and distribution of potable water and develop additional supplies. In addition to providing capacity for
potential build-out under the City General Plan outside the coastal zone, any expansion of capacity of
water facilities shall be designed to serve no more than the maximum level of development in the
coastal zone allowed by the certified LCP that is consistent with all other policies of the LCP and
Coastal General Plan. The City shall identify and implement water system improvements or changes
in service areas that are designed to ensure adequate service capacity to accommodate existing,
authorized, and projected probable future coastal dependent priority uses. Such uses include, but
are not limited to, industrial (including commercial fishing facilities), visitor serving, and recreational
priority uses in commercial, industrial, parks and recreation, and public facilities districts.
3 – Public Facilities Element                           3-5                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program PF-2.2.1: Maintain and update a Water System Master Plan and identify capital
         improvements required to meet anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.2: Monitor, on an ongoing basis, the capacity of the potable water system in
         relation to the anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.3: Evaluate, and periodically adjust as appropriate, water capital
         improvement installation and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing water service and
         increasing capacity.
         Program PF-2.2.4: Pursue all available sources of revenue to fund the maintenance and
         expansion of the City’s water system.
         Program PF-2.2.5: Develop a program to encourage and allow the safe use of graywater.
         Program PF-2.2.6: Obtain a permanent license for the water rights initially permitted to the
         City by the State Division of Water Rights in 1956.
         Program PF-2.2.7: Reconstruct the Madsen Hole pump station, construct a new raw water
         line from the Madsen Hole pump station to Sherwood Road, and reconstruct water storage
         ponds.
         Program PF-2.2.8: Improve the pressure in the water system lines to meet State standards.
Policy PF-2.3 Emergency Water Supply:            Develop an emergency water supply for disaster
preparedness.
         Program PF-2.3.1: Provide a means for obtaining and treating water from Pudding Creek or
         the Noyo River for emergency disaster situations only, if allowed by the State and if deemed
         feasible.
Policy PF-2.4: Potable Water Quality: Maintain the safety of the water supply.
         Program PF-2.4.1: Continue to maintain the water collection, treatment, and distribution
         system to ensure compliance with all State requirements for a public drinking water system.
         Program PF-2.4.2: Provide security and protection for the watersheds and water storage and
         treatment facilities with monitoring, appropriate notices, physical barriers, and protective
         devices as well as land use policies and controls.
         Program PF-2.4.3: Develop long range management and improvement programs for the
         watersheds. These plans should include management practices and methods of protecting
         the water source from degradation.
         Program PF-2.4.4: Develop and secure additional water storage capacity to meet potential
         buildout water use needs for the City of Fort Bragg.
3 – Public Facilities Element                          3-6                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy PF-2.5: Wastewater Capacity: Review wastewater capacity and expansion plans as needed
when regulations change and as the treatment and disposal facility nears capacity. In addition to
providing capacity for potential build-out under the City General Plan outside the coastal zone, any
expansion of capacity of wastewater facilities shall be designed to serve no more than the maximum
level of development in the coastal zone allowed by the certified LCP that is consistent with all other
policies of the LCP and Coastal General Plan. The City shall identify and implement wastewater
system improvements or changes in service area that are designed to ensure adequate service
capacity to accommodate existing, authorized, and probable future priority uses. Such uses include,
but are not limited to, industrial (including commercial fishing facilities), visitor serving, and
recreational priority uses in commercial, industrial, parks and recreation, and public facilities districts.
         Program PF-2.5.1: Develop a Wastewater System Master Plan.
         Program PF-2.5.2: Continue to improve the wastewater treatment and disposal facility to
         comply with changing State requirements.
         Program PF-2.5.3: Upgrade wastewater collector lines in areas where there is inadequate
         capacity or where lines are subject to substantial infiltration and inflow
         Program PF-2.5.4: Evaluate and periodically adjust, as appropriate, wastewater capital
         improvement, installation, and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing wastewater
         collection, treatment, and disposal service and increasing capacity.
Policy PF-2.6 Storm Drainage: Annually review storm drain system capacity and expansion plans.
         Program PF-2.6.1: Update the Storm Drain Master Plan to comply with NPDES requirements
         and to address current efficiencies in the system.
         Program PF-2.6.2: Implement the storm drain recommendations contained in the Capital
         Improvement Plan (CIP) and update the CIP as necessary.
         Program PF-2.6.3: Continue to implement, and update as needed, the Storm Drain Master
         Plan and the improvements itemized in the Capital Improvement Plan.
         Program PF-2.6.4: Periodically adjust, as appropriate, drainage capital improvement
         installation fees to reflect the actual cost of providing drainage service and increasing
         capacity.
     Policy PF-2.7          Public Buildings:  Ensure that public buildings in the City are adequate to
provide services for the community.
         Program PF-2.7.1: Identify and map key public buildings and areas.
         Program PF-2.7.2:         Provide for relocation or upgrading of essential public buildings as
         necessary.
3 – Public Facilities Element                            3-7                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     Policy PF-2.8          Capital Improvement Plan: Continually update the Capital Improvement Plan
to ensure that it identifies capital projects necessary to maintain adequate levels of performance as
well as funding sources for all phases of intended projects.
     Policy PF-2.9          Schools: Work with the Fort Bragg Unified School District to ensure that the
District has the means to provide a high quality education to City students.
         Program PF-2.9.1: Work with the School District to address anticipated deficits between the
         cost of constructing necessary new schools or renovating existing schools and the revenues
         generated by developer fees. Where a clear nexus can be shown between the impacts of a
         new development and the need for new school facilities, the City shall consider the need for
         additional project mitigation to be provided by project developers to the degree allowed by
         State law.
3 – Public Facilities Element                          3-8                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

4. CONSERVATION, OPEN SPACE, ENERGY, AND PARKS
ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Conservation, Open Space, Energy, and Parks Element of the Coastal General Plan
combines two State-mandated elements, Conservation and Open Space. It also includes
policies and programs addressing energy conservation, Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas,
water quality, public access, and recreation.
Open space is defined by Government Code Section 65561 as “any area of land or water which
is essentially unimproved and devoted to open space use and which is designated on local,
regional or a State open space plan for the preservation of natural resources, the managed
production of resources, outdoor recreation, or for public health and safety." Fort Bragg’s open
space includes lands which are publicly-owned and operated for active or passive recreational
use and land which is in private ownership but is either undeveloped or managed for the
protection and enhancement of natural resources. Open space in Fort Bragg provides for
coastal access, recreational uses, scenic and aesthetic resources, and habitat preservation.
The City wishes to create a sustainable environment by conserving natural resources, reducing
anthropogenic greenhouse gases, and encouraging its citizens to reduce their carbon footprint.
The City also wishes to preserve as much open space as feasible to provide habitat for native
species of plants and wildlife, reduce sprawl, and maintain the aesthetic benefits of undeveloped
land, and to provide its residents with a full range of recreational opportunities. The City seeks to
conserve natural resources and provide its residents with a full range of recreational
opportunities. The goals, policies, and programs of this Element address these aims by
establishing the framework for the protection and enhancement of natural resources, reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions, protection of water quality, and enhancement of open space, and for
the provision of coastal access and recreational opportunities for Fort Bragg residents and
visitors.
The Draft EIR for the General Plan contains a full description of the natural resources, parks,
trails, and recreational facilities existing within the Planning Area. The Draft EIR also contains a
full description of natural resources occurring within the Planning Area. See Map OS-1 for a
depiction of Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas, Map OS-2 for a depiction of Special
Review Areas, Map OS-3 for a listing of existing trails, and Map OS-4 for a depiction of existing
parks and recreational facilities.
B.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:          are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy OS-7.1,
Policy OS-7.2, Policy OS-8.1, Policy OS-17.4, Policy OS-17.5, Policy OS-17.7, Policy OS-18.2,
and Policy OS-18.3,
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4-1                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas and Conservation
Goal OS-1          Preserve and Enhance the City's Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas
Policy OS-1.1: Definition of ESHA. “Environmentally sensitive habitat area" means any area in
which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their
special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by
human activities and developments.
         Protection of environmentally sensitive habitat areas is one of the essential aspects of the
         Coastal Act. Fort Bragg has several environmentally sensitive habitat areas including,
         but not limited to, portions of coastal bluffs, biologically rich tide pools, nesting grounds,
         kelp beds, wetlands, riparian habitats, and rare, threatened, or endangered plants or
         plant communities.
         Areas that may contain environmentally sensitive habitat areas include, but are not
         limited to, areas indicated by Map 0S-1: Open Space and Environmentally Sensitive
         Habitat Areas. The environmentally sensitive habitat areas shown on Map 0S-1 are
         based on the best information available at the time mapping was done. The boundaries
         of environmentally sensitive habitat areas identified in Map 0S-1 are not intended to be
         definitive, but to identify the general location of sensitive environmental resources.
         Detailed locations and boundaries of these resources shall be obtained by the
         preparation of biological reports described in Policy OS-1.7.
Policy OS-1.2: Determination of ESHA. The determination of what constitutes ESHA shall not
be limited by what is mapped and not all parcels that are mapped necessarily contain ESHA.
Map 0S-1 serves to identify those general areas known to potentially contain ESHA and for
which a biological report is required consistent with Policy OS-1.7 to substantiate the presence or
absence of ESHA on any particular parcel. Any area not designated on LUP Map OS-1 that
meets the ESHA definition is ESHA and shall be accorded all the protection provided for ESHA
in the LCP. All habitat maps shall include a note that states that “the maps may be updated as
appropriate and may not include all areas that constitute ESHA.” The following areas shall be
considered ESHA:
             • Any habitat area that is rare or especially valuable because of their special nature
                  or role in an ecosystem and is easily degraded or disturbed by human activities or
                  developments.
             • Any habitat area of plant or animal species designated as rare, threatened, or
                  endangered under State or Federal law.
             • Any habitat area of species designated as Fully Protected or Species of Special
                  Concern under State law or regulations.
             • Any habitat area of plant species for which there is compelling evidence of rarity,
                  for example, those designated 1b (Rare or endangered in California and
                  elsewhere) or 2 (rare, threatened or endangered in California but more common
                  elsewhere) by the California Native Plant Society.
         Program OS-1.2.1: Update the mapping of environmentally sensitive habitat areas as
         new information becomes available.
Policy OS-1.3: Development in ESHA Wetlands: Diking, Filling, and Dredging of open coastal
waters, wetlands, estuaries, and lakes shall be permitted where there is no feasible less
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4-2                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                        HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Map OS-1
                                                                                                                                                                                               OPEN SPACE AND
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE                                                                                                                                             ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                HABITAT AREAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Environmentally Sensitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Habitat Areas
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
environmentally damaging alternative, and where feasible mitigation measures have been
provided to minimize adverse environmental effects, and shall be limited to the following uses:
       a. New or expanded port, energy, and coastal-dependent industrial facilities, including
           commercial fishing facilities.
       b. Maintaining existing or restoring previously dredged depths in existing navigational
           channels, turning basins, vessel berthing and mooring areas, and boat launching
           ramps.
       c. New or expanded boating facilities and the placement of structural pilings for public
           recreational piers that provide public access and recreational opportunities.
       d. Incidental public service purposes, including but not limited to burying cables and pipes
           or inspection of piers and maintenance of existing intake and outfall pipelines.
       e. Restoration purposes.
       f. Nature study, aquaculture, or similar resource dependent activities.
Policy OS-1.4: The more specific permissible use provisions for wetlands identified in Policy OS-
1.3 shall control over the more general permissible use provisions for other types of ESHA
identified in Policy OS-1.5 and Policy OS-1.6.
Policy OS-1.5: Development in Rivers and Streams with ESHA. Channelizations, dams, or
other substantial alterations of rivers and streams shall incorporate the best mitigation measures
feasible, and be limited to:
       a. Necessary water supply projects,
       b. Flood control projects where no other method for protecting existing structures in the
           floodplain is feasible and where such protection is necessary for public safety or to
           protect existing development, or
       c. Developments where the primary function is the improvement of fish and wildlife
           habitat.
Policy OS-1.6: Development within Other Types of ESHA shall protect ESHA against any
significant disruption of habitat values and shall be limited to the following uses:
       a. Resource Dependent Uses. Public nature trails within riparian ESHA are considered a
           resource dependent use provided that: (1) the length of the trail within the riparian
           corridor shall be minimized; (2) the trail crosses the stream at right angles to the
           maximum extent feasible; (3) the trail is kept as far up slope from the stream as
           possible; (4) trail development involves a minimum of slope disturbance and vegetation
           clearing; and (5) the trail is the minimum width necessary. Interpretive signage may be
           used along permissible nature trails accessible to the public to provide information
           about the value and need to protect sensitive resources.
       b. Restoration projects where the primary purpose is restoration of the habitat.
       c. Invasive plant eradication projects if they are designed to protect and enhance habitat
           values.
       d. Pipelines and utility lines installed underneath the ESHA using directional drilling
           techniques designed to avoid significant disruption of habitat values.
Policy OS-1.7 Development in areas adjacent to Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas shall
be sited and designed to prevent impacts which would significantly degrade such areas, and
shall be compatible with the continuance of such habitat areas.
Policy OS-1.8:        Development adjacent to ESHA shall provide buffer areas to serve as
transitional habitat and provide distance and physical barriers to human intrusion. The purpose
of this buffer area is to provide for a sufficient area to protect environmentally sensitive habitats
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4-3                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

from significant degradation resulting from future development. Buffers shall be of a sufficient
size to ensure the biological integrity and preservation of the ESHA they are designed to protect.
The width of the buffer area shall be a minimum of 100 feet, unless an applicant can
demonstrate, after consultation with the California Department of Fish and Game, other relevant
resource agencies, and the City, that 100 feet is not necessary to protect the resources of that
particular habitat area and the adjacent upland transitional habitat function of the buffer from
possible significant disruption caused by the proposed development. The buffer area shall be
measured from the outside edge of the environmentally sensitive habitat areas and in no event
shall be less than 30 feet in width.
Policy OS-1.9: Utilize the following criteria to establish buffer areas:
       a. Biological Significance of Adjacent Lands. Lands adjacent to a wetland, stream, or
           riparian habitat area vary in the degree to which they are functionally related to these
           habitat areas. Functional relationships may exist if species associated with such areas
           spend a significant portion of their life cycle on adjacent lands. The degree of
           significance depends upon the habitat requirements of the species in the habitat area
           (e.g., nesting, feeding, breeding, or resting).
           Where a significant functional relationship exists, the land supporting this relationship
           shall also be considered to be part of the ESHA, and the buffer zone shall be measured
           from the edge of these lands and be sufficiently wide to protect these functional
           relationships. Where no significant functional relationships exist, the buffer shall be
           measured from the edge of the ESHA that is adjacent to the proposed development.
       b. Sensitivity of Species to Disturbance. The width of the buffer zone shall be based, in
           part, on the distance necessary to ensure that the most sensitive species of plants and
           animals will not be disturbed significantly by the permitted development. Such a
           determination shall be based on the following after consultation with the Department of
           Fish and Game or others with similar expertise:
                  (i) Nesting, feeding, breeding, resting, or other habitat requirements of both
                  resident and migratory fish and wildlife species;
                  (ii) An assessment of the short-term and long-term adaptability of various species
                  to human disturbance;
                  (iii) An assessment of the impact and activity levels of the proposed development
                  on the resource.
       c. Erosion susceptibility. The width of the buffer shall be based, in part, on an
           assessment of the slope, soils, impervious surface coverage, runoff characteristics,
           erosion potential, and vegetative cover of the parcel proposed for development and
           adjacent lands. A sufficient buffer to allow for the interception of any additional material
           eroded as a result of the proposed development shall be provided.
       d. Use natural topography.             Where feasible, use hills and bluffs adjacent to
           Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas, to buffer these habitat areas. Where
           otherwise permitted, locate development on the sides of hills away from
           Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas. Include bluff faces in the buffer area.
       e. Use existing man-made features. Where feasible, use man-made features such as
           roads and dikes to buffer environmentally sensitive habitat areas.
       f. Lot Configuration and Location of Existing Development. Where an existing subdivision
           or other development is largely built-out and the buildings are a uniform distance from a
           habitat area, at least that same distance shall be required as a buffer zone for any new
           development permitted. However, if that distance is less than one hundred (100) feet,
           additional mitigation measures (e.g., planting of native vegetation) shall be provided to
           ensure additional protection.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4-4                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

       g. Type and Scale of Development Proposed. The type and scale of the proposed
           development will, to a large degree, determine the size of the buffer zone necessary to
           protect the ESHA. Such evaluations shall be made on a case-by-case basis depending
           upon the resources involved, the degree to which adjacent lands are already
           developed, and the type of development already existing in the area.
       Required buffer areas shall be measured from the following points as applicable:
          The outer edge of the canopy of riparian vegetation for riparian ESHA, or from the top
             of stream bank where no riparian vegetation exists.
          The upland edge of a wetland for a wetland ESHA.
          The outer edge of the plants that comprise the rare plant community for rare plant
             community ESHA.
Policy OS-1.10: Permitted Uses within ESHA Buffers. Development within an Environmentally
Sensitive Habitat Area buffer shall be limited to the following uses:
       a. Wetland Buffer.
             i. Uses allowed within the adjacent Wetland ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-1.3.
             ii. Nature trails and interpretive signage designed to provide information about the
                  value and protection of the resources
             iii. Invasive plant eradication projects if they are designed to protect and enhance
                  habitat values.
       b. Riparian Buffer.
             i. Uses allowed within the adjacent River and Stream ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-
                  1.5.
             ii. Uses allowed within the adjacent ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-1.6.
             iii. Buried pipelines and utility lines.
             iv. Bridges.
             v. Drainage and flood control facilities.
       c. Other types of ESHA Buffer.
             i. Uses allowed within the adjacent ESHA pursuant to Policy OS-1.6.
             ii. Buried pipelines and utility lines.
             iii. Bridges.
             iv. Drainage and flood control facilities.
Policy OS-1-11: Land Divisions and ESHA. Prohibit new land divisions creating new parcels
located entirely within an environmentally sensitive habitat area or buffer area unless the parcel
to be created is restricted at the time of its creation solely for open space, public recreation, or
conservation.
Policy OS-1.12: Drainage and Erosion Control Plan. Permissible development on all properties
containing environmentally sensitive habitat, including but not limited to those areas identified as
ESHA Habitat Areas on Map OS-1, shall prepare a drainage and erosion control plan for
approval by the City. The plan shall include measures to minimize erosion during project
construction, and to minimize erosive runoff from the site after the project is completed. Any
changes in runoff volume, velocity, or duration that may affect sensitive plant and animal
populations, habitats, or buffer areas for those populations or habitats, shall be reviewed by a
qualified biologist to ensure that there will not be adverse hydrologic or, erosion, or
sedimentation impacts on sensitive species or habitats. Mitigation measures shall be identified
and adopted to minimize potential adverse runoff impacts. All projects resulting in new runoff to
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4-5                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

any streams in the City or to the ocean shall be designed to minimize the transport of pollutants
from roads, parking lots, and other impermeable surfaces of the project.
Policy OS-1.13: Landscaping Adjacent to ESHA. All development located within or adjacent to
environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall be conditioned to:
         a) Require all proposed plantings be obtained from local genetic stocks within
             Mendocino County. If documentation is provided to the review authority that
             demonstrates that native vegetation from local genetic stock is not available, native
             vegetation obtained from genetic stock outside the local area, but from within the
             adjacent region of the floristic province, may be used; and if local genetic stocks
             within the floristic province are unavailable, the Director may authorize use of a
             commercial native mix, provided it is clear of invasive seed. Director may also
             authorize use of a seed mix that is selected for rapid senescence and replacement
             with native stock; and
         b) Require an invasive plant monitoring and removal program; and
         c) Prohibit the planting of any plant species on the property that is (a) listed as
             problematic and/or invasive by the California Native Plant Society, the California
             Invasive Plant Council, and/or by the State of California, or (b) listed as a ‘noxious
             weed’ by the State of California or the U.S. Federal Government.
Policy OS-1.14: Vegetation Removal in ESHA. Prohibit vegetation removal in Environmentally
Sensitive Habitat Areas and buffer areas except for:
         a) Vegetation removal authorized through coastal development permit approval to
             accommodate permissible development,
         b) Removal of trees for disease control,
         c) Vegetation removal for public safety purposes to abate a nuisance consistent with
             Coastal Act Section 30005, or
         d) Removal of firewood for the personal use of the property owner at his or her
             residence to the extent that such removal does not constitute development pursuant
             to Coastal Act Section 30106.
Such activities shall be subject to restrictions to protect sensitive habitat values.
Policy OS-1.15: Implement the following measures when a project involves dredging, filling or
diking of open coastal waters, wetlands, estuaries, or lakes:
         a)       Dredging and spoils disposal shall be planned and carried out to avoid significant
                  disruption to marine and wildlife habitats and to water circulation to the maximum
                  extent feasible. Avoiding significant disruption means, in part, that the functional
                  capacity of the wetland is maintained to the maximum extent feasible.
         b)       Limitations may be imposed, including but not limited to, limitations on the timing
                  of the operation, the type of operation, the quantity of dredged material removed,
                  and the location of the spoils site.
         c)       Dredge spoils suitable for beach replenishment shall, where feasible, be
                  transported to appropriate beaches or into suitable longshore current systems.
         d)       Other mitigation measures may include opening areas to tidal action, removing
                  dikes, improving tidal flushing, or other restoration measures.
         Program OS-1.15.1: Consult with the Department of Fish and Game, California Coastal
         Commission, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as applicable, on the review of
         dredging, filling and diking plans in, or adjacent to wetlands or estuaries to establish
         mitigating measures.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4-6                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-1.16: Biological Report Required.
         a)       Permit applications for development within or adjacent to Environmentally
                  Sensitive Habitat Areas including areas identified in Map OS-1 or other sites
                  identified by City staff which have the possibility of containing environmentally
                  sensitive habitat shall include a biological report prepared by a qualified biologist
                  which identifies the resources and provides recommended measures to ensure
                  that the requirements of the Coastal Act and the City of Fort Bragg’s Local
                  Coastal Program are fully met. The required content of the biological report is
                  specified in the Coastal Land Use and Development Code.
         b)       Submittal of Biological Reports. These biological reports shall be reviewed by the
                  City and approving agencies. The biological reports described above shall be
                  submitted prior to filing as complete a coastal development permit application and
                  may also be submitted as a part of any environmental documentation required
                  pursuant to CEQA. The selection of the professional preparing the report shall be
                  made or approved by the City or the agency approving the permit and paid for by
                  the applicant.
         c)       Biological reports shall contain mitigating measures meeting the following
                  minimum standards:
                        i. They are specific, implementable, and, wherever feasible, quantifiable.
                        ii. They result in the maximum feasible protection, habitat restoration and
                             enhancement of sensitive environmental resources. Habitat restoration
                             and enhancement shall be required wherever feasible, in addition to the
                             applicable baseline standard of either avoiding or minimizing significant
                             habitat disruption.
                        iii. They are incorporated into a Mitigation Monitoring Program; and
                        iv. They include substantial information and analysis to support a finding
                             that there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative.
Goal OS-2          Preserve and enhance the City's other natural resources.
Policy OS-2.1 Riparian Habitat: Prevent development from destroying riparian habitat to the
maximum feasible extent. Preserve, enhance, and restore existing riparian habitat in new
development unless the preservation will prevent the establishment of all permitted uses on the
property.
         Program OS-2.1.1: To the maximum extent feasible, preserve, protect, and restore
         streams and creeks to their natural state.
         Program OS-2.1.2: Work with organizations and private property owners to enhance the
         City’s watercourses for habitat preservation and recreation.
         Program OS-2.1.3: Develop additional guidelines for the maintenance of watercourses to
         further assure that native vegetation is not unnecessarily removed and that maintenance
         minimizes disruption of wildlife breeding activities and wildlife movement. Incorporate
         these guidelines, where appropriate, into the City's maintenance procedures.
         Program OS-2.1.4: Seek Federal and State funding for the repair of streambank erosion,
         planting of riparian vegetation to stabilize creek banks, and removal of debris obstructing
         waterflow.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element      4-7                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-2.2: Protect Aquifers: Protect groundwater aquifers.
         Program OS-2.2.1: Continue to require the preparation of a hydrologic study prior to
         approving new wells for domestic use in the City.
         Program OS-2.2.2: Prior to consideration of any new development on the Todd Point
         aquifer, a project-specific hydrologic design analysis shall be prepared by the project
         applicant to recommend specific mitigation measures to minimize runoff from the site in
         order to retain existing levels of groundwater recharge. (Examples of such measures
         include establishment of retention basins, establishment of percolation chambers, use of
         permeable paving materials, etc.)
                  If the design analysis concludes that the project will result in a net decrease in
                  groundwater recharge from the project site, then a supplemental hydrologic
                  analysis shall be prepared by the applicant which evaluates cumulative hydrologic
                  impacts. The study shall establish a baseline of aquifer supply to existing
                  residential wells on Todd Point and evaluate cumulative impacts to aquifer
                  recharge from all projected development on Todd Point.
                  If the supplemental hydrologic analysis shows that the cumulative development
                  would adversely impact existing Todd Point wells, then the study shall establish
                  the nexus for new development, both in the City and in the County, to pay its pro
                  rata share of the costs of extending City water service to the affected existing
                  residences.
                  Prior to new development, the City will establish a program that identifies how
                  fees will be collected to extend City water, what existing residences will be
                  served, and when the water service would be extended.
                  The cost of preparing the cumulative hydrologic study will be borne by the first
                  application received which triggers this requirement, and all future applicants for
                  new development on Todd Point will be required to reimburse the original
                  applicant their fair share of the hydrologic study.
Goal OS-3          Protect and preserve soil as a natural resource.
Policy OS-3.1 Soil Erosion: Minimize soil erosion to prevent loss of productive soils, prevent
landslides, and maintain infiltration capacity and soil structure.
Goal OS-4          Protect and preserve Cultural Resources.
 Policy OS-4.1. Preserve Archaeological Resources. New development shall be located and/or
designed to avoid archaeological and paleontological resources where feasible, and where new
development would adversely affect archaeological or paleontological resources, reasonable
mitigation measures shall be required.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element     4-8                               July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Policy OS-4.2: Archaeological Resources Report Required.
         A) Development located within areas of known or potential archaeological or
             paleontological resources included in (i) – (iv) shall be required to submit a report
             consistent with the requirements of section B below prior to approval of a building,
             grading, or coastal development permit for the development.
             i. Former Georgia Pacific timber mill. The entire property which comprises the
                  former Georgia-Pacific timber mill site;
             ii. Noyo Bay. The area located along the south side of Noyo Bay (e.g., Todd
                  Point);
             iii. Noyo River. All of the areas located adjacent to the north side of the Noyo
                  River;
             iv. North Fort Bragg Coast. All of the areas located west of Highway 1 and north of
                  Pudding Creek;
             v. Special Review Areas. All Special Review Areas identified on Map OS-2 in the
                  Coastal General Plan; and
             vi. Other areas identified by the Director.          Other areas identified by the
                  environmental review process (Chapter 18.72), or brought to the attention of the
                  City through special studies performed after the enactment of this Section, as
                  having the potential for containing archaeological or paleontological resources.
         B) Report required. A project specific report shall be prepared by a qualified
             archaeologist and shall be submitted prior to filing as complete a coastal
             development permit application. The permit review authority may waive the
             requirement for a project specific report if the Director determines that an existing
             report satisfies the requirements of this section. The report shall be prepared
             consistent with the requirements of Section 18.50.030 of the Coastal Land Use &
             Development Code.
Policy OS-4.3: Halt all work if archaeological resources are uncovered during construction.
Require an evaluation by a qualified archaeologist before recommencing construction.
Policy OS-4.4: Locate and/or design new development to avoid archaeological resources where
feasible.
Policy OS-4.5: Mitigation shall be designed in compliance with the guidelines of the State Office
of Historic Preservation and the State Native American Heritage Commission.
Goal OS-5          Preserve areas with other biotic resources.
Policy OS-5.1 Native Species: Preserve native plant and animal species and their habitat.
Policy OS-5.2: To the maximum extent feasible and balanced with permitted use, require that
site planning, construction, and maintenance of development preserve existing healthy trees and
native vegetation on the site.
Policy OS-5.3: Require site planning and construction to maintain adequate open space to
permit effective wildlife corridors for animal movement between open spaces.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4-9                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-5.4: Condition development projects, requiring discretionary approval to prohibit the
planting of any species of broom, pampas grass, gorse, or other species of invasive non-native
plants deemed undesirable by the City.
         Program OS-5.4.1: Request that Caltrans, PG&E, and the County of Mendocino remove
         pampas grass and broom from their rights-of-way. The City shall strive to remove these
         plants from City-owned rights-of-way.
Goal OS-6         Reduce dependence on non-renewable energy and materials.
Policy OS-6.1 Energy Conservation Measures in Buildings: Continue to require structures to
comply with State energy conservation standards and encourage owners of existing dwellings to
retrofit with energy-saving features.
         Program OS-6.1.1: Require retrofitting of energy-saving features in existing dwellings as
         a part of the City's Housing Rehabilitation Program by providing information, technical
         assistance, and other incentives.
         Program OS-6.1.2: Review and revise the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances to
         incorporate standards for energy-efficient development, including site orientation, building
         design, use of materials, landscaping, solar access, and solar space and water heating.
Policy OS-6.2 Development Review Process: Make energy conservation an important criterion
in the development review process.
         Program OS-6.2.1: Adopt a solar access ordinance which would require development
         applications to be reviewed for potential energy conservation measures and designs
         including site orientation, building design and use of materials, landscaping, and solar
         access.
         Program OS-6.2.2: Include a section on energy-efficient features in the Design Review
         Guidelines.
         Program OS-6.2.3: Obtain PG&E assistance in reviewing commercial buildings and
         major subdivisions during the design and approval process to incorporate energy-efficient
         design suggestions into the plans.
Policy OS-6.3 Alternative Energy: Encourage the development and use of alternative sources of
energy such as wind, solar, and waves to meet Fort Bragg's energy needs.
         Program OS-6.3.1: Revise the Coastal LUDC to allow alternative energy facilities for on-
         site use as a conditional use in all zones within the City. Solar energy facilities for on-site
         use shall be allowed as a permitted use in all zoning districts.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 10                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal OS-7         Improve air quality.
      Policy OS-7.1      Participate in Regional Planning to Improve Air Quality: Continue to
cooperate with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District (MCAQMD) in
implementing the Regional Clean Air Plan.
      Policy OS-7.2      Air Quality Standards: Seek to comply with State and Federal standards
for air quality.
         Program OS-7.2.1: Adopt a plan and timelines to reduce greenhouse gas emissions for
         City operations through the establishment and implementation of a Greenhouse Gas
         Reduction Action Plan.
         Program OS-7.2.2: Consider adopting a plan and timeline to eliminate emissions from the
         City’s transportation sector by replacing internal combustion vehicles with zero emission
         vehicles (ZEV) to maintain compliance with AB 32, the California Global Warming
         Solutions Act passed in September 2006.
         Program OS-7.2.3: Review new project proposals for consistency with MCAQMD
         regulations and guidelines.
         Program OS-7.2.4: Revise the Coastal LUDC to require that all new woodburning stoves
         and heaters meet current EPA standards for woodburning devices. Do not allow
         woodburning devices in commercial or industrial development (except for use in
         operating the existing or an upgraded powerhouse on the Georgia-Pacific property solely
         for processing forest products).
         Program OS-7.2.5: Work with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District to
         ensure that all new industrial projects include Best Available Control Technologies
         (BACTs) to control emissions of air pollutants to the maximum extent permitted by law.
         Program OS-7.2.6: Require that proposed new asphalt plants undergo an air quality
         analysis that includes analysis of emissions, dispersion modeling, risk analysis, and
         mitigation required to reduce pollution and risk.
         Program OS-7.2.7: Include thorough dust control provisions in the Grading Ordinance.
         Program OS-7.2.8: The City will prohibit unpaved driveways of more than 50 feet and
         unpaved roads in all new development.
Goal OS-8         Reduce, recycle, and reuse solid waste generated in the City.
      Policy OS-8.1      Recycling and Reuse of Solid Waste: Comply with State requirements to
reduce the volume of solid waste through recycling and reduction of solid waste.
         Program OS-8.1.1: Enact ordinances requiring recycling, reuse, and waste reduction,
         including recycling of green waste and construction debris.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 11                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program OS-8.1.2: Require on-site areas for recycling in commercial, office, multi-family
         residential developments, and all municipal facilities.
         Program OS-8.1.3: Continue to participate in the County’s Integrated Waste
         Management Plan operated by the Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority.
C.       Water Quality
Goal OS-9         Improve water quality.
Policy OS-9.1: Minimize Introduction of Pollutants. Development shall be designed and
managed to minimize the introduction of pollutants into coastal waters (including the ocean,
estuaries, wetlands, rivers, streams, and lakes) to the extent feasible.
Policy OS-9.2: Minimize Increases in Stormwater Runoff. Development shall be designed and
managed to minimize post-project increases in stormwater runoff volume and peak runoff rate, to
the extent feasible, to avoid adverse impacts to coastal waters.
Policy OS-9.3: Maintain Biological Productivity and Quality of Coastal Waters. Development
shall be designed and managed to maintain, and restore where feasible, the biological
productivity and quality of coastal waters, consistent with sections 30230, 30231, and other
relevant sections of the California Coastal Act. The Coastal Act sections set forth below are
incorporated herein as policies of the Land Use Plan:
Policy OS-9.4: Maintain, Enhance, and Restore Marine Resources. Marine resources shall be
maintained, enhanced, and, where feasible, restored. Special protection shall be given to areas
and species of special biological or economic significance. Uses of the marine environment shall
be carried out in a manner that will sustain the biological productivity of coastal waters and that
will maintain healthy populations of all species of marine organisms adequate for long-term
commercial, recreational, scientific, and educational purposes.
Policy OS-9.5. Maintain and Restore Biological Productivity and Water Quality. The biological
productivity and the quality of coastal waters, streams, wetlands, estuaries, and lakes
appropriate to maintain optimum populations of marine organisms and for the protection of
human health shall be maintained and, where feasible, restored through, among other means,
minimizing adverse effects of waste water discharges and entrainment, controlling runoff,
preventing depletion of ground water supplies and substantial interference with surface water
flow, encouraging waste water reclamation, maintaining natural vegetation buffer areas that
protect riparian habitats, and minimizing alteration of natural streams.
Goal OS-10 Improve water quality through the Selection and Design of Appropriate Best
Management Practices (BMPs)
Policy OS-10.1: Construction-phase Stormwater Runoff Plan. All development that requires a
grading permit shall submit a construction-phase erosion, sedimentation, and polluted runoff
control plan. This plan shall evaluate potential construction-phase impacts to water quality and
coastal waters, and shall specify temporary Best Management Practices (BMPs) that will be
implemented to minimize erosion and sedimentation during construction, and prevent
contamination of runoff by construction chemicals and materials.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element 4 - 12                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Map OS-2
                                                        HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SPECIAL REVIEW AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RUNOFF SENSITIVE AREAS
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Existing Coastal Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Special Review Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Runoff Sensitive Area
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
Policy OS-10.2: Post-Construction Stormwater Runoff Plan. All development that has the
potential to adversely affect water quality shall submit a post-construction polluted runoff control
plan (“Runoff Mitigation Plan”). This plan shall specify long-term Site Design, Source Control,
and, if necessary, Treatment Control BMPs that will be implemented to minimize stormwater
pollution and erosive runoff after construction, and shall include the monitoring and maintenance
plans for these BMPs.
Policy OS-10.3: Emphasize Site Design and Source Control BMPs. Long-term post-construction
Best Management Practices (BMPs) that protect water quality and control runoff flow shall be
incorporated in the project design of development that has the potential to adversely impact
water quality in the following order of emphasis:
         A) Site Design BMPs: Any project design feature that reduces the creation or severity of
             potential pollutant sources, or reduces the alteration of the project site’s natural flow
             regime. Examples include minimizing impervious surfaces, and minimizing grading.
         B) Source Control BMPs: Any schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
             maintenance procedures, managerial practices, or operational practices that aim to
             prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source
             of pollution. Examples include covering outdoor storage areas, use of efficient
             irrigation, and minimizing the use of landscaping chemicals.
         C) Treatment Control BMPs: Any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by
             simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media
             adsorption, or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. Examples include
             vegetated swales, and storm drain inserts.
             Site Design BMPs may reduce a development’s need for Source and/or Treatment
             Control BMPs, and Source Control BMPs may reduce the need for Treatment Control
             BMPs. Therefore, all development that has the potential to adversely affect water
             quality shall incorporate effective post-construction Site Design and Source Control
             BMPs, where applicable and feasible, to minimize adverse impacts to water quality
             and coastal waters resulting from the development. Site Design and Source Control
             BMPs may include, but are not limited to, those outlined in the City’s Storm Water
             Management program.
Policy OS-10.4: Incorporate Treatment Control BMPs if Necessary. If the combination of Site
Design and Source Control BMPs is not sufficient to protect water quality and coastal waters
consistent with Policy OS-9.3, as determined by the review authority, development shall also
incorporate post-construction Treatment Control BMPs. Projects of Special Water Quality
Concern (see Policy OS-12.1) are presumed to require Treatment Control BMPs to meet the
requirements of OS-9.3. Treatment Control BMPs may include, but are not limited to, those
outlined in the City’s Storm Water Management program, including biofilters (e.g., vegetated
swales or grass filter strips), bioretention, infiltration trenches or basins, retention ponds or
constructed wetlands, detention basins, filtration systems, storm drain inserts, wet vaults, or
hydrodynamic separator systems.
Policy OS-10.5: Guidance on BMP Selection and Design. Where BMPs, are required, BMPs
shall be selected that have been shown to be effective in reducing the pollutants typically
generated by the proposed land use. The strategy for selection of appropriate BMPS to protect
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 13                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

water quality and coastal waters shall be guided by Chapter 18.64.070, Tables 1-3, of the Land
Use & Development Code, or equivalent tables which list pollutants of concern for each type of
development or land use.
          The design of BMPs shall be guided by the California Stormwater Quality Association
          (CASQA) Stormwater BMP Handbooks dated January 2003 (or the current edition), or an
          equivalent BMP manual that describes the type, location, size, implementation, and
          maintenance of BMPs suitable to address the pollutants generated by the development.
          Caltrans' 2007 "Storm Water Quality Handbook: Project Planning and Design Guide” (or
          the current edition) may also be used to guide design of construction-phase BMPs.
Policy OS-10.6: Water Quality Checklist. A water quality checklist shall be developed and used
in the permit review process to evaluate a proposed development’s potential impacts to water
quality and coastal waters, and proposed mitigation measures.
Goal OS-11        Improve water quality through Site Design and Source Control BMPs
Development shall be sited and designed to protect water quality and minimize impacts to
coastal waters by incorporating BMPs designed to ensure the following:
Policy OS-11.1: Use Integrated Management Practices in Site Design. The city shall require,
where appropriate and feasible, the use of small-scale integrated management practices (e.g.,
Low Impact Development techniques) designed to maintain the site’s natural hydrology by
minimizing impervious surfaces and infiltrating stormwater close to its source (e.g., vegetated
swales, permeable pavements, and infiltration of rooftop runoff).
Policy OS-11.2: Preserve Functions of Natural Drainage Systems. Development shall be sited
and designed to preserve the infiltration, purification, detention, and retention functions of natural
drainage systems that exist on the site, where appropriate and feasible. Drainage shall be
conveyed from the developed area of the site in a non-erosive manner.
Policy OS-11.3: Minimize Impervious Surfaces. Development shall minimize the creation of
impervious surfaces (including pavement, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking areas, streets,
and roof-tops), especially directly connected impervious areas, where feasible. Redevelopment
shall reduce the impervious surface site coverage, where feasible. Directly connected
impervious areas include areas covered by a building, impermeable pavement, and/or other
impervious surfaces, which drain directly into the storm drain system without first flowing across
permeable land areas (e.g., lawns).
Policy OS-11.4: Infiltrate Stormwater Runoff. Development shall maximize on-site infiltration of
stormwater runoff, where appropriate and feasible, to preserve natural hydrologic conditions,
recharge groundwater, attenuate runoff flow, and minimize transport of pollutants. Alternative
management practices shall be substituted where the review authority has determined that
infiltration BMPs may result in adverse impacts, including but not limited to where saturated soils
may lead to geologic instability, where infiltration may contribute to flooding, or where regulations
to protect groundwater may be violated.
Policy OS-11.5: Divert Stormwater Runoff into Permeable Areas. Development that creates new
impervious surfaces shall divert stormwater runoff flowing from these surfaces into permeable
areas, where appropriate and feasible, to enhance on-site stormwater infiltration capacity.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 14                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-11.6: Use Permeable Pavement Materials. To enhance stormwater infiltration
capacity, development shall use permeable pavement materials and techniques (e.g., paving
blocks, porous asphalt, permeable concrete, and reinforced grass or gravel), where appropriate
and feasible. Permeable pavements shall be designed so that stormwater infiltrates into the
underlying soil, to enhance groundwater recharge and provide filtration of pollutants. All
permeable pavement that is not effective in infiltrating as designed will be replaced with effective
stormwater detention and infiltration methods.
Policy OS-11.7: Avoid Steep Slopes with Highly Erodible Soil. Where feasible, development
shall be sited and designed to avoid areas on steep slopes (i.e., 12% or greater) with highly
erodible soil. Developments on these hillside areas are considered Developments of Special
Water Quality Concern, and are subject to additional requirements (see Policies OS-12.1 and
OS-12.2).
Policy OS-11.8: Landscape with Native Plant Species. The City shall encourage development to
use drought-resistant native plant species for landscaping, to reduce the need for irrigation and
landscaping chemicals (e.g., pesticides and fertilizers).
Policy OS-11.9: Provide Storm Drain Inlet Markers. Markers or stenciling shall be required for all
storm drain inlets constructed or modified by development, to discourage dumping and other
illicit discharges into the storm drain system.
Policy OS-11.10: Continue Operation and Maintenance of Post-Construction BMPs. Permitees
shall be required to continue the operation, inspection, and maintenance of all post-construction
BMPs as necessary to ensure their effective operation for the life of the development.
Goal OS-12 Improve water quality through additional requirements for Developments of
Special Water Quality Concern
Policy OS-12.1: Developments of Special Water Quality Concern.                   The categories of
development listed below have the potential for greater adverse coastal water quality impacts,
due to the development size, type of land use, impervious site coverage, or proximity to coastal
waters. A development in one or more of the following categories shall be considered a
“Development of Special Water Quality Concern,” and shall be subject to additional requirements
set forth in Policy OS-12.2 below to protect coastal water quality. Developments of Special Water
Quality Concern include the following:
      a) Housing developments of ten or more dwelling units.
      b) Hillside developments on slopes greater than 12 percent, located in areas with highly
           erodible soil.
      c) Developments that result in the creation, addition, or replacement of 10,000 square feet
           or more of impervious surface area.
      d) Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area, potentially
           exposed to stormwater runoff.
      e) Heavy industrial developments.
      f) Vehicle service facilities (including retail gasoline outlets, service stations, commercial
           car washes, and vehicle repair facilities).
      g) Commercial or industrial outdoor storage areas of 5,000 square feet or more, or as
           determined by the review authority based on the use of the storage area, where used for
           storage of materials that may contribute pollutants to the storm drain system or
           waterbodies.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 15                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     h) All developments within 125 feet of the ocean or a coastal waterbody (including
          estuaries, wetlands, rivers, streams, and lakes), or that discharge directly to the ocean or
          a waterbody, if such development results in the creation, addition, or replacement of
          2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface area.
              a. “Discharge directly to” the ocean or a waterbody means outflow from a drainage
                   conveyance system that is composed entirely of flows from the subject
                   development or redevelopment site, and not commingled with flows from adjacent
                   lands.
     i) Any other development determined by the review authority to be a Development of
          Special Water Quality Concern.
Policy OS-12.2: Additional Requirements for Developments of Special Water Quality Concern.
All Developments of Special Water Quality Concern (as identified in Policy OS-12.1, above) shall
be subject to the following four additional requirements to protect coastal water quality:
      1) Water Quality Management Plan. The applicant for a Development of Special Water
           Quality Concern shall be required to submit for approval a Water Quality Management
           Plan (WQMP), prepared by a qualified licensed professional, which supplements the
           Runoff Mitigation Plan required for all development. The WQMP shall include hydrologic
           calculations per City standards that estimate increases in pollutant loads and runoff
           flows resulting from the proposed development, and specify the BMPs that will be
           implemented to minimize post-construction water quality impacts.
      2) Selection of Structural Treatment Control BMPs. As set forth in Policy OS-10.4, if the
           review authority determines that the combination of Site Design and Source Control
           BMPs is not sufficient to protect water quality and coastal waters as required by Policy
           OS-9.3, structural Treatment Control BMPs shall also be required. The WQMP for a
           Development of Special Water Quality Concern shall describe the selection of Treatment
           Controls BMPs, and applicants shall first consider the BMP, or combination of BMPs,
           that is most effective at removing the pollutant(s) of concern, or provide a justification if
           that BMP is determined to be infeasible.
      3) 85th Percentile Design Standard for Treatment Control BMPs. For post-construction
           treatment of runoff in Developments of Special Water Quality Concern, Treatment
           Control BMPs (or suites of BMPs) shall be sized and designed to treat, infiltrate, or filter
           the amount of stormwater runoff produced by all storms up to and including the 85th
           percentile, 24-hour storm event for volume-based BMPs, and/or the 85th percentile, 1-
           hour storm event (with an appropriate safety factor of 2 or greater) for flow-based BMPs.
       4) Goal for Runoff Reduction. In Developments of Special Water Quality Concern, the
           post-development peak stormwater runoff discharge rate shall not exceed the estimated
           pre-development rate for developments where an increased discharge rate will result in
           increased potential for downstream erosion or other adverse habitat impacts.
Goal OS-13         Improve water quality through Municipal Activities to Protect Water Quality
Policy OS-13.1: Municipal Activities to Protect and Restore Water Quality. The City shall promote
both the protection and restoration of water quality and coastal waters. Water quality
degradation can result from a variety of factors, including but not limited to the introduction of
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 16                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

pollutants, increases in runoff volume and rate, generation of non-stormwater runoff, and
alteration of physical, chemical, or biological features of the landscape.
         Program OS-13.1.1: Water Quality Public Education and Outreach. The City shall
         continue to encourage public outreach and education about the water quality impacts of
         development. The City shall continue to coordinate with other agencies in the watershed
         area, as feasible, to develop public education programs on urban runoff issues and the
         appropriate roles of individuals, businesses, and government in the implementation of
         BMPs for pollution prevention.
         Program OS-13.1.2: BMPS for Municipal Maintenance Activities. The City shall ensure
         that municipal maintenance activities and other public projects not requiring a Coastal
         Development Permit also integrate appropriate BMPs to protect water quality and coastal
         waters.
Goal OS-14        Improve water quality through Construction-Phase Pollution Control
Policy OS-14.1: Minimize Polluted Runoff and Pollution from Construction. All development shall
minimize erosion, sedimentation, and the discharge of other polluted runoff (e.g., chemicals,
vehicle fluids, concrete truck wash-out, and litter) from construction activities, to the extent
feasible.
Policy OS-14.2: Minimize Land Disturbance During Construction. Land disturbance activities
during construction (e.g., clearing, grading, and cut-and-fill) shall be minimized, to the extent
feasible, to avoid increased erosion and sedimentation. Soil compaction due to construction
activities shall be minimized, to the extent feasible, to retain the natural stormwater infiltration
capacity of the soil.
Policy OS-14.3: Minimize Disturbance of Natural Vegetation. Construction shall minimize the
disturbance of natural vegetation (including significant trees, native vegetation, and root
structures), which are important for preventing erosion and sedimentation.
Policy OS-14.4: Stabilize Soil Promptly. Development shall implement soil stabilization BMPs
(including, but not limited to, re-vegetation) on graded or disturbed areas as soon as feasible.
Policy OS-14.5: Grading During Rainy Season. Grading is prohibited during the rainy season
(from November 1 to March 30), except in response to emergencies, unless the review authority
determines that soil conditions at the project site are suitable, and adequate erosion and
sedimentation control measures will be in place during all grading operations.
D.       Open Space
There are three categories of open space in the Fort Bragg Planning Area: 1) publicly-owned
land, such as Ocean Front Park, Pomo Bluffs Park, and MacKerricher State Park, 2) dedicated
land, which is privately-owned and maintained and has a recorded open space or conservation
easement, and 3) land which has a trail easement permitting public use.
Goal OS-15         Conserve and enhance a variety of open space features including creeks,
                   wildlife habitats, scenic view corridors, and other amenities.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 17                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-15.1: Open Space: Plan for and condition new development to implement the City’s
priorities for open space. Refer to the Community Design Element for specific policies and
programs dealing with scenic view corridors.
         Program OS-15.1.1: Use conservation easements wherever possible to protect
         environmentally sensitive open space areas.
         Program OS-15.1.2: Continue to work with local and regional agencies and interest
         groups, in conjunction with the Mendocino Coast Recreation and Park District Master
         Plan, to develop an open space preservation strategy.
         Program OS-15.1.3: Develop additional standards in the Coastal LUDC for further public
         access to open space areas.
Policy OS-15.2 Protect and Restore Open Space: During the development review process,
protect and restore open space areas such as wildlife habitats, view corridors, coastal areas,
and watercourses as open and natural.
         Program OS-15.2.1: Require that projects on parcels 5 acres or larger, requesting a
         rezoning to a higher density, include dedications for open space or parkland as needed.
         Program OS-15.2.2: Maintain an inventory of vacant parcels that could potentially be
         purchased and developed as public open space.
Policy OS-15.3 Trails in Open Space: Wherever feasible, plan and construct trails through the
greenbelts and open space that connect to the City’s trail system and that of Mendocino Coast
Recreation Park District (MCRPD) as defined in its Master Plan.
E.       Public Access and Recreation
Public access to the shoreline is guaranteed by the California Constitution and is further defined
by standards established by the Coastal Act to recognize the shoreline as a public resource
which is available for viewing, recreation, and scientific research at the water's edge and along
tidal rivers.
As development in the Fort Bragg area and elsewhere increases, there will be an increased need
for public access. Access to the coastline is dependent on the right of the public to cross public
and private land. Access across private land generally is obtained through purchase of an
easement, or obtained as a condition of development approval.
Goal OS-16        Maximize public access to and along the coast consistent with sound
                  resources and conservation principles and constitutionally protected rights
                  of private property owners.
Policy OS-16.1 Coastal Access: Maximum access and recreational opportunities shall be
provided consistent with public safety needs and the need to protect public rights, rights of
private property owners, and natural resource areas from overuse. Provide public open space
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element 4 - 18                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

and shoreline access in the Coastal Zone. Acquisitions for coastal access shall not preclude the
potential development of necessary infrastructure to support coastal-dependent uses.
         Program OS-16.1.1: Provide shoreline access in the Coastal Zone along the vertical and
         lateral access routes as described in Table OS-2 and Map OS-3.
         Program OS-16.1.2: Acquire additional public access to the shoreline by:
         a)       accepting Offers To Dedicate (OTDs) that will increase opportunities for public
                  access and recreation;
         b)       actively seeking public agency, community non-profit, or other private offers of
                  dedication and offers to assume the liability and maintenance responsibilities;
                  and
         c)       requiring public access as a condition of development consistent with the Coastal
                  Act, the Coastal Commission's Statewide Interpretive Guidelines, and the findings
                  required to support an Offer to Dedicate (OTD); and
         d)       creating a partnership with the State Coastal Conservancy and other funding
                  agencies to purchase and develop public access to and along the coast, with the
                  City assuming responsibility for management and maintenance of the public open
                  space.
         Program OS-16.1.3: Work with the California Coastal Conservancy to assure that the
         proposed access improvements and public facilities identified in the Noyo Harbor Plan
         are provided on the banks of the Noyo River.
         Program OS-16.1.4: Work with the appropriate State agencies to preserve and improve
         the existing coastal access north of Airport Road (i.e., Access "Q" on Map OS-3).
         Parking or recreational facilities shall not be required on the west side of Highway One in
         this area due to the fragile nature of the coastal terrace prairie habitat.
         Program OS-16.1.5: Acquisitions of coastal land and easements for public access
         purposes shall not preclude the potential development of necessary infrastructure to
         support coastal-dependent uses.
Policy OS-16.2 Right of Public Access: Development in the Coastal Zone shall not interfere with
the public's right of access to the sea where acquired through use or legislative authorization,
including, but not limited to, the use of dry sand and rocky coastal beaches to the first line of
terrestrial vegetation. Public prescriptive rights must be protected wherever they exist.
Policy OS-16.3: Unless a landowner chooses to adjudicate any existing prescriptive rights issue,
where there is substantial evidence that prescriptive rights of access to the beach exist on a
parcel, development on that parcel must be designed, or conditions must be imposed, to avoid
interference with the prescriptive rights that may exist or to provide alternative, equivalent
access.
Policy OS-16.4 New Development: Require public access from the nearest public roadway to
the shoreline and along the coast in new development except where:
         a)       it is inconsistent with public safety, military security needs, or the protection of
                  fragile coastal resources;
         b)       adequate access exists within 500 feet of the site; or
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 19                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         c)       access at the site would be inconsistent with other LCP policies, including but not
                  limited to, expanded or new coastal-dependent industry or the protection of
                  environmentally sensitive resources.
TABLE OS-1: COASTAL ZONE PUBLIC ACCESS
 Map                                                        Description of Proposed Access
  Key           Access Point/Area                                 and Related Programs
   A      Pudding Creek sand bar –           Existing access from Highway One to the sand bar located at
          Vertical Access                    the northern bank of Pudding Creek where it joins the ocean.
   B      Old Haul Road                      Existing lateral access from the Pudding Creek Trestle to
                                             northern City Limits.
   C      Bluff Access on the South Bluff    Lateral access shall be provided on the south bluff of the
          of the Mouth of Pudding Creek      mouth of Pudding Creek. Bluff top access as indicated in
                                             Map OS-3 shall be required as a condition of permit approval
                                             from Glass Beach Drive westerly to the point above the mouth
                                             of the river, and then southwesterly to Glass Beach. Other
                                             General Plan policies regarding protection of environmentally
                                             sensitive areas shall apply to the development of bluff access
                                             in this area.
   D      Glass Beach - Vertical Access      Vertical access from west end of Elm Street to Glass Beach
                                             shall be required as a condition of permit approval. Funding
                                             shall be sought by a public agency or private association for
                                             additional parking at the end of Elm Street and for directional
                                             signs at the site and on Main Street. Directional signs that
                                             may tend to increase utilization at the site shall be provided
                                             only after additional parking is provided.
   E      Glass Beach                        Beach and bluff lateral access to the area shall be required as
                                             a condition of permit approval on this site.
   F      Glass Beach South                  Public access south of Glass Beach shall be permitted in a
                                             manner that does not adversely impact environmentally
                                             sensitive areas.
   G      South Side of Noyo Bridge –        Vertical access shall be required as mapped as a condition of
          Vertical Access                    permit approval. Minor signing and path improvements shall
                                             be accomplished by a public agency or private association.
   H      South Side of Noyo Bridge -        Lateral access along the south bank of the Noyo River within
          Lateral Access                     the City Limits shall be acquired. This access shall be
                                             connected to the trail system leading from the southern bluff
                                             of the Noyo Headlands to South Harbor Drive as indicated in
                                             Map OS-3.
    I     North Harbor Drive – Vertical      A vertical access from the bottom of North Harbor Drive to the
          Access                             proposed lateral access along the north bank of the Noyo
                                             River shall be required as a condition of permit approval.
Note:    The Map Key refers to the letter code indicating the general location of the public access on Map
         OS-3: Coastal Land Use and Environment.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element       4 - 20                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Map                                                        Description of Proposed Access
  Key           Access Point/Area                                 and Related Programs
   J      North Bank of the Noyo –           Require public access along the entire length of the City's
          Lateral Access                     frontage on the north bank of the Noyo River as a condition of
                                             permit approval, except where physical conditions make
                                             access infeasible due to topography and/or safety
                                             considerations.
   K      South Street – Vertical Access     Require a vertical access from the end of South Street to the
                                             north bank of the Noyo River as a condition of permit
                                             approval. This access may be in conjunction with any street
                                             required for access to development. Public parking may be
                                             provided by a public agency or private association.
   L      Pomo Bluffs Overlook               Develop signage and trails to accommodate public use of the
                                             Noyo Bluffs Overlook park for passive recreation.
   M      North Shore of Noyo Bay            Rights for access and recreation shall be required as a
                                             condition of approval or through acquisition by a public or
                                             private organization for the north shore of the Noyo Bay, west
                                             of the Bridge, labeled “Open Space” as indicated on Map OS-
                                             3.
   N      Cypress Street - Vertical          Require a vertical access from the end of Cypress Street to
          Access                             the north bank of the Noyo River as a condition of permit
                                             approval. This access may be in conjunction with any street
                                             required for access to development. If the area is developed,
                                             then public parking may be provided by a public agency or
                                             private association.
   O      Highway One and                    A vertical access between Highway One and MacKerricher
          MacKerricher State Park –          State Park.
          Vertical Access
   P      Todd Point                         Recognize that prescriptive rights may exist on the portion of
                                             Todd Point labeled “PD” on Map OS-3. Require public
                                             access as a condition of permit approval in this area. Soil
                                             and vegetation restoration work shall be part of any
                                             acquisition and a paved parking area shall be developed.
   Q      Airport Road/Highway One           Acquire and improve the current unimproved dirt trail to the
                                             coast.     Major parking facilities and restrooms are not
                                             recommended due to the fragile nature of the coastal bluffs.
   R      Central Business District to       Proposed vertical access to start at Pine Street, along railroad
          Glass Beach Parking area           right-of-way to Glass Beach
   S      Pine Street to Bluff edge          Proposed vertical access from Pine Street to Glass Beach
Note:    The Map Key refers to the letter code indicating the general location of the public access on Map
         OS-3: Coastal Land Use and Environment.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element       4 - 21                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Policy OS-16.6: Easement Requirements. In order to avoid or offset a project’s significant
 adverse impacts on public access, and consistent with the provisions of Section 18.56.070, the
 City shall require a 25-foot-wide easement along all trails designated on Map OS-3 “Coastal
 Zone, Coastal Access, and City Trail System,” as a condition of approval to mitigate impacts of
 development that requires a coastal development permit where such impacts cannot be avoided.
 For any project where such mitigation is required, the preferred implementation should be
 through a recorded grant of easement to the City or to a designated private nonprofit association
 acceptable to the City who is willing to accept the easement and willing to operate and maintain
 the public accessway or trail. Where grants of easement are not feasible because neither the
 City nor private nonprofit association is willing to accept, maintain and operate the accessway,
 implementation of required access mitigation shall be implemented through a recorded Offer to
 Dedicate (OTD) an easement to a public agency or a designated private nonprofit association
 acceptable to the City. Offers of dedication shall last for a period of 21 years from the date of
 recordation of the offer.
 Policy OS-16.7: Mitigation measures required for impacts to public access and recreational
 opportunities shall be implemented prior to or concurrent with construction of the approved
 development. Mitigation shall not substitute for implementation of a feasible project alternative
 that would avoid impacts to public access.
 Policy OS-16.8: Public Access as a Permitted Use. Public accessways and trails to the
 shoreline and public parklands shall be a permitted use in all land use and zoning designations.
 Where there is an existing, but unaccepted and/or unopened public access Offer to Dedicate
 (OTD), easement, or deed restriction for lateral, vertical or trail access or related support
 facilities (e.g. parking), construction of necessary access improvements shall be permitted to be
 constructed, opened and operated for its intended public use.
 Policy OS-16.9: Review new development to prevent siting of structures that encroach on
 coastal access routes where prescriptive easements may exist so as to provide the opportunity
 to acquire the access through a conservation easement, adjudication, or other means, as
 appropriate.
 Policy OS-16.10: Require, as a condition of development for projects which create significant
 adverse impacts on public access and where discretionary approval by the City is required,
 lateral access along the bluffs of the Georgia-Pacific property and adjacent properties, north of
 the Noyo Harbor area to Pudding Creek as indicated in Map OS-3.
          Program OS-16.10.1: Consider the establishment of an ocean front park connecting to
          bicycle trails and rest areas from Hare Creek to MacKerricher State Park.
Policy OS-16.11 Use of Public Accesses: Dedicated accesses shall not be required to be
opened for public use until a public agency or private association agrees to accept responsibility
for maintenance and liability of the access.
 Policy OS-16.12: Open the Easement. For all grants of easement to the City, the City shall open
 the easement to the public as soon as is feasible, and shall be responsible for operating and
 maintaining the accessway, or the City shall grant the easement to a private nonprofit
 association that is willing to accept, maintain and operate the accessway.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 22                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Policy OS-16.12: Easements to Non Profits. For all grants of easement from the City to a private
 non-profit association, the Executive Director of the Commission must review and approve a
 management plan submitted by the private non-profit association that indicates that the
 association will open, operate, and maintain the easement in accordance with terms of the
 recorded grant of easement, and that the association will open the easement to the public as
 soon as is feasible.
         Program OS-16.12.1: Work with the Coastal Conservancy and other organizations to
         accept liability for and maintain public accesses.
         Program OS-16.12.2: Facilitate the acceptance of Offers to Dedicate (OTDs) as a means
         of obtaining additional public access.
 Policy OS-16.13: Offers to Dedicate. Any government agency may accept an offer to dedicate
 an easement if the agency is willing to operate and maintain the easement. For all offers to
 dedicate an easement that are required as conditions of Coastal Development Permits approved
 by the City, the Executive Director of the Commission must approve any private non-profit
 association that seeks to accept the offer. In order for the Executive Director of the Commission
 to approve any private association, the non-profit association must submit a management plan
 that indicates that the association will open, operate, and maintain the easement in accordance
 with terms of the recorded offer to dedicate the easement.
 Policy OS-16.14: Acquire OTDs for access easements for all areas designated on Map OS-3 in
 conjunction with new development which will adversely impact public access, unless other sites
 exist within 500 feet which provide sufficient access, parking, and other related facilities.
 Policy OS-16.15: In coordination with the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission, the
 City shall establish a procedure for acceptance of OTDs and management of public accesses
 prior to their expiration.
Policy OS-16.16           Priority to Beach Rather than Bluff Access North of Glass Beach: Where
public access to both beach and blufftop areas is feasible, give a higher priority to public use of
the beaches rather than to the bluffs in the design and development of accesses and the
location and placement of directional signs. This policy applies to bluffs north of Glass Beach to
the mouth of Pudding Creek and then easterly to the Pudding Creek Trestle.
Policy OS-16.17           Coastal Trails: Develop a continuous trail system throughout the City
which connects to the California Coastal Trail system.
         Program OS-16.17.1: Ensure that City trails connect with the California Coastal Trails
         system, as shown on Map OS-3. Acquire rights-of-way through Offers to Dedicate;
         easements; land transfers; and land acquisition, as appropriate.
         Program OS-16.17.2.         California Coastal Trail (CCT)
         1.     The City shall strive to complete the links in the California Coastal Trail (CCT) by
                participating and consulting with the National Park Service, the State Department of
                Parks & Recreation, the State Coastal Conservancy, Mendocino County, and other
                appropriate public and private entities and interested parties in designing, locating,
                funding, acquiring, and implementing the Fort Bragg California Coastal Trail (CCT)
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 23                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

               segment, including opening trails for vertical access designated on Map OS-3,
               “Coastal Zone, Coastal Access, and City Trail System.”
                  a) The CCT shall be identified and defined as a continuous trail system
                     traversing the length of the state’s coastline and designed and sited as a
                     continuous lateral trail traversing the length of the City’s Coastal Zone and
                     connecting with contiguous trail links in adjacent Coastal jurisdictions
                     (Mendocino County).
                  b) The CCT shall be designed and implemented to achieve the following
                     objectives:
                     · Provide a continuous walking and hiking trail as close to the ocean as
                          possible;
                     · Provide maximum access for a variety of non-motorized uses by utilizing
                          alternative trail segments where feasible;
                     · Maximize connections to existing and proposed local trail systems;
                     · Ensure that all segments of the trail have vertical access connections at
                          reasonable intervals;
                     · Maximize ocean views and scenic coastal vistas;
                     · Provide an educational experience where feasible through interpretive
                          facilities.
                  c) Ensure that shoreline and blufftop trail segments that may not be passable at
                     all times provide inland alternative routes.
         2. CCT Siting and Design Standards:
                  a) The trail should be sited and designed to be located along or as close to the
                     shoreline where physically and aesthetically feasible. Where it is not feasible
                     to locate the trail along the shoreline due to natural landforms or legally
                     authorized development that prevents passage at all times, inland bypass trail
                     segments located as close to the shoreline as possible should be utilized.
                     Shoreline and blufftop trail segments that may not be passable at all times
                     shall provide inland alternative routes.
                  b) Where gaps are identified in the trail, interim segments should be identified to
                     ensure a continuous coastal trail. Interim segments should be noted as such,
                     with provisions that as opportunities arise, the trail shall be realigned for ideal
                     siting. Interim trail segments should meet as many of the CCT objectives and
                     standards as possible.
                  c) The CCT should be designed and located to minimize impacts to
                     environmentally sensitive habitat areas to the maximum extent feasible.
                     Where appropriate, trail access should be limited to pass and repass. Where
                     necessary to prevent disturbance of nesting birds, sections of the trail may be
                     closed on a seasonal basis. Alternative trail segments shall be provided where
                     feasible.
                  d) The CCT should be located to incorporate existing oceanfront trails and paths
                     and support facilities of public shoreline parks and beaches to the maximum
                     extent feasible.
                  e) To provide a continuously identifiable trail along the base and shoreline of
                     Mendocino County, the trail should be integrated with the CCT in Mendocino
                     County which borders the City.
                  f) The CCT should be designed to avoid being located on roads with motorized
                     vehicle traffic where feasible. In locations where it is not possible to avoid
                     siting the trail along a roadway, the trail should be located off of the pavement
                     and within the public right-of-way, and separated from traffic by a safe
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 24                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                            Proposed Vertical Access
                           B      Haul Road
                                                                                                                                                                                            at Surfer Trail                                              Q
                                                                                      Y1
                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                 AIRPORT                             ROAD
                                                                                                            Haul Road
                                                                                                            Access                                                   O
                           Trestle
  N                            Parking
                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                       Glass Beach
                                                                                                                                                                                       Drive
               Glass
                                                               Pudding
                Beach                                                                                                                                                                       Pudding Creek
                           E                                                                                                                                                                Beach Access                                     A
                                                                                                                      Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                 k
                                      D
                                                                ELM ST.
                                                                SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                        PUDDING                    CREEK            RD.
          CBD to Glass
R         Beach Parkway                                                                                                          BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                 FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                 PINE STREET
                                                                                                                      STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LN.
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                   McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                  LAUREL STREET
                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DENNISON LANE
                                                                            STREET
Oce
                                                                                                                             REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                     FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                 ALDER STREET
    an
                                                                            MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K TERR                                                           SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CT.
                                                                                                                                 MADRONE                              ST.
                                                                                                                                                                       HAROLD STREET
                                      F                                                                                                                                                                       WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                           MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                      WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                    CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                 HAZEL ST.
                                                                                      STREET
                                                                                                 CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                      FRANKLIN
                                                                                                  WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                         MAIN ST.
Pacific
                                North Shore Access
                                         M                                                                                                                                                                                                             Vertical Access
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       at Cypress Street                                  N
                 Ocean Front Park
                 North Harbor Drive                                                                                                                                                                                                        Noyo River Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               J
                                                                                     L                                                                          RI
                                                                                                                                                                     VE
                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Map OS-3
                            H                                                                                                           O                                                                                    COASTAL ZONE, COASTAL ACCESS,
                                                                                                                                     OY
                                                            HWY 1                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AND CITY TRAIL SYSTEM
                                                                                                                                  I                                                             Vertical Access
                                                                                                                                                                                                at South Street                                 K                              City Boundary
                               OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
    Noyo Bluff
    Overlook                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                Vertical Access                                        COASTAL ACCESS AND OTHER TRAIL S
                                                            HWY.
                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                from South End
                                                                                                                                                                                                of Noyo Bridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               G             Existing coastal trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Proposed trails
                                                                                                                                                                                       HW
                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                         Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                            2   0                                                          X                   Key to Table LC-1
                                                    HWY 1
                                                                SIMPSON LANE
  Source: City of Fort Bragg
           July, 2008
 Scale 1Ó = 2300Õ(approximate)
  For Schematic purposes only

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                       WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                             LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                       WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Map OS-4
                                                        HWY 1                                                                                                                    EXISTING AND PROPOSED
                                                                                                                                                                            PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Existing School Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Existing Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Parks Under Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Proposed Parks
                                                HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                             Map OS-4 identifies the general area where new parks
                                                                                                                                                                                             should be located. The actual park site acquired and
                                                            SIMPSON LANE                                                                                                                     developed would be in the approximate vicinity of the
 Source: City of Fort Bragg                                                                                                                                                                  areas identified on Map OS-4.
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
                     distance. In locations where the trail must cross a roadway, appropriate
                     directional and traffic warning signing should be provided.
         3. CCT Acquisition and Management:
                  a) Trail easements should be obtained by encouraging private donation of land,
                     by public purchase, or by dedication of trail easements. Trail easement
                     dedications shall be required as a condition of approval of a Coastal
                     Development Permit for development on property located on the CCT route or
                     on designated vertical accessways to the route, when the dedication will
                     mitigate adverse impacts on public access and/or recreation by the project.
                  b) The CCT plan should identify the appropriate management agency(s) to take
                     responsibility for trail maintenance.
         4. CCT Signage Program Standards:
                  a) The trail should provide adequate signage at all access points, trailheads,
                     parking lots, road crossings, and linkages or intersections with other trails or
                     roads which incorporate the CCT logo (to be designed).
                  b) The trail should provide adequate safety signage, including but not limited to,
                     road crossing signs and yield/warning signs on multi-use trail segments.
                     Where appropriate signs should be developed in coordination with Caltrans
                     and/or City and County Public Works Departments and any other applicable
                     public agencies.
                  c) Signs shall be posted in Spanish and in English.
         5. CCT Support Facilities:
                  a) To maximize access to the CCT, adequate parking and trailhead facilities
                     should be provided.
         6. CCT Mapping:
                  a) The final CCT map shall identify all planned or secured segments, including
                     existing segments, all access linkages and planned staging areas, public and
                     private lands, existing easements, deed restricted sections and sections
                     subject to an Offer-to-Dedicate (OTD). The map shall be updated on a regular
                     basis.
                  b) The CCT shall be identified on all applicable City Trail Maps contained in the
                     LCP Access Component.
         7. Inclusion of CCT in LCP:
                  a) The LCP shall be amended to incorporate all plans and designs for locating
                     and implementing the CCT within the City including the final mapped
                     alignment.
Policy OS-16.18 General Standards: Require that all public access easements offered for
dedication to public use be a minimum of 25 feet wide. The area where public access is allowed
within the easement may be reduced to the minimum necessary to avoid:
         a)       adverse impacts on sensitive environmental areas;
         b)       encroachment closer than 20 feet from an existing residence; and/or
         c)       hazardous topographic conditions.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 25                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-16.19 Standards for Lateral Shoreline Access Easements: Lateral shoreline access
easements shall extend landward 25 feet from mean high tide to the toe of the bluff or the first
line of terrestrial vegetation if the width of the beach is greater than 25 feet. Lateral blufftop
easements shall be at least 25 feet in width. The area where public access is allowed within the
easement may be reduced consistent with Policy OS-16.18 above. The average annual bluff
retreat (erosion) shall be taken into account when planning lateral accesses. Shoreline and
blufftop trail segments that may not be passable at all times shall provide inland alternative
routes.
Policy OS-16.20 Visitor Accommodations and Services: In order to avoid or offset a project’s
significant adverse impacts on public access and consistent with the provisions of Section
18.56.070, require public access to the blufftop and/or shoreline for visitor serving uses, as a
condition of permit approval, or by other methods such as OTDs, specified by the City. Access
shall be available to the public at large as well as to guests.
Policy OS-16.21 Safety and Environmental Protection: Permanent closure of any existing
public accessway shall require an amendment to the Local Coastal Program.
 Policy OS-16.22: Unless immediate action by a person or a public agency performing a public
 service is required to protect life and property from imminent danger, the City shall not close,
 abandon, or render unusable by the public any existing accessway which the City owns,
 operates, maintains, or is otherwise responsible for, without first obtaining a Coastal
 Development Permit. Any accessway which the City or any other managing agency or
 organization determines cannot be maintained or operated in a condition suitable for public use
 shall be offered to another public agency or qualified private association that agrees to open and
 maintain the accessway for public use.
         Program OS-16.22.1: Request the California Department of Fish and Game monitor
         public accesses adjoining or near sensitive environmental resources such as wetlands,
         dunes, tide pools, and other sensitive wildlife habitats to determine whether they are
         being adversely impacted or degraded. Request that regulations governing use of
         accesses be implemented and posted as needed. Limit public use, as needed, to allow
         resource recovery and restoration.
F.       Parks and Recreation
Goal OS-17        Provide an attractive system of parks and recreation facilities throughout
                  the City to meet the needs of all age groups and capabilities.
Policy OS-17.1 Parkland Standard: Use the standard of three acres of parkland per 1,000
residents for the acquisition of additional parkland pursuant to the provisions of the Quimby Act
(Government Code Section 66477).
         Program OS-17.1.1: Establish a parkland dedication ordinance that provides standards
         and a process for dedication of parkland and/or payment of in-lieu fees.
         Program OS-17.1.2: Establish a Park and Open Space Trust Fund as required by the
         Quimby Act and Government Code Sections 66000-66011.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element   4 - 26                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy OS-17.2 Neighborhood Parks: Acquire and develop new neighborhood parks, in concert
with other local recreation agencies, to meet the needs of the existing population and consistent
with growth of the City's population.
         Program OS-17.2.1: Acquire and develop additional neighborhood parks as shown on
         Map OS-4.
Policy OS-17.3 Recreational Facilities: Provide recreational facilities to meet the needs of all
Fort Bragg citizens, especially children and teenagers.
         Program OS-17.3.1: Consider teen recreation needs when planning new or redesigned
         parks.
         Program OS-17.3.2: Consider building a skateboard facility in an existing or newly
         developed park as deemed feasible.
         Program OS-17.3.3: Work with other agencies to develop an inventory of recreational
         facilities and programs available to young people. Seek to implement joint programs and
         identify additional facilities that are necessary to meet the recreational needs of youth.
      Policy OS-17.4 Playground Facilities: Add or upgrade playground facilities at existing
neighborhood parks.
         Program OS-17.4.2: Provide additional playground facilities and basketball courts at
         appropriate locations within neighborhoods.
      Policy OS-17.5 Ballfields: Develop additional baseball, softball, and other ballfields.
         Program OS-17.5.1: Work with the School District and other agencies to develop
         additional sports field facilities.
Policy OS-17.6 Prioritize Park Acquisitions: Use the following criteria to prioritize acquisition of
parkland and open space:
         a)       distribution of neighborhood parks/playground facilities and ballfields on a
                  neighborhood basis;
         b)       scenic beauty;
         c)       relationship to the existing and proposed trail systems and parks; and
         d)       natural resource protection.
         e)       appropriateness (physical characteristics) of the site to meet specific recreational
                  needs.
         Program OS-17.6.1: Consider the acquisition of strategically located vacant lots for the
         development of neighborhood parks using the criteria listed in Policy OS-17.6.
         Program OS-17.6.2: Adopt a management plan that analyzes geoseismic and other
         related potential hazards before City acceptance of dedications of land for park or open
         space. Identified hazards shall be fully repaired and/or financial protection provided to
         the City for liability before acceptance of land. The management plan shall also specify
         funding for ongoing maintenance.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 27                               July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy OS-17.7 Financing Parks: Consider methods of increasing revenues for the
acquisition and development of parkland and open space areas and supporting recreational
facilities.
         Program OS-17.7.1: Consider the following potential funding sources for the acquisition
         of park and trails and development of recreation facilities:
                  a)     Establish a Park Improvement Fee pursuant to Government Code Section
                         66000;
                  b)     Place an advisory measure on the ballot for a tax proposal or assessment;
                         and/or
                  c)     Pursue available grants.
         Program OS-17.7.2: Include in the Capital Improvement Program the schedule and costs
         of expanding and improving the City’s parks and recreation facilities as deemed
         appropriate by the City Council.
Goal OS-18         Develop park and recreation facilities with the coordination of other
                   agencies and the public.
Policy OS-18.1 Coordinate with Other Agencies: Coordinate with other governmental entities to
procure and develop additional park and recreational facilities.
         Program OS-18.1.1: Consider establishing joint powers agreements with the Mendocino
         Coast Recreation and Parks District (MCRPD), Fort Bragg Unified School District
         (FBUSD), and Mendocino County to coordinate planning and development of recreation
         facilities.
         Program OS-18.1.2: Continue to coordinate with State Department of Parks and
         Recreation regarding development adjacent to MacKerricher State Park.
         Program OS-18.1.3: In reviewing development applications adjacent to MacKerricher
         State Park, the City shall confer with the State Department of Parks and Recreation to
         determine if additional mitigation measures regarding access to the park, or protection of
         park resources, are warranted. If feasible, these additional measures will be required.
         Program OS-18.1.4: Support public acquisition of land along the eastern boundary of
         MacKerricher State Park as indicated in Map OS-3: Coastal Zone, Coastal Access, and
         City Trail System which would be donated to the State Parks.
        Policy OS-18.2 City/School/Recreation District Cooperation: Continue to encourage
City/School/Recreation District cooperation in developing and maintaining park and recreation
facilities.
         Program OS-18.2.1: Develop joint use agreements with the School District.
         Program OS-18.2.2: Continue to cooperate with the FBUSD, MCRPD, and Timberwolf
         Stadium to develop playfield improvements and maintenance programs.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element  4 - 28                              July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy OS-18.3 Public Participation: Actively solicit public participation in the selection,
design, and facilities planning for existing and future park sites.
         Program OS-18.3.1: Utilize local volunteer efforts and fund-raising to cover the "match"
         costs needed to secure rehabilitation or purchase grants for public parks.
Goal OS-19        Provide a comprehensive trail system in Fort Bragg.
Policy OS-19.1 Multiple Use Trail System: Develop a multiple use trail system.
         Program OS-19.1.1: Identify potential additions to the trail system which increase access
         to rivers and the coastline with cross linkages through to the eastern parts of Fort Bragg.
         Work with the MCRPD to seek funding and to acquire rights-of-way.
         Program OS-19.1.2: Establish an integrated trail system serving both inland hiking and
         trail needs as well as the coastal trail programs as shown on Map OS-3 utilizing existing
         rights-of-way, City streets, and river front property.
Policy OS-19.2: Review development applications and require a trail easement dedication for
locations where trails are shown on Map OS-3 where an appropriate nexus is established
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 18.56 (Public Access) of the Coastal Land Use &
Development Code.
Policy OS-19.3: Require new development to provide direct pedestrian connections, such as
sidewalks, trails, and other rights-of-way to the existing and planned network of parks and trails
wherever feasible.
         Program OS-19.3.1: Consider the access needs of a variety of users, including school-
         age children, the elderly, and those with handicaps or disabilities when developing trails
         and recreation facilities.
         Program OS-19.3.2: Support efforts to extend the existing trail from the end of Cypress
         Street east adjacent to the Georgia-Pacific haul road.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element    4 - 29                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

4 – Conservation, Open Space, Energy, & Parks Element 4 - 30 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

5.       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
Government Code Section 65302[b] requires that every General Plan include a Circulation
Element which consists of "the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all
correlated with the Land Use Element of the Plan."
The Circulation Element discusses transportation issues for the Fort Bragg Planning Area; it
briefly describes the existing circulation system and travel characteristics and projects future
traffic based on the land uses and growth projections described in the Land Use Element.
Policies and programs contained in this element provide a guide for decisions regarding
transportation system improvements to accommodate Fort Bragg's anticipated growth. Detailed
description and analysis of Fort Bragg’s transportation system are contained in the Draft EIR.
The main objectives of the Circulation Element are to:
     • Ensure that Fort Bragg’s circulation network is sufficient to accommodate anticipated
         development;
     • Minimize the intrusion of through-traffic onto local streets;
     • Encourage public transportation, bicycle, and pedestrian movement, and other
         alternatives to the single-occupant vehicle; and
     • Provide improvements to the transportation system which complement and support the
         other goals of this Coastal General Plan.
B.       Existing Conditions
1.       Roadway Classifications
The street system in Fort Bragg is laid out in a grid pattern with Main Street (Highway One)
functioning as the primary north-south roadway. Franklin Street is located one block east of
Main Street and provides access along the main commercial corridor. A number of streets,
including Cypress Street, Chestnut Street, Oak Street, Redwood Avenue, Pine Street, and Elm
Street provide east-west connections. Streets in Fort Bragg are classified according to their
function as defined and shown in Table C-1 and Map C-1: Existing Roadway System.
5 – Circulation Element                        5-1                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                   The Roadway Classification System
Highway:               A high-speed, limited access roadway serving primarily regional and county-wide
                      travel. California State Department of Transportation (Caltrans) controls the design,
                      operation, and maintenance of highways. Fort Bragg does not have any limited
                      access roadways.
Arterial:              A medium-speed, medium capacity roadway that provides travel and access within
                      the City and access to highways. Main Street (Highway One) and Highway 20 are
                      considered arterial roadways.
Major Collector:      A relatively low-speed, street that provides access within and between
                      neighborhoods. Major Collectors usually serve short trips and are intended for
                      collecting trips from local streets and distributing them to Arterial streets.
Minor Collector:      A relatively low-speed street that provides a connection between Arterials and Major
                      Collectors and direct access to parcels. They handle a lower volume of traffic than
                      Major Collectors.
Local Street:          A low-speed, low-volume street that provides access to adjacent land. Local streets
                      are designed for trips within neighborhoods and to Collector and Arterial streets, and
                      not to serve through-traffic.
                                              Table C-1
                              Fort Bragg Roadway Classification
           Roadway Classification                             Location
           Arterials
           Main Street                                        Full Length
           Highway 20                                         Full Length
           Major Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Main Street to Franklin Street
           Franklin Street                                    Full Length
           Redwood Avenue                                     Main Street to Harold Street
           Oak Street                                         Alley West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Minor Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Franklin Street to Dana Street
           Maple Street                                       Main Street to Lincoln Street
           Alder Street                                       Main Street to Harold Street
           Laurel Street                                      Block West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Pine Street                                        Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Fir Street                                         Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Elm Street                                         Glass Beach Drive to Franklin Street
           McPherson Street                                   Chestnut Street to Bush Street
           Harrison Street                                    Walnut Street to Bush Street
           Harold Street                                      Maple Street to Fir Street
           Lincoln Street                                     Chestnut Street to Willow Street
           Sanderson Way                                      Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Dana Street                                        Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Cypress Street                                     Full Length
           South Harbor Drive                                 Full Length
           South Street                                       Main Street to River Drive
           Local Streets
           All remaining streets will be considered local streets.
5 – Circulation Element                              5-2                                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PACIFIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OCEA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                   Neptune               Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ocean
                                                                                                                                                               Pacific                                   Drive
                                                          S
                                                               r
                                                            ho                                               Bayview Avenue                                                                 View
                                                                e lin
                                                                        n.                                                                                                                          Monterey Av .
                                                                     eL
                                           Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                            Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                         Ro
                                        Coas t       H ig h w                     ad
                                 O ld                           ay
                                                                                                   Ha
                                                                                                        re                                                                                          Harbo r                    Avenu e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S t ew
                                                         Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W                                                                                                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rn                                                                      Spruce               Elm St
            Simpson                                                                                              Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o   ad
                                                                                                                                                               V ie w Boat Yard                     an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                Dr.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
            Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a in                                                             Manzanita                    Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Myr                                                                                                                                St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fir St                                                                                                                       dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tl e St            S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Airpor t
            e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  ing Cre         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bush St                                                                             dd
                                    Hare Creek Terrac            e                                                                                                                                                                                   Haz       dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d St                     S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison S t                                                                                                                      Winnifred                                                                                                                                                Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t                                      C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr
                                                                                            Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DuBois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               k    ee                                                                                                             Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                           re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                                    Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                             Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Highway   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             John
                                                ek
                                            Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hyman
                                                                                                         Babcock Lan                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Roa d                                                        Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesota Avenu e                                                                                                                              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Petaluma                               A            v                                           Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                           Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Johnson
                                                                                           Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                                     Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ln.                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                                        re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee
                                                                                                                                                  s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                                                   Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Johnson   Ln   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Howlan d                                                                                                                               Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Map C-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lane
                             Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stree t
                                                                     Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Denniso n
                             Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                          Benson                                                      W i n d in g
                                                                                  Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                              Camille
                             Sears Lan       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                                           Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                             W ay
                                                                                                                                                                               Hanso n                                        Roa d
                             A nd r e a              W ay                                                                                                                Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Puddin g
                             Lahmon Lan          e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Monsen Wa y
                             Tex-Mon t                                                                              Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                             Benson                           Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                           Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EXISTING ROADWAY SYSTEM
                                                                                  Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Road
                                                                 S ummers
                                                                                                                                                 Ro
                                                                                                                                                      ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Arterial                                          LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limit
Scale 1Ó = 2300Õ (approximate)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Minor Collector   Major Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sphere of Influence
For Schematic purposes only

 2.        Level of Service Standards
 Level of Service (LOS) standards provide a qualitative indicator based on a quantitative analysis
 of the functional capacity of a roadway or intersection. LOS standards describe the relative
 ease or congestion of traffic movement on a roadway or at an intersection. LOS "A" represents
 free flow conditions and LOS "F" represents jammed conditions where traffic flow is at or over
 the capacity of the roadway and consequently moves very slowly. Table C-2 below explains in
 more detail the LOS concept. LOS is normally used to describe peak-hour conditions.
                                                 Table C-2
                                       Level of Service Definitions
 Level of Service        Description                                                            V/C Ratio*
 Free Flowing            Relatively free-flow. No restrictions to vehicle maneuverability or    0.00-0.60
 LOS A                   speed. Very slight delay.
 Minimal Delays          Stable Flow. Some slight reduction in maneuverability and speed.       0.61-0.70
 LOS B                   Vehicle platoons form. This is a suitable level of operation for rural
                         design. Slight delay
 Acceptable Delays       Stable flow operation. Higher volumes. More restrictions on            0.71-0.80
 LOS C                   maneuverability and speed. Acceptable delay.
 Tolerable Delays        Approaching unstable flow operation. Queues develop. Little freedom    0.81-0.90
 LOS D                   to maneuver. Tolerable delays for short periods.
 Significant Delays      Unstable flow or operation. Low operating speed; momentary             0.91-1.00
 LOS E                   stoppages.     This condition is not uncommon in peak hours.
                         Congestion and intolerable delays.
 Excessive Delays        Forced flow or operation. There are many stoppages. The highway           1.00+
 LOS F                   acts as a vehicle storage area. Jammed. Gridlock.
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, HRB Special Report 87.
 C.        Existing and Projected Traffic Patterns
 Fort Bragg is built along Highway One which is also called Main Street within the City. Highway
 One is the only continuous north-south road serving the north coast of Mendocino County,
 providing a local transportation corridor for many communities and the primary access route for
 visitors. Traffic volumes on this roadway have increased steadily over the years.
 Traffic into and out of Fort Bragg is constrained by the capacity of two bridges: Hare Creek and
 Pudding Creek, and by the two-lane (i.e., one through lane in each direction) roadway sections
 along Highway One. The Hare Creek and Pudding Creek bridges are limited to one lane of
 traffic in each direction.
 The most congested street in the City is Main Street between the northbound merge area
 located just south of Laurel Street through Elm Street. The northbound section of this road
 currently operates at LOS D to LOS E during peak hours.
 Caltrans recently replaced the Noyo River Bridge with a four lane bridge, a center lane for
 emergency vehicles, and a sidewalk on both sides. The new bridge provides improved access
 at the south end of the City and to Highway 20 and operates at LOS A.
 5 – Circulation Element                           5-3                                            July 2008
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Although the volume of traffic on Main Street has increased over the past few years,
intersections with traffic signals – Highway 20, Ocean View Drive, Cypress Street, Chestnut
Street, Oak Street, Elm Street, and Redwood Avenue - are operating at LOS B or better. The
side street stop sign controlled intersections with Main Street are also operating at LOS B or
better for traffic traveling on Main Street, although traffic turning onto Main Street from some
side streets can experience LOS D, E, or F during peak hours.
D.       Projected Traffic Volumes
Land use and transportation must be coordinated so that the capacity of the transportation
system will accommodate the traffic generated by the development of the community. To
understand the relationship between land use and transportation, the new traffic that would be
generated by the 10-year buildout projections listed in Table LU-1 and Table LU-2 of the Land
Use Element was added to existing traffic volumes on major streets. See the Draft EIR for the
General Plan for a full description of the trip generation and trip assignment methods that were
used.
The traffic projections take into account the type and intensity of existing and future
development, areas of vacant developable land, and the policies established by the Coastal
General Plan. The traffic projections estimate how much traffic will be generated by new
development, what traffic problems will occur, and what roadway improvements would relieve
traffic congestion. This projected traffic increase would be generated by development within the
City and its Sphere of Influence, new development in the County, and tourist traffic which will
continue to increase in Fort Bragg and the coastal areas of Mendocino County.
The traffic projections include the existing roadway network as shown in Map C-1.
Tables C-3 and C-4 summarize the Levels of Service for roadway segments and intersections
for a summer Friday mid-day peak hour when traffic is generally the most congested. These
tables show the projected LOS with and without the roadway improvements recommended in
this element.
E.       Roadway Deficiencies
Traffic projections in Tables C-3 and C-4 indicate that, without intersection signalization and
roadway widening, Levels of Service will decline at several intersections and roadway segments
below the standards established by the General Plan. The recommended transportation
improvements recognize that it may not be feasible to accommodate all of the projected traffic at
established LOS standards. This would require extensive street widening on Main Street
between the northbound merge area (south of Laurel Street) and Elm Street where there is
limited right-of-way. Roadway widening in this area could have adverse impacts on businesses
fronting Main Street due to the loss of on-street parking.
5 – Circulation Element                        5-4                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

F.       Alternatives to the Automobile
Effective alternatives to automobile use are needed. These include:
• Better public transit;
• Expansion of bicycle routes;
• Provision of safe sidewalks throughout the City; and
• Land use designations which reduce the need to drive from home to work, schools, and/or
     commercial outlets.
By improving alternative modes of transit, the City best serves those individuals who lack
access to a vehicle and those who would prefer to use alternate modes of transport to conserve
energy, reduce air and noise pollution, and/or reduce the costs of constructing and maintaining
roads and parking facilities.
5 – Circulation Element                      5-5                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                           Table C-3
  INTERSECTION LEVEL OF SERVICE
  (FRIDAY PM PEAK HOUR IN AUGUST)
                                                Existing
Intersection                                (August 2001)              Year 2006             Year 2011
                                                       (1)
Highway One/Hwy. 20 (Signal)                  B-17.3                   B-18.9                 C-21.0
Highway One/Ocean View Dr.                    B-16.0(1)                C-20.6                 C-24.3
(Signal)
Highway One/Cypress St.                       B-16.7(1)                B-18.7                 C-21.0
(Signal)
Highway One/Chestnut St.                      A-8.7(1)                 A-9.3                  B-10.1
(Signal)
Highway One/Oak St. (Signal)                  B-10.2(1)                B-11.3                 B-12.5
Highway One/Redwood Ave.                      B-16.6(1)                B-17.0                 B-17.5
(Signal)
Highway One/Laurel St. (Side                  E-35.4/B-10.3(2)         A-8.3(1)               A-9.2
Street Stop)
Highway One/Pine St. (Side                    D-26.6/F-55.8/           E-40.6/F-99.8/         F-65.9/F-193/
Street Stop)                                  A-9.0/A-9.4(3)           A-9.3/A-9.7            A-9.7/B-10.1
Highway One/Elm St. (Signal)                  A-7.9(1)                 A-8.3                  A-8.9
Highway One/Pudding Creek                     E-38.7/A-9.1(4)          F-60.7/A-9.4           F-103/A-9.6
Rd. (Side Street Stop)
Franklin St./South St. (Side                  A-6.6/A-6.6(5)           A-8.0/A-6.8            A-8.3/A-7.0
Street Stop)
Franklin St./Cypress St. (All                 B-11.6(6)                B-13.5                 C-16.0
Way Stop)
Franklin St./Chestnut St. (All                B-12.4(6)                B-14.0                 C-16.1
Way Stop)
Franklin St./Oak St. (All Way                 C-16.8(6)                C-20.7                 D-27.0
Stop)
Franklin St./Redwood Ave. (All                B-10.9(6)                B-11.7                 B-12.7
Way Stop)
Franklin St./Laurel St. (Side                 B-13.7/A-8.0(7)          B-14.5/A-8.0           C-15.4/A-8.1
Street Stop)
   (1)   Signalized level of service–control delay in seconds.
   (2)   Unsignalized level of service–average control delay in seconds. Laurel St. eastbound stop sign controlled
         approach to Highway One/Highway One southbound left turn to Laurel St.
   (3) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds. Pine St. eastbound stop sign controlled approach to
         Highway One/Pine St. westbound stop sign controlled approach to Highway One/southbound Highway One left
         turn/northbound Highway One left turn.
   (4) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds. Pudding Creek Rd. westbound stop sign controlled
         approach to Highway One/Highway One southbound left turn to Pudding Creek Rd.
   (5) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds.              Franklin St. northbound stop sign controlled
         approach/Franklin St. southbound stop sign controlled approach.
   (6) All way stop level of service–average control delay in seconds.
   (7) Unsignalized LOS–average control delay in seconds.               Laurel St. eastbound stop sign controlled
         approach/Franklin St. southbound left turn.
   Year 2000 Highway Capacity Manual Analysis Methodology
   Source: Crane Transportation Group, February, 2002
   5 – Circulation Element                                  5-6                                           July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Table C-4
5 – Circulation Element         5-7 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

G.       Goals, Policies and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:           are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy C-2.11,
Policy C-9.4, Policy C-9.7, Policy C-12.1, Policy C-12.1, Policy C-12.3, Policy C-13.1, and Policy
C-15.1.
1.       Transportation Planning
Goal C-1            Coordinate land use and transportation planning.
Policy C-1.1       Level of Service Standards: Establish the following Level of Service (LOS)
standards:
     Signalized and All-Way-Stop                    LOS D
     Intersections Along Highway One
     Side Street Stop Sign Controlled              LOS D, or LOS F if there are less than 15
     Intersections Along Highway One (Side         vehicles/hour left turns plus through
     Street Approach)                              movements from the side street and the
                                                   volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                   hour signal warrant criteria levels.
     Signalized and All-Way Stop                    LOS C
     Intersections
     Not Along Highway One
     Side Street Stop Sign Controlled               LOS C, or LOS E if there are less than 15
     Intersections Not Along Highway One            vehicles/hour left turns plus through
     (Side Street Approach)                         movements from the side street and the
                                                    volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                    hour signal warrant criteria levels.
         •         If volumes at an unsignalized intersection are increased to meet or exceed
                   Caltrans rural peak hour signal Warrant #11 criteria levels and the intersection is
                   operating at an unacceptable level of service, then signalization of the
                   intersection is warranted.
         •         LOS E for Main Street (Highway One) between the northbound lane merge area
                   and Manzanita Street.
         •         LOS D for Main Street south of the northbound merge lane and north of
                   Manzanita Street and other City-designated arterials and collectors.
         •         LOS C on all City-designated local streets.
         •         The maximum allowable LOS standards for Main Street apply to the p.m. peak
                   hour weekdays during the summer and to the p.m. peak hour on weekdays and
                   weekends during the remainder of the year. They do not apply to p.m. peak
                   hours on weekends and holidays during the summer. During the p.m. peak
                   hours on summer weekends and holidays, Main Street can operate at LOS F.
5 – Circulation Element                         5-8                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy C-1.2 Coordinate Land Use and Transportation: Ensure that the amount and phasing
of development can be adequately served by transportation facilities.
         Program C-1.2.1: Review development proposals for their direct and cumulative effects
         on roadway Level of Service standards. During the development review process, City
         staff will determine whether traffic studies need to be carried out and the scope of such
         studies.
Policy C-1.3: Do not permit new development that would result in the exceedance of roadway
and intersection Levels of Service standards unless one of the following conditions is met:
                   a)     Revisions are incorporated in the proposed development project which
                          prevent the Level of Service from deteriorating below the adopted Level
                          of Service standards; or
                   b)     Funding of prorata share of the cost of circulation improvements and/or
                          the construction of roadway improvements needed to maintain the
                          established Level of Service is included as a condition or development
                          standard of project approval.
Policy C-1.4: Include specific time frames for the funding and completion of roadway
improvements for projects which cause adopted roadway and intersection Level of Service
standards to be exceeded. Require security, bonding or other means acceptable to the City to
ensure the timely implementation of roadway mitigations.
Policy C-1.5: Traffic Impact Fees. When traffic impact fees are collected, establish a schedule
from the date of collection of said fee for the expenditure of funds to construct roadway
improvements that meets project needs. Where a project would cause a roadway or
intersection to operate below the adopted traffic Level of Service standards, the roadway or
intersection improvements should be completed in a timely manner but no later than five years
after project completion.
2.       Recommended Roadway Improvements
Goal C-2            Develop and manage a roadway system that accommodates future growth
                    and maintains acceptable Levels of Service while considering the other
                    policies and programs of the Coastal General Plan.
Policy C-2.1 Roadway Improvements: In coordination with Caltrans and Mendocino County,
plan for and seek funding for on-going improvements to the local and regional road system to
ensure that the roadway system operates safely and efficiently and to ensure that Highway 1 in
rural areas outside the Mendocino County urban/rural boundary will remain a scenic two-lane
road consistent with Section 30254 of the Coastal Act. Project applicants are fiscally
responsible for their fair share of roadway improvements necessary to serve their projects.
Policy C-2.2: Improvements to major road intersections for public safety or increased vehicle
capacity shall be permitted, as necessary, in existing developed areas and where such
improvements are sited and designed to be consistent with all policies of the LCP.
Policy C-2.3: Design Roadways to Protect Scenic Views. In scenic areas, roadway
improvements, including culverts, bridges or overpasses, shall be designed and constructed to
5 – Circulation Element                         5-9                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

protect public views and avoid or minimize visual impacts and to blend in with the natural setting
to the maximum extent feasible.
         Program C-2.3.1: When a traffic analysis of levels of service and/or safety hazards
         indicates the need, construct the following roadway improvements where such roadway
         improvements are found to be consistent with all applicable policies of the LCP
         including, but not limited to, the wetland, environmentally sensitive habitat area, public
         access, and visual protection policies:
                   a)    Signalize the Main Street/Pudding Creek Road intersection;
                   b)    Signalize the Franklin Street/Oak Street intersection;
                   c)    Widen the section of Main Street from the Pudding Creek Bridge to the
                         northern City Limits to three lanes, adding a center turn lane;
                   d)    Reconstruct the Main Street/Ocean View Drive intersection at time of
                         development of the property between the College of the Redwoods and
                         Main Street. Require a traffic engineering analysis of the intersection to
                         determine appropriate geometrics and signal timing. Construct turning
                         lane mitigations as needed.
                   e)    Signalize the Main Street/Laurel Street intersection or provide some other
                         improvement to provide for pedestrian safety;
                   f)    Signalize the Main Street/Pine Street intersection;
                   g)    Construct bicycle lane and pedestrian improvements on Chestnut Street
                         and Oak Street;
                   h)    Consider extending Harrison Street south from Walnut Street to Cypress
                         Street.
                   i)    Continue the two northbound through lanes on Main Street from Oak
                         Street to just north of Laurel Street. Stripe the curb lane as a right turn
                         only lane between Redwood Avenue and Laurel Street.                         This
                         improvement shall only be implemented if there are no other feasible
                         circulation improvements that would result in the street operating at a
                         LOS E or better.
                    j)   Construct a second southbound through travel lane on Main Street from
                         Elm Street to Laurel Street. This improvement shall only be implemented
                         if there are no other feasible circulation improvements that would result in
                         the street operating at a LOS E or better.
Policy C-2.4 Roadway Standards: Continue to provide consistent standards for the City's
street system.
         Program C-2.4.1: Establish standards for public streets, which allow for the following:
                   a)    traffic "calming" measures;
                   b)    sidewalks with curbs, gutters, and a planting strip between the sidewalk
                         and the roadway;
                   c)    rounded street corners with "bulb-outs" at key intersections;
                   d)    continuation of the grid street system; and
                   e)    standards for radius returns for local, collector, and arterial streets.
         Program C-2.4.1.2: Adopt standards for alleyways which address parking restrictions,
         shared access, lighting, and maintenance.
Policy C-2.5: Continue to prohibit the establishment of private roads.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 10                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy C-2.6: Traffic Studies for High Trip Generating Uses: Traffic studies shall be required
for all major development proposals, including but not limited to, drive-through facilities, fast
food outlets, convenience markets, major tourist accommodations, shopping centers,
commercial development, residential subdivisions, and other generators of high traffic volumes
that would affect a Level of Service. Traffic studies shall identify, at a minimum:
     (a) the amount of traffic to be added to the street system by the proposed development;
     (b) other known and foreseeable projects and their effects on the street system;
     (c) the direct, indirect, and cumulative adverse impacts of project traffic on street system
          operations, safety, and public access to the coast;
     (d) mitigation measures necessary to provide for project traffic while maintaining City Level
          of Service standards;
     (e) the responsibility of the developer to provide improvements; and
     (f) the timing of all improvements.
 Policy C-2.7: Consider Impacts to Roads for LCP Amendments. Direct, indirect, and cumulative
 adverse impacts to Highway 1 capacity in the rural areas surrounding Fort Bragg shall be
 considered during the review of proposed LCP amendments that would increase density or
 change land use classifications to ensure that Highway 1 in rural areas outside the Mendocino
 County urban/rural boundary remains a scenic two-lane road consistent with Section 30254 of
 the Coastal Act.
Policy C-2.8 Continuation of Streets: Require the continuation of streets and bicycle and
pedestrian paths through new developments wherever possible.
Policy C-2.9: Facilitate Street Connections. Review site plans for new development to facilitate
the continuation of streets to improve local circulation. Priority shall be given to providing
pedestrian and bicycle trails that establish connections to streets wherever possible.
Policy C-2.10 Continue Grid System onto Mill Site: Ensure that the grid street system and a
north/south arterial on the Mill Site be designed to ensure the maximum benefit to local traffic,
pedestrian, and bicycle circulation and to provide maximum public access to the coast.
      Policy C-2.11        Right-of-Way Acquisition:    Require right-of-way acquisition for new
development to meet the City’s roadway width standards.
Policy C-2.12 Roadway Safety: Improve the safety of the roadway system. All safety
improvements shall be consistent with the applicable policies of the LCP including, but not
limited to, the wetlands, environmentally sensitive habitat area, public access, and visual
protection policies.
          Program C-2.12.1: Periodically analyze the locations of traffic accidents to identify
          problems and use this information to set priorities for improvements as a part of the
          City's Capital Improvement Program.
3.        Residential Areas
The City's residential neighborhoods need to be protected from excessive through-traffic. When
Main Street and other arterial streets become congested, drivers may seek alternate routes to
their destination, often taking local streets through residential areas.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 11                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Excessive traffic on local streets has an impact on the quality of life. Through-traffic can
generate excessive noise and present potential safety hazards to children. The goals, policies,
and programs below are intended to address this issue.
Goal C-3            Preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
Policy C-3.1 Reduce Through-Traffic on Local Streets: Reduce through-traffic on local streets
to preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
         Program C-3.1.1: Develop measures to limit through-traffic on residential streets when
         traffic studies indicate that traffic volumes on such streets exceed the adopted Levels of
         Service and/or safety concerns warrant such measures.
         Program C-3.1.2: Consider the following measures, as appropriate, to reduce through-
         traffic from using local streets in residential areas:
                   a)     narrow and landscape the street entrances to residential areas that
                          experience heavy traffic;
                   b)     restrict turning movements into residential areas; and
                   c)     use traffic calming measures such as permitting wider sidewalks,
                          additional on-street parking, and landscape strips between the sidewalk
                          and the road.
Policy C-3.2 Additional Connector Streets: Establish additional connectors between residential
streets to improve emergency access, particularly on dead-end streets south of Chestnut Street.
4.       Main Street Corridor
Transportation improvements to Main Street and principal streets in the Central Business
District will enhance the character, sense of place and economic well-being of this area.
However, the need to accommodate traffic flow through the City should be considered in the
context of the community's desire to preserve and enhance the historic character of Fort Bragg's
Central Business District.
Goal C-4            Regard the quality of life in Fort Bragg and maintaining community identity
                    as more important than accommodating through-traffic.
Policy C-4.1 Community Priorities for Transportation Improvements: Place a higher priority on
maintaining a sense of place and enhancing the attractiveness of the Central Business District
than on efficient traffic flow and movement. (The adopted Level of Service Standards make an
exception for Main Street between the northbound lane merge area, currently located just south
of Laurel Street, to Manzanita Streets, to prevent street widening and/or elimination of on-street
parking which would require acquisition of the right-of-way, and consequently change the
character of the City’s historic downtown. Widening this segment of Main Street would require
acquisition of right-of-way and reduction in on-street parking, thereby changing the intimate,
pedestrian-oriented downtown the City wishes to preserve and enhance.)
         Program C-4.1.1: Consider traffic safety, the ease and safety of pedestrian movement
         across Main Street, and adequacy of on-street parking as key factors in evaluation of
         proposed roadway improvements along Main Street.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 - 12                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program C-4.1.2: Ensure that property and business owners in the Central Business
         District are informed and actively involved in planning future improvements to Main
         Street and other nearby streets.
         Program C-4.1.4: Consider signalizing the intersection of Pine Street and Main Street to
         provide adequate pedestrian safety.
         Program C-4.1.5: Consider options for increasing the capacity of Main Street north of
         the northbound lane merge area south of Laurel Street that do not require elimination of
         parking.
5.       Parking
Adequate off-street parking is essential for Central Business District businesses1. Fort Bragg
has implemented an in-lieu fee to build additional off-street parking facilities. Providing
additional off-street parking facilities in the Central Business District will have a community-wide
benefit.
Goal C-5            Provide additional parking spaces in the Central Business District.
Policy C-5.1 Additional Off-Street Parking: Continue to construct additional off-street parking
spaces in the Central Business District.
         Program C-5.1.1: Continue, and update, as needed, the City's parking in-lieu fee
         program for the Central Business District.
         Program C-5.1.2: Define priorities for the acquisition of property and the construction of
         additional parking facilities.
         Program C-5.1.3: Encourage the use of reciprocal access agreements and
         interconnecting off-street parking and circulation between adjacent commercial uses.
         Program C-5.1.4: Revise the Coastal LUDC to allow shared parking and driveways for
         commercial uses having day/night activity patterns.
         Program C-5.1.5: Develop a comprehensive signage program within the Central
         Business District to direct vehicles to off-street parking areas.
         Program C-5.1.6: Develop incentives for employers and employees to park off-street in
         the Central Business District.
         Program C-5.1.7: Continue enforcing parking restrictions in alleyways to ensure access
         for emergency and delivery vehicles.
         Program C-5.1.8: Review building setback standards from alleyways to ensure adequate
         emergency vehicle access.
1
         Refer to the Downtown Parking Study, City of Fort Bragg, 1999.
5 – Circulation Element                              5 - 13                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

6.       Additional Access to Noyo Harbor
Currently, access to the north side of Noyo Harbor is limited to North Harbor Drive. Another
access is required to improve traffic circulation and to ensure that emergency vehicles can
reach Noyo Harbor in the event North Harbor Drive is obstructed. Improved access to the Noyo
Harbor would be considered if and when the City annexes the harbor.
Goal C-6           Improve access to the North Part of the Noyo Harbor.
Policy C-6.1 Provide Additional Access Routes to Noyo Harbor: Consider constructing a new
access route from the west side of Main Street to the north side of the Noyo Harbor. Any new
access route to the north side of the Noyo Harbor shall be consistent with all applicable policies
of the LCP including, but not limited to, the wetland, environmentally sensitive habitat area,
public access, and visual protection policies.
         Program C-6.1.1: Evaluate the economic and environmental feasibility of acquiring an
         access route to Noyo Harbor using existing road alignments extended onto the Georgia-
         Pacific site.
Policy C-6.2 Improve Existing North Harbor Drive: Consider improvements to North Harbor
Drive to increase capacity and safety for vehicles and pedestrians. Any improvements to North
Harbor Drive shall be consistent with all applicable policies of the LCP including, but not limited
to, the wetland, environmentally sensitive habitat area, public access, and visual protection
policies.
         Program C-6.2.1: Develop a plan to improve North Harbor Drive by enlarging lane widths
         and constructing a sidewalk along one side of the street.
7.       Additional Eastern Emergency Route
The City needs to establish an emergency route to the east for emergency vehicles and for
evacuation in the event bridges are blocked or destroyed.
Goal C-7           Improve emergency access to the City.
Policy C-7.1 Emergency Access: Establish an access route out of Fort Bragg that could be
used in the event of damage to the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges.
         Program C-7.1.1: Work with the Georgia-Pacific Corporation to obtain temporary use, in
         the event of an emergency, of the logging road that begins on Cypress Street and
         provides access to Highway 20, east of Fort Bragg.
          Program C-7.1.2: Prepare an emergency evacuation route plan for the City.
8.       Public Transit
Fort Bragg is served by the Mendocino Transit Authority (MTA). MTA provides daily bus service
(the "65 CC Rider") between Fort Bragg, Willits, Ukiah, and Santa Rosa. A separate bus route
(the "60 The Coaster") provides weekday service between Fort Bragg, Mendocino, and the
Navarro River.
5 – Circulation Element                       5 - 14                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

MTA has a fixed-route weekday bus service (the "5 BraggAbout") in Fort Bragg with seven fixed
stops that connect the College of the Redwoods, shopping centers, the Central Business
District, and the hospital. Local trips within the Fort Bragg area are also provided by MTA's dial-
a-ride service where riders can call to be picked up and delivered to their destination Monday
through Saturday. In addition, the Redwood Senior Center provides transportation services for
seniors in the community.
Goal C-8            Provide better public transportation.
Policy C-8.1: Encourage Transit Use.
         Program C-8.1.1: Continue to support the expansion of transit services provided by
         MTA and other public transit providers.
Policy C-8.2: Bus Shelters: Encourage attractive, well-lighted, and comfortable bus shelters
placed in convenient locations.
         Program C-8.2.1: Continue to require the provision of bus stops, bus shelters, benches,
         turnouts, and related facilities in all major new commercial, industrial, residential, and
         institutional developments, and identify, in collaboration with MTA, additional locations
         for bus stops and shelters.
Policy C-8.3: Transit Facilities in New Development. Continue to require the provision of bus
stops, bus shelters, benches, turnouts, and related facilities in all major new commercial,
industrial, residential, and institutional developments.
9.       Pedestrian Facilities
Most areas of Fort Bragg have sidewalks for pedestrians. There are, however, a number of
residential streets which lack sidewalks, and substandard sidewalk facilities exist throughout the
City. Better pedestrian access across Fort Bragg's bridges and along Main Street from the
Noyo Bridge to the southern City limits and from Elm Street north is needed. New development
must be served by adequate pedestrian facilities. In addition to the policies and programs listed
below, see the Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element regarding policies and programs
recommended for increasing and improving the trail system within the Planning Area.
Goal C-9            Make it easier and safer for people to walk in Fort Bragg.
Policy C-9.1: Provide Continuous Sidewalks: Provide a continuous system of sidewalks
throughout the City.
Policy C-9.2: Require Sidewalks. Require a sidewalk on both sides of all collector and arterial
streets and on at least one side of local streets as a condition of approval for new development.
         Program C-9.2.1: Consider implementing the following funding sources for the purpose
         of installing sidewalks in existing developed areas of the City:
                   a)     special benefit assessment districts; and/or
                   b)     a low-interest revolving loan fund.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 15                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program C-9.2.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments and Caltrans to
         construct pedestrian walkways over the Hare Creek and Pudding Creek Bridges. These
         facilities may qualify for Transportation Enhancement Activities (TEA) funding available
         through Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG).
Policy C-9.3: Where feasible, incorporate pedestrian facilities into the design and construction
of all road improvements.
         Program C-9.3.1: Incorporate additional sidewalks from the Noyo Bridge to Ocean View
         Drive in the Capital Improvement Program.
     Policy C-9.4: Sidewalk Maintenance: Ensure that property owners maintain sidewalks in a
safe manner.
         Program C-9.4.1: Continue to implement City regulations that require sidewalks to be
         maintained by property owners. Carry out regular inspections, notification, and
         enforcement of this requirement.
         Program C-9.4.2: Financial Concerns: Consider the financial ability of property owners
         when establishing proposed sidewalk assessment districts.
         Program C-9.4.3: Seek available funding from grants and other funding sources for the
         construction of sidewalks in existing developed areas.
         Program C-9.4.4: Consider deferring payment for sidewalk installations for property
         owners with low incomes and/or on fixed incomes.
Policy C-9.5 Pedestrian Paths: Develop a series of continuous pedestrian walkways
throughout the commercial districts and residential neighborhoods.
         Program C-9.5.1: Allow asphalt or other approved surface pedestrian paths in very low
         density single-family residential areas where sidewalks are not required.
         Program C-9.5.2: Revise the Subdivision and Coastal Program to allow approved
         surface pedestrian paths within developments to create pedestrian connections to
         nearby streets, community facilities, and adjacent developments as a part of on- and off-
         site improvements.
Policy C-9.6:        Ensure that pedestrian paths are sited to avoid wetlands and other
environmentally sensitive areas.
     Policy C-9.7: Improve Pedestrian Safety.
         Program C-9.7.1: Continue to provide traffic controls and well-lit intersections in areas
         with a high volume of pedestrian movement.
         Program C-9.7.2: Consider expanded use of illuminated crosswalks.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 16                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

10.      Bikeways
With better facilities and trails, bicycling can become a more significant part of the transportation
system and an alternative to automobile use. Fort Bragg has few constraints to bicycling: most
of the City is flat, the weather is mild, and the City is compact with relatively short distances
between residential areas, schools, parks, and commercial centers.
The California Street and Highway Code has established three categories of bicycle trails based
on the physical conditions of the right-of-way.
     Class 1 Bikeway - Bike Path or Bike Trail: These facilities are constructed on a separate
     right-of-way, are completely separated from street traffic, and have minimal cross flows of
     automobile traffic. The State standard for minimum paved width of a two-way bike trail is
     eight feet.
     Class 2 Bikeway - Bike Lane: A restricted right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles with
     vehicle parking and cross flow by pedestrians and motorists permitted. Bike lanes are
     normally striped within paved areas of highways and are one-directional with a minimum
     standard width of five feet.
     Class 3 Bikeway - Bike Route: A route for bicyclists designated by signs or other markings
     and shared with pedestrians and motorists. Bike routes are typically designated to provide
     linkages to the bikeway system where Class 1 or 2 Bikeways cannot be provided.
The following local bikeway projects are identified as high priority by Mendocino County's 2000
Regional Bikeway Plan. A full description of recommended improvements is included in that
Plan.
•    The Pudding Creek Trestle to Otis Johnson Park Bikeway would provide a link between a
     park in northeast Fort Bragg and the beach at the mouth of Pudding Creek. It would also
     connect with the Old Haul Road, which travels north through MacKerricher State Park. As
     indicated on Map C-2, this path would serve Fort Bragg Middle School and neighborhoods
     in the northwest area of the City through a combination of Class 2 and 3 Bikeways. New
     Class 3 segments would be required from the Pudding Creek Trestle to Elm Street. Class 3
     improvements would be constructed on Elm Street, Franklin Street, and Laurel Street.
•    The Otis Johnson Park/Dana Street Bikeway would provide a north-south link within central
     Fort Bragg. This bicycle route would connect Fort Bragg Middle School and Fort Bragg High
     School. The proposed bike route would use existing bikeways and a section of the
     proposed bikeway improvement listed above for Laurel Street. It would consist of Class 3
     Bikeway improvements on Oak Street and Class 1 Bikeway improvements on Dana Street.
•    The Dana Gray School to Maple Street Bikeway would provide east-west access between
     Dana Gray School and an existing bikeway on Maple Street. Class 3 Bikeways would be
     constructed on S. Sanderson Way, Willow Street, and Lincoln Street.
Goal C-10          Make it easier and safer for people to travel by bicycle.
Policy C-10.1 Comprehensive Bikeway System: Establish a comprehensive and safe system
of bikeways connecting all parts of Fort Bragg.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 17                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program C-10.1.1: Complete the bikeway system as indicated in Map C-2: Bicycle
         Paths. Make the completion of the Pudding Creek Trestle/Glass Beach to Otis Johnson
         Park a high priority.
         Program C-10.1.2: Incorporate bicycle and pedestrian facilities into the design and
         construction of all road improvements as feasible.
         Program C-10.1.3: Continue to participate in MCOG's Regional Bikeway Plan to qualify
         for State Bicycle Lane Account funds.
         Program C-10.1.4: Utilize parking-in-lieu funds, dedications, grant funding, traffic impact
         fees, and other means, as appropriate, to acquire rights-of-way needed for a
         comprehensive bikeway system as indicated in Map C-2.
         Program C-10.1.5: Maintain bikeways to ensure that they are free of debris and other
         obstacles. Consider increasing the number of trash receptacles, solar-powered
         emergency telephones, and increased lighting along bicycle trails.
Policy C-10.2: Require Bikeways. Require new development to provide on-site connections to
existing and proposed bikeways, as appropriate.
Policy C-10.3: Require that streets linking residential areas with school facilities be designed to
include bikeways.
Policy C-10.4: Consider bicycle operating characteristics in the design of intersections and
traffic control systems.
Policy C-10.5 Bicycle Parking: Provide adequate and secure bicycle parking at public transit
facilities, park and ride lots, schools, the library, parks, City offices, and commercial areas.
         Program C-10.5.1: Revise the Coastal LUDC parking standards to require larger
         commercial and multi-family residential projects, public buildings, and transit facilities to
         provide secure bicycle parking.
         Program C-10.5.2: Continue the bicycle safety program conducted by the Police
         Department.
11.      Access for the Mobility Impaired
Providing transportation facilities accessible to persons who are mobility-impaired is essential.
Approximately three percent of the population in Fort Bragg cannot use conventional public
transit due to a disability. The Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 contains many
requirements regarding removal of barriers for persons with disabilities.
Goal C-11          Provide mobility-impaired persons with access to transportation.
      Policy C-11.1: Regulations for Disabled Persons: Enforce Federal and State regulations
regarding access for persons with disabilities.
5 – Circulation Element                           5 - 18                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                 HW
                                                                                   Y1
                                                                                                                          AIRPORT                           RD.
                     Trestle Bridge Connection to the
                              Haul Road Trail
                                                                Pudding
                                                                                                                   C   re
                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                 ELM ST.
                                                                SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                      PUDDING                  CREEK         RD.
                                                                                                                               BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                                FIR ST.
                                                                                    Library                                                    PINE ST.
                                   Guest House Museum                                                                                    LAUREL ST.
                                                                                                                    ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DENNISON LANE
                                                                                  ST.
                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                 McPHERSON
                                                                                                 McPH
                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                 McPHERSO
                                                                                                   cPHERSON
                                                                                                       RSO
                                                                                                         ON S
                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                            ST.
                                                                                                              T.
                                                                                                                                REDWOOD AVE.
          an
                                                                                                                    HARRISON
                                                                                                                           N
                                                                          ST
                                                                           T.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                  FRAN
                                                                                  F RA KLIN
                                                                                        L IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                  ALDER ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Corporation
                                                                          MAIN
                                                                          M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OAK
        Oce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SHERWOOD RD.         Yard
                                                                                                                          MADRONE                           ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                           WILLOW ST.
                                                                                             MAP
                                                                                             MAPL
                                                                                             MA
                                                                                              APLE ST.
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.    CORRY ST.     HAROLD ST.          LINCOLN ST.       WALL ST.
                                                                                               HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                                     WALNUT                         ST.
                                                                                                                                               Health Club
                                                                      MAIN ST.
        Pacific
                                                                                                             CYPRESS ST.
                                                                                                                   SOU
                                                                                                                           TH
                                                                                                                                  ST.
                                                                                                                                                      RI
                                                                                                                                                        VE
                                                                                                                                                          R                                                                                  MAP C-2
                                                             HWY 1                                                             NO
                                                                                                                                 YO                                                                                                          BICYCLE PATHS
               College              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                of the                                                             Boatyard Shopping
              Redwoods                                                                  Center
                                                             HWY.
                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                                                           Y.
                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                     HWY 1
                                                                 SIMPSON LANE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Legend
                                                                                                                                               City Boundary                                                                          Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                      School                            Parks       Hospital                      Harbor/Marina
0           1400         2800
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Aquatic Center                    Points of Interest
feet
                                                                                                                                                                           Proposed Hwy 1 Bike Lanes                                           Existing Bikeways
SOURCE: CITY OF FORT BRAGG, 2007
(revised 11/28/07)

Policy C-11.2: Handicapped Access. In conformance with State and Federal regulations,
continue to review all projects for handicapped access and require the installation of curb cuts,
ramps, and other improvements facilitating handicapped access.
         Program C-11.2.1: Assist organizations, such as the Senior Center, which provide transit
         service to the elderly and the mobility-impaired, in identifying and obtaining funding.
      Policy C-11.3      Support Improved Access:            Support improved access to public
transportation and pedestrian facilities for people with disabilities.
         Program C-11.3.1: Continue to apply for grants for ADA-related projects from MCOG
         and other sources.
         Program C-11.3.2: Consider funding to implement the City’s ADA Access and
         Transportation Plan through the City’s Capital Improvement Plan (CIP), grants, and
         State and Federal transportation funds.
12.      Train Service
The Sierra Railroad, known as the Skunk Line, operates a rail system between Willits and Fort
Bragg. It is the only railroad in the region that has maintained passenger service on a regular
basis since its founding. Train service is offered daily (approximately eleven months per year),
and handles approximately 80,000 passengers annually. Freight service is provided on request.
The Skunk Depot, located at Laurel Street in the Central Business District, has been recently
renovated, including additional parking facilities. It provides access to MTA’s local and regional
buses. The railroad not only benefits from the extensive tourist traffic on the Mendocino Coast,
it is also a major generator of visitors to the Willits and Fort Bragg areas.
Although the use of the Skunk Line for freight transportation has decreased in recent years, it
continues to provide freight service. If the rail lines were upgraded to carry heavier loads, it
could serve as an incentive to increase freight loads.
Goal C-12          Increase use of the Skunk Line for transportation of people and freight.
      Policy C-12.1      Skunk Train: Encourage increased use of the Skunk Train.
         Program C-12.1.1: Continue to work with the Skunk Train Company to improve and
         expand facilities at the Skunk Depot.
         Program C-12.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments to facilitate
         increased use of the Skunk Line as an alternative to automobile transportation between
         Fort Bragg and Willits.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 19                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

13.      Coordinate Regional Transportation Planning
Traffic congestion along Fort Bragg's Main Street is connected to development in
unincorporated areas to the north and south of the City. Main Street is Highway One which is
the primary north-south route for all communities on the coast. Land use decisions made by the
County of Mendocino have a significant impact on transportation in the Fort Bragg area. The
City works closely with the regional agencies described below:
     • County of Mendocino: maintains and plans the county road system.
     • Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG): prepares and carries out a Regional
         Transportation Plan, establishes priorities for Federal and State funding, and funds
         studies of transportation corridors.
     • Mendocino Transit Authority, (MTA): operates several transit routes serving the City and
         the region. It is a county-wide authority created through a joint powers agreement
         among cities and the County.
Goal C-13          Coordinate regional traffic planning.
      Policy C-13.1      Regional Transportation Efforts:    Participate in regional transportation
planning efforts.
         Program C-13.1.1: Continue to provide City Council and staff representation on regional
         transportation planning agencies.
         Program C-13.1.2: Work with the MCOG and Caltrans to coordinate transportation
         planning and to identify funding for necessary transportation improvements.
         Program C-13.1.3: Continue to ensure that MCOG's Regional Transportation Plan
         (RTP), the State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) and the State Highway
         Systems Operation and Protection Plan (SHOPP) include needed improvements to
         Highway One and Highway 20 in the Fort Bragg Planning area. Such improvements
         shall be designed to ensure that Highway One in rural areas outside the Mendocino
         County urban/rural boundary remains a scenic two-lane road consistent with Section
         30254 of the Coastal Act.
14.      Funding Transportation Improvements
Funding transportation improvements is predominantly a Federal, State, and regional
responsibility. For many years the road system has received the largest proportion of public
expenditures for transportation.         Although increased funding for alternative modes of
transportation has significant environmental and social benefits, roadway funding will continue
to receive the highest priority. Fort Bragg remains a relatively isolated coastal community and
depends on the road system for the majority of its transportation needs.
A significant amount of the traffic in Fort Bragg is through-traffic (trips that originate or have
destinations outside of the City). The logging industry, tourist travel, and people coming to Fort
Bragg from around the region for shopping, educational, medical, and other services generate
much of the traffic.
It is necessary that funding mechanisms be expanded to ensure effective coordination among
different government jurisdictions. The goals, policies, and programs below complement those
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 20                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

in the Land Use and Public Facilities Elements requiring new development to pay for its fair
share of maintaining the City's infrastructure and service levels.
Goal C-14          Promote balanced funding for transportation.
     Policy C-14.1       Development to Pay Its Fair Share: Require new development to pay its
fair share of transportation improvements to maintain levels of service and traffic safety in the
City.
         Program C-14.1.1: Develop a City-wide Traffic Mitigation Fee Program.
         Program C-14.1.2: Work with the County of Mendocino and MCOG to develop traffic
         mitigation fees for the Fort Bragg Sphere of Influence.          Consider adopting a
         memorandum of understanding between the City of Fort Bragg and the County
         regarding traffic mitigation fees.
         Program C-14.1.3: Work with MCOG to ensure that the standards and requirements
         contained in the joint City and County Traffic Mitigation Program between Fort Bragg
         and the County are incorporated into the Regional Transportation Plan.
         Program C-14.1.4: Include in the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program mitigation fees for new
         development with primary access to Highway One and Highway 20. Utilize the funds
         collected as a local match to encourage Caltrans to raise the priority of Highway One
         and Highway 20 improvements.
         Program C-14.1.5: Ensure that the City's Pavement Management System obtains
         funding from the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program, as deemed appropriate by the traffic
         impact fee nexus study and applicable State law.
         Program C-14.1.6: Carry out an ongoing inventory of transportation system needs to be
         included in the City's Capital Improvement Plan.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 21                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

5 – Circulation Element         5 - 22 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

6.       COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Community Design Element is concerned primarily with the protection of the visual
resources and quality in the Coastal Zone and the City, or what residents and visitors see. The
City’s appearance is essential to the quality of life in Fort Bragg. Visual quality and amenities
go hand-in-hand with long-term economic development strategies, and strengthen the stability
and desirability of the community. To be attractive to residents, visitors, and businesses, the
City must be concerned about its appearance, physical character, and livability. Existing
residential real estate values and the desirability of businesses that depend on tourism are
closely tied to the visual character of the community.
This element contains sections addressing Visual Analyses for development in the Coastal
Zone, Design Review, the Central Business District, historic preservation, and public art and
spaces.
The Community Design Element also establishes goals, policies, and programs to preserve and
enhance Fort Bragg’s authentic, small town character. The community is defined in part by its
isolated location on the magnificent coastline of Mendocino County. Its sense of place derives
from its heritage as a regional center for the timber and fishing industries. As the economy
evolves to a more tourism and service-based economy, the community has acknowledged the
importance of maintaining the historic identify of downtown and the integrity of the residential
neighborhoods, while enhancing views and access to the coastline and planning for continued
growth and development.
B.       Community Design and the Coastal Act
Protection of visual resources is called for by the Coastal Act. Section 30251 of the Coastal Act
states that the scenic and visual qualities of coastal areas shall be considered and protected as
a resource of public importance. Permitted development shall be sited and designed to protect
views to and along the ocean and scenic coastal areas to minimize alteration of natural land
forms, to be visually compatible with the character of surrounding areas, and, where feasible, to
restore and enhance visual quality in visually degraded areas. The Local Coastal Program
Background Report contains an inventory of scenic views.
Fort Bragg has many valuable visual resources in the Coastal Zone, including high bluffs, jutting
headlands, wetlands, serene river estuaries, beaches, and dunes. The mature trees that front
the west side of Main Street between the North Cliff Hotel and Maple Street provide an
important visual resource. Scenic resources attract many visitors to these areas and provide
the basis for the City's tourist industry. Visual resources can be readily degraded through
poorly-designed and located structures, roads, signs, and utility lines that block coastal views,
alter natural landforms, and detract from the small town character of the community.
6 – Community Design Element                   6-1                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

In addition, Section 30253 of the Coastal Act states that new development shall, where
appropriate, protect special communities and neighborhoods which, because of their unique
characteristics, are popular visitor destination points for recreational uses.
C.       Design Review
Most new development in the City is subject to a design review process which is intended to
ensure that it preserves and enhances the aesthetic character of its setting. This Element and
the City’s recently adopted Citywide Design Guidelines assist property owners, business
owners, and developers to design projects which fit with the City. This element and the Citywide
Design Guidelines also assist decision-makers with the evaluation of proposed development.
The Citywide Design Guidelines are intended to be flexible and to encourage innovative and
creative designs. For this reason, the Guidelines are generally qualitative statements rather
than quantitative standards, and there are many acceptable ways to meet each of the
Guidelines. Design Review approval requirements do not replace, supersede or otherwise
modify the independent requirement for a coastal development permit approved pursuant to the
applicable policies and standards of the certified LCP.
D.       Historic Preservation
Much of Fort Bragg was built during the first half of the twentieth century, and the built
environment in the Central Business District and many of the neighborhoods reflects the
architectural heritage of the community. Fort Bragg’s architecturally significant buildings and
structures convey a sense of the community’s history, providing a link to the past and
strengthening the City’s identity. From the Sherwood Pomo who lived in the area for over 5,000
years to the more recent European settlers seeking lumber, fish, and fur, the landscape has
seen remarkable transformations.
The City has a Historic Building Inventory that identifies buildings, sites, structures, and objects
of cultural and historical importance. The purpose of the Inventory is to preserve the
community’s heritage by facilitating use of the State of California’s Historic Building Code. To
be included in the Historic Building Inventory, a structure must be at least 40 years old and meet
other criteria related to its design and history. The Inventory is not a comprehensive description
of all historically or culturally significant buildings or sites in the community, and a property is
listed at the owner’s request.
E.       The Central Business District
The Central Business District (CBD) is the heart of the community’s commercial, civic, historic,
and cultural life. It is the area with the largest concentration of historic buildings such as the
Skunk Train Depot, the Guest House Museum, the Old Fort Building, Town Hall, City Hall, and
numerous commercial and residential structures. The combined efforts of government and
property owners will ensure that the attractiveness of the downtown will be preserved and
enhanced. Increasing pedestrian activity, improving street lighting, parking, and amenities, and
ensuring that renovations and new construction maintain the historic scale and character of this
area will foster the continued vitality of the CBD.
6 – Community Design Element                     6-2                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                  Old Fort Building, 430 Franklin Street
F.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:                 are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy CD-2.6,
Policy CD-3.3, Policy CD-7.3, and Policy CD-8.1.
Goal CD-1          Preserve and enhance scenic views.
Policy CD-1.1: Visual Resources: Permitted development shall be designed and sited to
protect views to and along the ocean and scenic coastal areas, to minimize the alteration of
natural landforms, to be visually compatible with the character of surrounding areas, and, where
feasible, to restore and enhance scenic views in visually degraded areas.
         Program CD-1.1.1:            Require Design Review of new development or significant
         expansion to existing development1 located in areas designated "Potential Scenic Views
         Toward the Ocean or the Noyo River" on Map CD-1: Scenic Views in the Coastal Zone.
Policy CD-1.2: The large trees fronting the west side of Highway One between the North Cliff
Hotel and Cypress Street shall be retained as far as feasible; trees may be removed if they are
dead or damaged or pose a public safety hazard, or to provide driveways or new public streets.
The forested area north of the Georgia-Pacific nursery and south of Maple Street shall be
maintained as a sensitive natural habitat and scenic resource, and it shall not be developed.
Policy CD-1.3: Visual Analysis Required. A Visual Analysis shall be required for all
development located in areas designated "Potential Scenic Views Toward the Ocean or the
Noyo River" on Map CD-1 except development listed in below. Development exempt from
Visual Analysis includes the following:
1
         For purposes of Design Review, Significant expansion of existing development is defined as an increase
         equal to or over 25 percent of the existing floor area of a structure.
6 – Community Design Element                             6-3                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

       1. The replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, destroyed by a
            disaster. The replacement structure shall conform to applicable existing zoning
            requirements, shall be for the same use as the destroyed structure, shall not exceed
            either the floor area, height, or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than 10
            percent, and shall be sited in the same location on the affected property as the
            destroyed structure.
       2.  The demolition and reconstruction of a single-family residence; provided, that the
            reconstructed residence shall not exceed either the floor area, height or bulk of the
            former structure by more than 10 percent, and that the reconstructed residence shall
            be sited in the same location on the affected property as the former structure.
       3. Improvements to any structure which do not change the intensity of its use, which do
            not increase either the floor area, height, or bulk of the structure by more than l0
            percent, which do not block or impede public access, and which do not result in a
            seaward encroachment by the structure.
       4. The reconstruction or repair of any seawall; provided, however, that the reconstructed
            or repaired seawall is not seaward of the location of the former structure.
       5. Any repair or maintenance activity for which the Director determines has no potential
            for impacts to visual resources.
       Definitions as used in this subsection:
              1. "Disaster" means any situation in which the force or forces which destroyed the
              structure to be replaced were beyond the control of its owner.
              2. "Bulk" means total interior cubic volume as measured from the exterior surface of
              the structure.
              3. "Structure" includes landscaping and any erosion control structure or device
              which is similar to that which existed prior to the occurrence of the disaster.
Policy CD-1.4: New development shall be sited and designed to minimize adverse impacts on
scenic areas visible from scenic roads or public viewing areas to the maximum feasible extent.
Policy CD-1.5: All new development shall be sited and designed to minimize alteration of
natural landforms by:
         1. Conforming to the natural topography.
         2. Preventing substantial grading or reconfiguration of the project site.
         3. Minimizing flat building pads on slopes. Building pads on sloping sites shall utilize
             split level or stepped-pad designs.
         4. Requiring that man-made contours mimic the natural contours.
         5. Ensuring that graded slopes blend with the existing terrain of the site and
             surrounding area.
         6. Minimizing grading permitted outside of the building footprint.
         7. Clustering structures to minimize site disturbance and to minimize development
             area.
         8. Minimizing height and length of cut and fill slopes.
         9. Minimizing the height and length of retaining walls.
6 – Community Design Element                     6-4                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                  Y1
                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                             AIRPORT                       ROAD
                                                           Pudding
                                                                                                                  Cr   ee
                                                                                                                             k
                                                            ELM ST.
                                                            SPRUCE ST.
                                                                                                                             BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                             FIR STREET
                                                                                                                             PINE STREET
                                                                                 STREET                           STREET
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                              LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DENNISON LANE
                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                         REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                             ALDER STREET
                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K TERR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT.
                                                                                                                             MADRONE                       ST.
                                                                                                                                                            HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                      WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                            LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                       MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                 WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                               CORRY ST.                                      WALL ST.
                                                                                             HAZEL ST.
                                                                                  STREET
                                                                                             CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                  FRANKLIN
                                                                                              WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                     MAIN ST.
                                                        HWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Map CD-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SCENIC VIEWS IN THE
                           OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE                                                                                                                                                                           COASTAL ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Potential scenic views toward the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ocean or the Noyo River
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The protection and enhancement of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               scenic views on the former Mill Site will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               be addressed in a Specific Plan.
                                                HWY 1
                                                            SIMPSON LANE
 Source: City of Fort Bragg
          July, 2008
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
 For Schematic purposes only
        10. Cut and fill operations may be balanced on-site, where the grading does not
             substantially alter the existing topography and blends with the surrounding area.
             Export of cut material may be required to preserve the natural topography.
Policy CD-1.6: Fences, walls, and landscaping shall minimize blockage of scenic areas from
roads, parks, beaches, and other public viewing areas.
Policy CD-1.7: Bluff Face and Bluff Retreat Setback Development. Development on the bluff
face and within the bluff retreat setback shall be limited to the following uses with a conditional
use permit where there is no feasible less environmentally damaging alternative, feasible
mitigation measures have been provided to minimize all adverse environmental impacts. and
allowable structures are designed be visually compatible with the surrounding area to the
maximum extent feasible.
         (a) engineered accessways or staircases to beaches, boardwalks, viewing platforms,
         and trail alignments for public access purposes,
         (b) pipelines to serve coastal dependent industry,
         (c) habitat restoration,
         (d) hazardous materials remediation, and
         (e) landform alterations where such alterations re-establish natural landforms and
         drainage patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
Policy CD-1.8: Blufftop development shall incorporate a setback from the edge of the bluff that
avoids and minimizes visual impacts from the beach and ocean below. The blufftop setback
necessary to protect visual resources may be in excess of the setback necessary to ensure that
risk from geologic hazards are minimized for the life of the structure, as detailed in Policy SF-B.
Policy CD-1.9: Exterior lighting (except traffic lights, navigational lights, and other similar safety
lighting) shall be minimized, restricted to low intensity fixtures, and shielded so that no light
shines beyond the boundary of the property.
Policy CD-1.10: All proposed divisions of land and boundary line adjustments shall be analyzed
for consistency of potential future development with the visual resource protection policies of the
LCP, and no division of land or boundary line adjustment shall be approved if development of
resulting parcel(s) would be inconsistent with these policies.
Policy CD-1.11: New development shall minimize removal of natural vegetation. Existing native
trees and plants shall be preserved on the site to the maximum extent feasible.
         Program CD.1.11.1: Consider amending the Coastal LUDC to adopt additional design
         standards to protect scenic resources.
Policy CD-1.12 Maintain Unobstructed Views of the Ocean: Require new development north of
Pudding Creek to leave unblocked views to the ocean from Highway One.
Policy CD-1.13: Retain Views North of Pudding Creek. New development north of Pudding
Creek and west of Main Street on parcels with total frontage of more than 135 feet, on either the
Haul Road or Main Street as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be required to
leave a minimum of 30 percent of the project’s total parcel frontage free of view-blocking
development. The area free of view-blocking development shall not include narrow
passageways between buildings on the site, and shall be concentrated.
6 – Community Design Element                   6-5                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy CD-1.14 All new development (including decks and balconies) north of Pudding Creek
shall be set back at least 30 feet from the edge of the Old Haul Road and shall be consistent
with all other applicable LCP setback requirements.
Goal CD-2:        Ensure that new development demonstrates excellence of design and
                  sensitivity to the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Policy CD-2.1 Design Review: All development that has the potential to affect visual resources
shall be subject to Design Review, unless otherwise exempt from Design Review pursuant to
Coastal Land Use & Development Code Section 18.71.050. Design Review approval
requirements shall not replace, supersede or otherwise modify the independent requirement for
a coastal development permit approved pursuant to the applicable policies and standards of the
certified LCP. Ensure that development is constructed in a manner consistent with the Citywide
Design Guidelines.
         Program CD-2.1.1: Establish a procedure for property owners to request that the City
         adopt additional Citywide Design Guidelines and/or measures for the preservation of
         historic structures within their neighborhood or commercial area.
Policy CD-2.2 Large Commercial Development: Ensure that large commercial development,
such as shopping centers, big box retail, and mixed use development, fits harmoniously with the
scale and design of existing buildings and streetscape of the City.
Policy CD-2.3 Second Dwelling Units and Manufactured Units and Single-Family Residential
Development: Ensure that second dwelling units, manufactured units, and single-family
residences are sited and constructed in a manner harmonious with surrounding development.
Policy CD-2.4 Discourage Sameness and Repetitive Residential Designs.
Policy CD-2.5 Scenic Views and Resource Areas: Ensure that development does not adversely
impact scenic views and resources as seen from a road and other public rights-of-way.
         Program CD-2.5.1: Adopt additional Citywide Design Guidelines for scenic views and
         resources identified in Map CD-1. Consider including, at a minimum, the following
         guidelines:
                 a)      Discourage continuous buildings that block scenic views and require view
                         corridors providing unobstructed views of the shoreline and/or the sea
                         from public rights-of-way.
                 b)      Require bluff setbacks for development adjacent to or near public areas
                         along the shoreline.
                 c)      Cluster development to avoid blocking viewsheds to the maximum extent
                         feasible.
                 d)      Minimize the size of advertising, business identification, and directional
                         signs to ensure scenic views are not obstructed.
                 e)      Design night lighting of buildings to be indirect with no source of light
                         visible, and lighting should not intrude on adjacent property or cause
                         glare.
                 f)      Prohibit or require screening of the following uses in scenic view
                         corridors: signs and fencing which block the scenic views, mechanical
6 – Community Design Element                    6-6                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                         equipment, refuse containers such as dumpsters, and the outdoor
                         storage of materials.
     Policy CD-2.6 Property Maintenance and Nuisances: Ensure that properties are well
maintained and nuisances are abated.
         Program CD-2.6.1: Continue to implement and enforce the City’s nuisance abatement
         ordinance, and update it, as necessary, to ensure that property values are maintained
         throughout the City.
         Program CD-2.6.2: Consider adopting regulations in the Municipal Code requiring that
         alleyways in residential areas be kept free of obstructions to ensure unimpeded access
         at all times.
         Program CD-2.6.3: Provide Code enforcement for immediate health and safety
         violations in conjunction with the building inspection process.
Policy CD-2.7 Landscaping: Encourage attractive native and drought-tolerant landscaping in
residential and commercial developments.
Policy CD-2.8 Strip Development: Discourage further strip development along Main Street.
Strip development is typically characterized by street frontage parking lots serving individual or
strips of stores or restaurants, with no provisions for pedestrian access between individual uses
and buildings arranged linearly.
         Program CD-2.8.1: Establish standards regarding site access, separation of vehicular
         and pedestrian movements, signage, landscaping and night-lighting for automobile-
         dependent businesses such as drive-through restaurants and automobile service
         stations.
Goal CD-3          Preserve the Central Business District as the commercial, civic, historic,
                   and cultural center of the community.
Policy CD-3.1 Adaptive Reuse: Facilitate the adaptive reuse of existing older buildings in the
Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.1.1: Consider establishing a low-interest revolving loan fund for the
         renovation and upgrading of older buildings in the Central Business District, with
         incentives for the reuse of vacant or underutilized upper floors for housing.
Policy CD-3.2 Pedestrian Activity: Encourage increased pedestrian movement and activity in
the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.2.1: Implement streetscape improvements such as pedestrian lighting,
         street trees, additional crosswalks, benches, intersection bulb-outs, and other amenities
         that improve the safety and ambiance of the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.2.2: Continue to support the operation of a Farmer’s Market and a
         multitude of street fairs and promotional activities in the Central Business District.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-7                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     Policy CD-3.3 Economic Vitality: Continue to support the economic diversity and vitality of
downtown businesses.
         Program CD-3.3.1: Consider establishing a Business Improvement District (BID) to
         stimulate increased business activity and revenues by helping to fund public
         improvements and loans and/or grants for private improvements in the Central Business
         District.
         Program CD-3.3.2: Consider amendments to the building height regulations in the
         Coastal LUDC to allow for additional height for well designed structures in the Central
         Business District that do not obstruct scenic views and which are compatible with
         existing development on adjoining properties.
Policy CD-3.4 Parking: Improve the availability of public parking facilities in the Central
Business District and other commercial areas.
         Program CD-3.4.1: Implement the recommendations of the Downtown Parking Study to
         provide better signage for off-street parking facilities and to increase the availability of
         on-street parking spaces by changing the time limits.
         Program CD-3.4.2: Implement shared parking agreements wherever feasible. Utilize,
         as appropriate, development agreements, conditions of approval, easements, and other
         means to assure shared parking arrangements.
         Program CD-3.4.3: Consider reduced and/or flexible parking requirements in the
         Coastal LUDC for mixed use developments.
         Program CD-3.4.4: Consider establishing a parking assessment district for the Central
         Business District to help finance the acquisition of property for additional off-street
         parking lots.
         Program CD-3.4.5: Periodically update the Central Business District parking in-lieu fee
         program to ensure that it presents a fair and equitable alternative to the provision of on-
         site parking.
Policy CD-3.5 Strengthen the Distinctive Identity of the Central Business District: Strengthen
the distinctive identity and unique sense of place of the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.5.1: Consider establishing a sign program for the Central Business
         District, with distinctive signs at the entryways to and within the Central Business District.
         Program CD-3.5.2: Consider installing street lighting in the Central Business District
         which reflects the historic character of the area, for example, cast-iron standards, lower-
         intensity, warm light fixtures, and spot lighting for key historical buildings.
         Program CD-3.5.3: Locate an area where a pocket park or a small plaza could be
         established for public gatherings, street fairs, concerts, and similar outdoor public
         events.
6 – Community Design Element                      6-8                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal CD-4         Create attractive entryways to the City.
Policy CD-4.1 Entryways: Clearly define the points of entry to the City through the use of
distinctive signs, lighting, and landscaping.
         Program CD-4.1: Maintain, distinctive signs placed in a landscaped area at the south
         entryway at Highway 20/Highway One and at the north entryway on Highway One at the
         City Limits.
                                Oceanfront Park and entrance to Noyo Harbor
Goal CD-5         Improve the appearance and effectiveness of parking facilities.
Policy CD-5.1 Parking Location: Wherever feasible, locate parking facilities to the rear of the
development so that the building facade is contiguous with the street frontage, and parking
areas are hidden from the street.
         Program CD-5.1.1: Consider adopting the following standards for parking facilities:
                 a)      establish standards for shade tree planting;
                 b)      establish an appropriately-scaled landscaped perimeter around parking
                         areas;
                 c)      provide bicycle and motorcycle parking in all new parking facilities that
                         include more than ten spaces.
6 – Community Design Element                      6-9                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal CD-6         Use lighting to create a sense of security and to provide cohesion to the
                  physical structure of the community.
Policy CD-6.1: Security: Establish standards to ensure that on-site lighting is adequate to
provide security while not producing excessive glare.
Policy CD-6.2: Lighting Design Guidelines: Apply lighting design guidelines contained in the
Citywide Design Guidelines.
Goal CD-7         Preserve cultural and historic resources.
Policy CD-7.1 Protect and Preserve Buildings and Sites with Historic and Cultural Significance
to the Community.
              Trestle at Pudding Creek: A historically significant structure at MacKerricher State Park
         Program CD-7.1.1: Update the Historic Building Inventory to include a wider and more
         comprehensive list of culturally and historically significant sites and buildings.
         Encourage property owners to list their buildings in the Historic Building Inventory.
         Program CD-7.1.2: Consider approval of building permits using the State Historic
         Building Code, as appropriate.
         Program CD-7.1.3: Include regulations in the Coastal LUDC which define historic
         resources, historic structure, and building styles and which establish procedures to
         evaluate, protect, and preserve sites, buildings, structures, districts, and objects that
         reflect significant elements of Fort Bragg’s cultural, social, economic, and architectural
         heritage.
         Program CD-7.1.4: Establish incentives for the preservation and restoration of historic
         buildings and sites.       Consider the following incentives: low interest loans for
         rehabilitation consistent with the original character of historic buildings, tax incentives for
         the preservation of historic structures, including the use of Mills Act preservation
6 – Community Design Element                      6 - 10                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         contracts, and awards or grants for the preservation and protection of historic buildings
         and those with cultural significance.
         Program CD-7.1.5: Consider adopting an “Affirmative Maintenance” ordinance for
         buildings in commercial land use designations.
         Program CD-7.1.6: Establish a procedure whereby property owners may initiate a
         program for preservation of historic structures within their neighborhood.
Policy CD-7.2 Discourage Demolitions: Discourage the demolition of historic buildings.
         Program CD-7.2.1: Require archival research be carried out determining the cultural
         and historic significance of buildings proposed for demolition, paid for by the project
         proponent.
         Program CD-7.2.2: Revise the City’s Coastal Land Use & Development Code to require
         the preparation of drawings and/or photographic records and the salvaging or
         preservation of architectural fixtures of historic structures that are demolished.
      Policy CD-7.3      Public Awareness: Increase public awareness and appreciation of the
City’s cultural and historic resources.
         Program CD-7.3.1: Work with the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical Society to
         increase public awareness concerning the importance of historic preservation and the
         location of significant and protected structures in the City.
         Program CD-7.3.2: Prepare a public information package describing available programs
         for property owners to restore and rehabilitate historic structures, including information
         on tax incentives.
         Program CD-7.3.3: Support the activities of the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical
         Society.
                                  Guest House Museum, Main Street
6 – Community Design Element                    6 - 11                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                   The Skunk Train Circa 1940
Goal CD-8         Support Public Art and Open Space.
      Policy CD-8.1 Public Art: Encourage the provision of murals, fountains, sculptures, and
other forms of public art in public spaces and parks.
         Program CD-8.1.1: Consider adopting a One-Percent for Art Program which would
         require one percent of the cost of construction of new public buildings and facilities to be
         allocated for public art.
         Program CD-8.1.2: Consider implementing an ongoing outdoor sculpture exhibit
         adjacent to City Hall and/or in other locations, with an emphasis on supporting and
         showcasing local artists and reflecting the cultural life of the community.
Policy CD-8.2 Provide Public Open Spaces: Encourage the development of public open spaces
for gatherings and fairs in commercial areas of the City.
         Program CD-8.2.1: Consider the purchase of appropriate locations for public open
         space and the enhancement of existing public spaces to accommodate community
         gatherings.
         Program CD-8.2.2: Encourage the inclusion of public open spaces in new commercial
         development that is sufficiently large to accommodate such uses.
6 – Community Design Element                    6 - 12                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

  7.     SAFETY ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Safety Element, pursuant to Government Code Section 65302(g), deals with the protection
of the community from unreasonable risks associated with the effects of earthquakes,
landslides, slope instability, subsidence, other geologic hazards, flood, and fire. Maps
identifying earthquake hazards, unstable soil hazards, landslide hazards, and flood zones are
included in this element.
The geology, topography, soils, hydrology, and fire risk of Fort Bragg pose numerous
constraints on future development. This element guides land use planning and policy decisions
in order to achieve an acceptable level of public protection.
B.       Seismic Safety and Geologic Hazards
There are no active earthquake faults in the City. However, the San Andreas fault is located
approximately 9 miles to the west, and the Maacama fault is 22 miles to the east. Major
earthquakes can occur on these faults. Seismic activities can cause major disruptions of the
City's transportation and emergency services network. Should the Pudding Creek, Noyo River,
and/or Hare Creek Bridges become unusable following a seismic event, people may not be able
to evacuate, and emergency access would be blocked. Potential hazards associated with
earthquakes include: rupture of the ground surface by displacement along faults, shaking of the
ground caused by the passage of seismic waves through the earth, ground failure induced by
shaking, such as landslides, liquefaction and subsidence of unstable ground, and tsunamis.
Non-seismic geologic hazards include the presence of unstable soils on steep slopes and
expansive soils which, in the presence of moisture, will swell and shrink when returning to a dry
condition. Map SF-1: Geologic Hazards identifies areas of potential landslides.
C.       Flooding
Portions of the City have areas subject to potential flooding during severe storms. Because of
the generally flat terrain in the Fort Bragg area, a 100-year storm could exceed the ability of the
City's infrastructure to move runoff water from the City to outfalls into natural drainageways and
the ocean. This drainage overload may result in standing water in low areas. High tides and
severe storms may also cause flooding in low-lying areas near creeks and drainages.
Map SF-2: Flood Hazards shows areas within the 100-year floodplain. Within floodplains
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), property owners may be
required to obtain flood insurance as a condition of mortgage approval. The areas subject to
flooding are shown on maps called the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) that are prepared by
FEMA. The City participates in the FEMA flood insurance program, which allows property
owners to obtain subsidized insurance rates.
7 – Safety Element                             7-1                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

FEMA also requires the City to establish development standards for construction in the 100-year
floodplain. Typically the standards developed by a city or county can range from limits on the
intensity of development to requirements to raise the "habitable floor" of the structure to at least
one foot above the 100-year flood peak elevation. The majority of the City is situated in "Zone
X" which is above both the 100-year and the 500-year floodplains.
D.       Fire Protection
In 1991, the City of Fort Bragg and the Fort Bragg Rural Fire District entered into an agreement
creating the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority. The Authority has primary fire protection
responsibility within the City limits and/or developed lands within the District (the District
includes all of the City's Sphere of Influence). In addition to normal fire calls, the Fort Bragg Fire
Protection Authority has increasingly been called to assist with accidents, hazardous material
spills, medical calls, and to provide personnel and equipment for large wildfires outside of the
area. The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CDFFP) has responsibility for
wildland fires within the Planning Area. The Draft EIR presents a complete description of
staffing, response time, calls for assistance, and other factors related to the Fire Protection
Authority. The primary constraints or issues involving the Fire Protection Authority concern
adequate staffing, adequate equipment, and adequate fireflow to structures.
E.       Police Protection
Within the City, the Fort Bragg Police Department has primary responsibility for police response.
The constraint to providing adequate police response involves the need to ensure that the City
hires sufficient staff to meet the response needs of both the existing and future population.
F.       Emergency Preparedness
California State Law requires that all cities and counties adopt an Emergency Plan. The
purpose of this plan is to outline policies and procedures with respect to significant events
occurring within or threatening the community which would require the deployment of
extraordinary resources for the protection of life and property.
The City has an adopted Emergency Operations Plan. The purpose of this plan is to ensure
that the City will be prepared to respond effectively in the event of emergencies to save lives,
restore and protect property, repair and restore essential public services, and provide for the
storage and distribution of medical, food, water, shelter sites, and other vital supplies to
maintain the continuity of government.
The Mendocino Emergency Services Authority (MESA), a joint powers organization that
includes the County of Mendocino and the incorporated cities within the county, serves as the
coordinating agency for mutual aid services provided by fire departments, law enforcement
agencies, and emergency medical service providers throughout the county. In addition, MESA
reviews and makes recommendations regarding emergency operation plans for public and
private institutions where pre-planning for emergency procedures is advisable. Coordination of
emergency services and planning guidelines is provided for situations including flood, wildland
fires, structure fires, explosions, hazardous material spills, severe weather, and earthquakes.
7 – Safety Element                             7-2                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                            Neptun e              Avenu e
                                                                                                                                                                                     Ocean
                                                                                                                                                       Pacifi c                                   Driv e
                                                    S
                                                       r
                                                    ho                                                                                                                               View
                                                        e lin
                                                                                                     Bayview Avenue
                                                                n.                                                                                                                           Monterey Av .
                                                             eL
                                 Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                     Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                             Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                 Ro
                           Coas t          H ig h w                       ad
                 O ld                                   ay
                                                                                           Ha
                                                                                                re                                                                                           Harbo r                   Avenu e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S t ew
                                               Highway                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rn                                                                       Spruce               Elm St
       Simpson                                                                                           Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o   ad
                                                                                                                                                       V ie w Boat Yard                      an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                        Dr.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
       Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Myr                                                                                                                               St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tl e St           S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Airpor t
       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bush St                                                                              dd
                     Hare Creek Terrac                   e                                                                                                                                                                                   Haz      dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                elw         d St                    S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ood            .                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                                                Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                                         C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e                                                                          Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                                     River D r                                                  S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                    Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DuBois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                                             Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                   re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                            Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Highway         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     John
                                 ek C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H yman
                                                                                                 Babcock Lan                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                                                       Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Minnesota Avenu e                                                                                                                              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Petaluma                                A             v                                               Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Map SF-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Johnson
                                                                                   Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                             Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                               re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                                          s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                            Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Johnson   Ln   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane
                 Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stree t
                                                             Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Denniso n
                 Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                   Benson                                                     W i n d in g
                                                                          Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                               Camille
                 Sears Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                                   Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                             W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
                                                                                                                                                                        Hanso n                                       Roa d
                 A nd r e a                W ay                                                                                                                   Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Puddin g
                 Lahmon Lan            e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Monsen Wa y
                 Tex-Mon t                                                                                  Lane        Tozer                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BaldH ill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                     Benson                           Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Creek
Source: Department of Conservation Division
                                                                          Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Road
         of Mines & Geology Geologic & Geomorphic
                                                         S ummers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           All ocean bluffs contain potentially
                                                                                                                                         Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Slide   Fault
         Features, Fort Bragg 7.5' Quadrangle                                                                                                 ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Slopes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Inner Gorge
         Mendocino County, California, 1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gradational Contact                                 Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           unstable slopes.
Scale 1” = 2300’ (approximate)
For Schematic purposes only

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Map SF-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Flood Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Highway 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                               Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ERWAY                                = Waterway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rgin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Special Flood Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Areas Inundated by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100-Year Flood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cr                        Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZONE A                         = No base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Burrows Ranch Rd
                 AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ZONE AE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = Base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZONE V                         = Coastal flood with velocity
         OCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airpor t                                            Road                                                                                                              Airport                                            Road                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               hazard (wave action); no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hemlock Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Johnson
                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                              Zone A
                                                                                                                             Roa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Johnson                           Ln.
                                                                                                                        Hau
                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                       Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Road
  PA C I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                       g Cr       ing
                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                            dd             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BaldHill Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                          Pu                  k
                                                                                                                                     rt
                                                                                                                                Stewa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr                                                    John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                        Manzanita
                                                                                                                                         St                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln.                                                                                                                                                  Creek                             Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Forster
                                                                                                                                                El m St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pudding
                                                                                                                                                Spr uce              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ro         ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pu                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Country                       Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dd                                                                                 Pudding                                               Creek                                                      Road
                                                                                                                                                                             unk
                                                                                                                                                                                           Tr a
                                                                                                                                                                                               in        Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i                      Zone A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                        Ra
                                                                                                                                                          ilroa
                                                                                                                                                                      Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                              Fir St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Harold Street
                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                        n       Pi n e                                  St
                                                                                                                                                 te r                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                                                               We
                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Alger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Huckleberry Lane
                                                                                                                                                                 Lau rel                                St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Nurnberger                   Dennison                                  Mall Lane
                                                                                                                                                                Redwo od Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Monsen Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                               McPherson St
                                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St                    St                    St                                                                                                       Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Whipple St
                                                                                                                                                                Al d er                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Harrison St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Howland
                                                                                                                                                                                            Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Corry                 Har ol d              Morrow                                                                                 Terrace Ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Court
                                                                                                                                                            STREET
                                                                                                                                                                 Oa k                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Florence St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SwingTree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acorn Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jewett
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Livingston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hocker                                                                                      Sherwood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Park St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Street
                                                                                                                                                                Madr one                                St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane        Street
                                                                                                                                                            MAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Willow                         St                                   Azalea                                                                                                                                                     Way
                                                                                                                                                                 Ma ple                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Alley                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Penitenti                                                                                                                                                  Lyta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Str eet               Str eet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dana St.
                                                                                                                                                                 Hazel                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S. Sanderson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Susie Ct.                                                                                                           Wall St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                            Str eet                     S. Corry                    Har ol d
                                                                                                                                                                 Chestnut                               St                                                                                                                                                                     Chestnut                              St
                  Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ebbing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesota Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S. Harrison                       S. Whipple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Olsen Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Grove St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Drive              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ve
                                  Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Walnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Espey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DuBois                                                                                                                      Rive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         view
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cypr ess Street
                                             Zone V                                                                                                                                                                                                                River Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CIRCL                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sout
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zone A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SEQU
                                                                                                                                Zone                                                                     St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tl e                    dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Stree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d St.
                                                                                                                                 A                                                                     Myr                    ood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  elw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Haz
                                   Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oyo
                                                                                                                                   Zone                                                                                                                                                                                     N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Winding                        Way
                                                                                                                       Avenue       AE
                                                                                          Del Mar Drive
                      Cliff Way
                                                                 Monterey Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Road
Zone V
                                   Avenue        Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                       Harbor
                                                                                                                                                            Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Camille
                                                                                                                                                                     an
                                                                                                                                                                     View Boat Yard
                                             Ocean           View                                           Drive
                                   Neptune                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hanson
                                                                                                                                                                                    Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane
                                                 Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lane                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           res                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Highway 20                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Babcock
                                             Bayview Avenue                                                                                           Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lane
                                                                                                                                                 Ha re
                                                                                                                  Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pine Tree Lane        Gorstrom Lane
                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Olsen Lane
 Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            re                              Zone A                                                                                                                                                        Noyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Summers
                                                                                                                                   Highway 1
                                                                                                         ad
                                                                      Ln.                             Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway 20
                                                                  ine
                                                              rel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Terrace
                                                           ho                                              Hi gh
                                                                                                                 way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W ay
                                                                                Cypress
                                                                                                          Coast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hare Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cr                                                       Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lane                                          Lahmon Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Source: FIRM, Flood Insurance Rate Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Chinquapin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of Fort Bragg, California,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Veronica                                                                       Andrea     Tex-Mont
                                                                                                            Ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sears                                                                                 Mendocino County, Rev. June 16, 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Scale 1” = 2300’ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                 Simpson                                                 Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              For Schematic purposes only

G.       Other Hazards
1.       Hazardous Materials
Various types of chemicals and other potentially hazardous materials are used by Fort Bragg
industries and businesses. Other hazardous substances are transported to and through Fort
Bragg. Finally, residents use various hazardous materials for landscaping, cleaning, and other
residential uses. Improper transport, storage, or use of these substances can result in releases
to the environment with consequent impacts on human health and the environment.
The Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority operates a hazmobile that serves the City.
The Fire Protection Authority maintains a hazardous materials unit behind the main fire station.
This unit is used to respond to hazardous waste spills.
2.       Electromagnetic Radiation
The potentially adverse health effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF) from electrical
transmission lines, substations, and appliances have been documented in many studies.
However, there is no consensus in the scientific community regarding the degree of risk posed
by EMFs. It is not known what levels of exposure to EMFs are safe. The approach taken to this
potential health hazard is one of prudent avoidance – establishing reasonable regulation before
electrical transmission lines are built and discouraging sensitive development from encroaching
in or near electrical transmission line rights-of-way.
3.       Air Quality
Emissions of pollutants from motor vehicles, industrial uses, and other sources can be injurious
to people's health. Policies and programs to protect the City's air quality are included in the
Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element.
H.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:       are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy SF-4.2,
Policy SF-5.3, Policy SF-5.4, Policy SF-6.1, Policy SF-6.2, Policy SF-7.1, Policy SF-7.2, Policy
SF-9.1, and Policy SF-9.2.
Goal SF-1        Reduce and minimize impacts of development on blufftops and shoreline
features.
Policy SF-1.1 Minimize Hazards: New development shall: (a) Minimize risks to life and property
in areas of high geologic, flood, and fire hazard; and (b) Assure stability and structural integrity,
and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of
the site or surrounding area or in any way require the construction of protective devices that
would substantially alter natural landforms along bluffs and cliffs.
7 – Safety Element                              7-3                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy SF-1.2: All ocean-front and blufftop development shall be sized, sited and designed to
minimize risk from wave run-up, flooding, and beach and bluff erosion hazards, and avoid the
need for a shoreline protective structure at any time during the life of the development.
Policy SF-1.3: Geotechnical report required. Applications for development located in or near an
area subject to geologic hazards, including but not limited to areas of geologic hazard shown on
Map SF-1, shall be required to submit a geologic/soils/geotechnical study that identifies all
potential geologic hazards affecting the proposed project site, all necessary mitigation
measures, and demonstrates that the project site is suitable for the proposed development and
that the development will be safe from geologic hazard. Such study shall be conducted by a
licensed Certified Engineering Geologist (CEG) or Geotechnical Engineer (GE) and shall be
prepared consistent with the requirements of Section 18.54.040(C) of the Coastal Land Use and
Development Code. Refer to Map SF-1: Geologic Hazards. Refer to the General Plan Glossary
for definitions of these terms.
Policy SF-1.4: Blufftop Setback. All development located on a blufftop shall be setback from the
bluff edge a sufficient distance to ensure that it will be stable for a projected 100-year economic
life. Stability shall be defined as maintaining a minimum factor of safety against sliding of 1.5
(static) or 1.1 (pseudostatic), as described in Section 18.54.040(F) of the Coastal Land Use and
Development Code. This requirement shall apply to the principal structure and accessory or
ancillary structures. Slope stability analyses and erosion rate estimates shall be performed by a
licensed Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer.
Policy SF-1.5: Siting and design of new blufftop development and shoreline protective devices
shall take into account anticipated future changes in sea level. In particular, an acceleration of
the historic rate of sea level rise shall be considered. Development shall be set back a sufficient
distance landward and elevated to a sufficient foundation height to eliminate or minimize to the
maximum extent feasible hazards associated with anticipated sea level rise over the expected
100-year economic life of the structure.
Policy SF-1.6: Land divisions, including subdivisions, lot splits, lot line adjustments, and
conditional certificates of compliance which create new shoreline or blufftop lots, shall not be
permitted unless the subdivision can be shown to create lots which can be developed without
requiring a current or future bluff or shoreline protection structure. No new lots shall be created
that could require shoreline protection or bluff stabilization structures at any time.
Policy SF-1.7 Alterations to Landforms: Minimize, to the maximum feasible extent, alterations to
cliffs, bluff tops, faces or bases, and other natural land forms in the Coastal Zone. Permit
alteration in landforms only if erosion/runoff is controlled and either there exists no other
feasible environmentally superior alternative or where such alterations re-establish natural
landforms and drainage patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
         Program SF-1.7.1: Establish standards in the Coastal LUDC or Grading Ordinance for
         the alteration and grading of natural landforms taking into account site characteristics,
         the resulting habitat disturbance, drainage modification, or erosion and sedimentation
         resulting from vegetation removal.
Policy SF-1.8 Floodplain Development: Limit new development in floodplains in the Coastal
Zone, including but not limited to those floodplain areas shown on Map SF-2, to those uses
allowed in the Open Space land use designation consistent with all other applicable
requirements of the LCP.
7 – Safety Element                              7-4                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy SF-1.9 Bluff Face and Bluff Retreat Setback: Prohibit development on the bluff face and
 within the bluff retreat setback because of the fragility of this environment and the potential for
 resultant increase in bluff and beach erosion due to poorly-sited development except that the
 following uses may be allowed with a conditional use permit:
          (1) engineered accessways or staircases to beaches, boardwalks, viewing platforms,
              and trail alignments for public access purposes;
          (2) pipelines to serve coastal dependent industry;
          (3) habitat restoration;
          (4) hazardous materials remediation; and
          (5) landform alterations where such alterations re-establish natural landforms and
              drainage patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
Findings shall be made that no feasible, less environmentally damaging, alternative is available
and that feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize all adverse
environmental impacts. Require as a part of the conditional use permit, a full environmental,
geological, and engineering study as specified in Policy LC-6.1. Such structures shall be
constructed and designed so as to neither create nor contribute to erosion of the bluff face and
to be visually compatible with the surrounding area to the maximum extent feasible.
Policy SF-1.10 Seawalls, Breakwaters and Other Shoreline Structures: Prohibit construction of
seawalls, breakwaters, revetments, groins, harbor channels, retaining walls, and other
structures altering the natural shoreline processes unless a finding is made that such structures
are required: (1) to serve coastal-dependent uses; or (2) to protect public beaches in danger
from erosion; or (3) to protect existing structures that were legally constructed prior to the
effective date of the Coastal Act; or (4) that were legally permitted prior to the effective date of
this Coastal General Plan provided that the CDP did not contain a waiver of the right to a future
shoreline or bluff protection structure; or (5) for a development consistent with Section 30233(a)
of the Coastal Act and only when it can be demonstrated that said existing structures are at risk
from identified hazards if no feasible or less environmentally damaging alternative is available
and the structure has been designed to eliminate or mitigate adverse environmental impacts,
including impacts upon local shoreline sand supply. The design and construction of allowed
protective structures shall respect natural landforms and provide for lateral beach access.
“Existing structures” for purposes of Policy LC-6.5 shall consist only of a principle structure, e.g.
residential dwelling, required garage, or second residential unit, and shall not include accessory
or ancillary structures such as decks, patios, stairs, landscaping, etc.
Goal SF-2          Reduce seismic and geologic-related hazards.
Policy SF-2.1 Seismic Hazards: Reduce the risk of loss of life, personal injury, and damage to
property resulting from seismic hazards.
         Program SF-2.1.1: Continue to comply with the provisions of the State Alquist-Priolo
         Act.
         Program SF-2.1.2: Require measures to mitigate potential seismic hazards for
         structures as conditions of project approval.
         Program SF-2.1.3: Monitor and review existing critical, high priority buildings to ensure
         structural compliance with seismic safety standards.
7 – Safety Element                              7-5                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program SF-2.1.4: Provide information to the public on ways to reinforce buildings to
         reduce damage from earthquakes and what to do in the event of an earthquake.
         Program SF-2.1.5: Provide information to educate the public about the availability and
         the benefits of obtaining earthquake insurance.
         Program SF-2.1.6: Encourage residents to consider earthquake insurance for their
         homes and businesses.
         Program SF-2.1.7: Continue to comply with State law regarding reinforcement of
         unreinforced masonry structures.
Policy SF-2.2: Require professional inspection of foundations and excavations, earthwork, and
other geotechnical aspects of site development during construction on those sites specified in
soils, geologic, and geotechnical studies as being prone to moderate or high levels of seismic
hazard.
Policy SF-2.3: Development on Slopes: Require that development in areas with identified slope
stability constraints as shown on Map SF-1 or other areas where City staff determines there is
potential slope stability issues be supervised and certified by a geologist, geotechnical engineer,
or engineering geologist.
         Program SF-2.3.1: Require repair, stabilization, or avoidance of active or potentially
         active landslides, areas of soil creep, or areas with possible debris flow as a condition of
         project approval.
 Policy SF-2.4 Tsunami: Minimize development in areas subject to tsunami.
         Program SF-2.4.1: Request FEMA conduct the necessary studies to accurately map
         areas within the City that are subject to tsunamis.
Policy SF-2.5: Review development proposals to ensure that new development is not in an
area subject to tsunami damage and if such development is otherwise allowable that it is
designed to withstand tsunami damage.
         Program SF-2.5.1: Review local- and distant-source tsunami inundation maps for Fort
         Bragg and adjacent coastal communities as they are developed to identify susceptible
         areas, plan evacuation routes or locations suitable for vertical evacuation and make
         evacuation plans available to all emergency responders and other appropriate parties.
         Program SF-2.5.2: Identify and map potential tsunami inundation zones for land use
         planning. Maps should identify generalized tsunami inundation zones on a probabilistic
         basis (e.g., 100-year event).
         Program SF-2.5.3: Review and update tsunami preparation response policies/practices
         to reflect current inundation maps and design standards, and submit these updated
         policies to the Coastal Commission for certification.
Policy SF-2.6: Avoid siting new critical facilities, including fire and police stations and hospitals
in tsunami inundation zones to the maximum extent feasible. If it is necessary to site such
facilities in tsunami inundation zones to provide adequate population protection, new critical
7 – Safety Element                              7-6                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 facilities shall be located and configured to be functional immediately after a 100-year tsunami
 event.
          Program SF-2.6.1: Develop a local response plan and/or participate in any regional
          effort to develop and implement workable response plans for distribution of information
          on tsunami alerts, watches, and warnings, to appropriate emergency responders and
          City personnel.
          Program SF-2.6.2: Include tsunami evacuation route information as part of any overall
          evacuation route sign program implemented in the City. Evacuation routes shall be
          clearly posted. An evacuation route traffic monitoring system that provides real-time
          information on the traffic flow at critical roadways should be considered.
          Program SF-2.6.3: Develop and implement a tsunami educational program for
          residents, visitors, and people who work in the susceptible areas.
Policy SF-2.7: Require that overnight visitor-serving facilities in susceptible areas provide
tsunami information and evacuation plans.
Goal SF-3          Reduce the risks from flooding.
Policy SF-3.1 Flood Hazards: Ensure adequate standards for development in the 100-year
floodplain. (Refer to Map SF-2: Flood Hazards which shows areas prone to flooding.)
          Program SF-3.1.1: Maintain and update as necessary the zoning and building code
          standards and restrictions for development in identified floodplains and areas subject to
          inundation by a 100-year flood. Use the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
          Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in the review of development proposals.
          Program SF-3.1.2: Ensure all development in flood prone areas meet Federal, State,
          and local requirements.
Policy SF-3.2 Storm Drainage: Continue to maintain effective flood drainage systems and
regulate construction to minimize flood hazards.
          Program SF-3.2.1: Update the City’s Storm Drain Master Plan.
Policy SF-3.3.2: Require, as determined by City staff, analysis of the cumulative effects of
development upon runoff, discharge into natural watercourses, and increased volumes and
velocities in watercourses and their impacts on downstream properties. Include clear and
comprehensive mitigation measures as part of project approvals to ensure that new
development does not cause downstream flooding of other properties.
Policy SF-3.4: Require development to pay for the costs of drainage facilities needed to drain
project-generated runoff. Develop a City-wide drainage policy to assist staff to identify drainage
improvements or impact fees required for development.
Policy SF-3.5: Require, where necessary, the construction of siltation/detention basins to be
incorporated into the design of development projects.
7 – Safety Element                                 7-7                                     July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Goal SF-4          Ensure emergency preparedness.
       Policy SF-4.1     Coordinate with County: Continue coordination with the Mendocino
County Emergency Services Authority.
       Policy SF-4.2     Maintain an Updated Emergency Plan: Update the City’s Emergency
Operations Plan as needed to take into account the requirements of the California Emergency
Management Systems (SEMS).
         Program SF-4.2.1: Establish an emergency evacuation route system that includes
         standards for street identification, street widths, and grade standards for the evacuation
         route system.
Goal SF-5          Reduce fire hazards.
Policy SF-5.1 Minimize Fire Risk in New Development: Review all development proposals for
fire risk and require mitigation measures to reduce the probability of fire.
         Program SF-5.1.1: Continue to consult the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority in the
         review of development proposals to identify the projected demand for fire protection
         services and implement measures to maintain adequate fire protection services.
         Mitigation measures may include levying fire protection impact fees for capital facilities, if
         warranted.
Policy SF-5.2 Maintain a High Level of Fire Protection: Work with the Fire Protection Authority
to ensure a continued high level of fire protection.
         Program SF-5.2.1: Prepare a cost-benefit assessment of using paid firefighters within
         the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority and determine the appropriate ratio of paid-to-
         volunteer staff.
         Program SF-5.2.2: Continue to use the City’s Municipal Code to require automatic
         sprinkler systems in commercial and industrial development.
         Program SF-5.2.3: Increase water main sizes or loop existing water mains where
         necessary to provide adequate flows for fire protection. The standard for water flow for
         fire protection purposes should be a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute for 2 hours
         with 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.
         Program SF-5.2.4: Develop a plan to provide sprinklers for commercial structures in the
         Central Business District. The plan shall include consideration of City funding to
         construct risers for this area.
         Program SF-5.2.5: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to establish a
         regular schedule for periodic inspections of commercial and industrial premises by the
         Fire Prevention Officer.
       Policy SF-5.3     Mutual Aid Agreements: Continue to maintain mutual aid agreements.
7 – Safety Element                               7-8                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

            Program SF-5.3.1: Coordinate equipment use and purchase and inter-agency
            communications.
            Program SF-5.3.2: Continue to coordinate with the Incident Command System (ICS) of
            Mendocino County.
        Policy SF-5.4        Fire Protection Authority Needs: Anticipate the needs of the Fort Bragg
Fire Protection Authority.
            Program SF-5.4.1: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to review its long-
            term fire plan on an annual basis to identify needed capital equipment and staff.
Policy SF-5.5 Vegetation Management:                        Continue to implement an           effective     and
environmentally sound vegetation management and weed abatement program.
            Program SF-5.5.1: Require a landscaping zone system for defensible space around
            buildings in high fire risk areas.
            Program SF-5.5.2: Continue to require weed abatement to reduce the risk of fire. Use
            mechanical rather than chemical methods wherever possible.
Goal SF-6             Maintain effective police services.
        Policy SF-6.1        Demand for Police Services: Review development proposals for their
demand for police services and implement measures to maintain adequate police services.
            Program SF-6.1.1: Consider the impacts on the level of police services of large
            development proposals in the environmental review and planning process.1
        Policy SF-6.2        Shared Resources: Utilize shared resources to improve police response.
            Program SF-5.2.1: Periodically review shared use of resources such as communication
            facilities and joint use of personnel where feasible with the County Sheriff’s Department.
Goal SF-7             Maintain an effective medical emergency response system.
        Policy SF-7.1        Emergency Medical Response: Ensure that the Fire Protection Authority
and the Mendocino Coast District Hospital continue to maintain a high level of emergency
medical response.
            Program SF-7.1.1: Periodically review the emergency medical response system.
1
  If warranted, mitigation measures may be required that may include the levying of police impact fees for capital
facilities, purchasing equipment, and dedication of land for new facilities.
7 – Safety Element                                      7-9                                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy SF-7.2          Maintain Mendocino Coast District Hospital’s Emergency Facilities:
Continue to encourage the Mendocino Coast District Hospital to maintain its emergency
department and acute care facilities.
         Program SF-7.2.1: Maintain ongoing communication with Mendocino Coast District
         Hospital to identify actions the City can implement to support the Hospital’s Emergency
         Department.
Goal SF-8           Reduce hazards of transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous
                    materials and wastes.
Policy SF-8.1 Protection from Hazardous Waste and Materials: Provide measures to protect
the public health from the hazards associated with the transportation, storage, and disposal of
hazardous wastes (TSD Facilities).
         Program SF-8.1.1: Continue to ensure that use, transportation, and disposal of
         hazardous materials are in accordance with the local, State, and Federal safety
         standards.2
         Program SF-8.1.2: Continue to support and participate in Mendocino County’s
         Hazardous Materials Business Plan which requires all businesses using hazardous
         materials to list the types, quantities, and locations of hazardous materials with the
         County’s Department of Environmental Health.3
         Program SF-8.1.3: Require, as a condition of City approvals of non-residential projects,
         that the Fire Protection Authority be notified of all hazardous substances that are
         transported, stored, treated, or could be released accidentally into the environment.
         Program SF-8.1.4: Require that applications for discretionary development projects that
         will generate hazardous waste or utilize hazardous materials include detailed information
         on hazardous waste reduction, recycling, transportation, and storage, and prepare a
         plan for emergency response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material.
         Program SF-8.1.5: Revise the Coastal LUDC to require secondary containment facilities
         and a buffer zone adequate to protect public health and safety on properties with
         hazardous materials storage and/or processing activities.
Policy SF-8.2 Support Environmental Review of Hazardous Waste Transportation, Storage and
Disposal Facilities: Support a thorough environmental review for Hazardous Waste
Transportation, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities, including waste to energy projects,
proposed in the Fort Bragg area.
2
  Implementation of this program is the responsibility of the Fire Protection Authority
3
  Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code requires businesses with more than 50 gallons, 500 pounds
or 200 cubic feet of hazardous materials to maintain a current Hazardous Materials Business Plan (HMBP). The law
provides for the collection of fees to fund the program.
7 – Safety Element                                       7 - 10                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program SF-8.2.1: Require that the environmental review of proposed Hazardous
         Waste TSD Facilities shall, at a minimum, contain the following analysis and information:
                  a)      A worst-case generic description, estimating the number, type, scale,
                          scope, location, and operating characteristics of proposed TSD
                          Facility(ies) based on the projected volumes and types of hazardous
                          waste. Data from existing facilities regarding the probability of accidents,
                          spills, and explosions should be documented and included;
                  b)      An assessment of risk resulting from the accidental release, fire, and
                          explosion of hazardous waste. This assessment should take into account
                          all phases of operation including transport, storage, and treatment. The
                          assessment of risk should include the probability of occurrence and
                          magnitude of impact;
                  c)      Quantify estimates of air emissions, by applying emissions rates of
                          existing facilities to the future volumes of hazardous waste and identifying
                          emissions for incinerator facilities under worst case circumstances;
                  d)      An assessment of non-incineration alternatives for hazardous waste
                          treatment such as chemical dechlorination for the detoxification of PCBs,
                          dioxins, solvents, and pesticides; photolysis; and biological treatment; and
                  e)      Review of the operating characteristics of proposed TSD Facilities, taking
                          into account maintenance and operating procedures, emissions
                          monitoring, and safety devices to assure the ongoing enforceability of the
                          mitigating measures that are required.
Goal SF-9          Minimize community exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs).
     Policy SF-9.1        Consider EMFs in Land Use Decisions: Consider information regarding
EMF radiation from existing and new electrical transmission lines and substations in making
land use decisions.
         Program SF-9.1.1: Request that PG&E or other electrical energy distributors provide
         information on renovation to existing and proposed new electrical transmission lines and
         substations. Request that information on the EMF radiation levels for proposed new
         facilities be provided.
         Program SF-9.1.2: Request that PG&E or any other electrical energy distributor provide
         a full and public disclosure of existing electrical transmission lines and existing and
         proposed facilities with their anticipated EMF levels within the Fort Bragg Planning Area.
         Program SF-9.1.3: Require that all new electrical transmission projects and facilities
         have an EMF mitigation plan as part of the project’s environmental review.
      Policy SF-9.2       Siting of Schools and Other Sensitive Uses: Minimize and reduce EMF
radiation levels near sensitive uses such as schools, hospitals, and playgrounds.
         Program SF-9.2.1: Work with the School District to continue enforcement of California
         State Board of Education regulations requiring that new schools be sited at least 100
         feet from the edge of the right-of-way of 100-110 kV lines; 150 feet from 220-230 kV
         lines; and 250 feet away from 345 kV lines.
7 – Safety Element                                  7 - 11                                    July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

7 – Safety Element              7 - 12 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

8.       NOISE ELEMENT
The policies of the Noise Element are not part of the City of Fort Bragg certified Local Coastal
Program and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits.
A.       Purpose
The purpose of the Noise Element is to protect the health and welfare of the community by promoting
development which is compatible with established noise standards. This element has been prepared
in conformance with Government Code Section 65302(f) and the guidelines adopted by the State
Office of Noise Control, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 46050.1. Existing and future
noise problems in the Planning Area are identified. Policies and implementation programs are
provided to reduce the community's exposure to excessive noise levels. Accomplishing this task
requires an evaluation of the noise generation from sources such as roads, highways, and stationary
sources such as industrial facilities.
B.       Noise Characteristics
Noise is defined as unwanted sound. Airborne sound is a rapid fluctuation of air pressure above and
below atmospheric pressure. Sound levels are usually measured and expressed in decibels (dB) with
0 dB corresponding roughly to the threshold of hearing. Decibels and other technical terms are
defined in Table N-1.
Most of the sounds which we hear in the environment do not consist of a single frequency, but rather
a broad band of frequencies, with each frequency differing in sound level. The intensities of each
frequency add together to generate a sound. The method commonly used to quantify environmental
sounds consists of evaluating all of the frequencies of a sound in accordance with a weighting that
reflects the fact that human hearing is less sensitive at low frequencies and extreme high frequencies
than in the mid-range frequency. This method is called weighting, and the decibel level so measured
is called the A-weighted sound level (dBA). In practice, the level of a sound source is conveniently
measured using a sound level meter that includes an electrical filter corresponding to the A-weighting
curve.
Although the A-weighted noise level may adequately indicate the level of environmental noise at any
instant in time, community noise levels vary continuously. Most environmental noise includes a
conglomeration of noise from distant sources which create a relatively steady background noise,
often called ambient noise, in which no particular source is identifiable. To describe the time-varying
character of environmental noise, the statistical noise descriptors, L10, L50, and L90, are commonly
used. They are the A-weighted noise levels equaled or exceeded during 10 percent, 50 percent, and
90 percent of a stated time period. A single number descriptor called the Leq is now also widely used.
The Leq is the average A-weighted noise level during a stated period of time.
In determining the daily level of environmental noise, it is important to account for the difference in
response of people to daytime and nighttime noises. During the nighttime, exterior background
noises are generally lower than the daytime levels. However, most household noise also decreases
at night and exterior noise becomes very noticeable. Further, sensitivity to noise increases when
8 – Noise Element                                     8-1                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

people sleep at night. To account for human sensitivity to nighttime noise levels, a descriptor, the Ldn
(day/night average sound level) was developed. The Ldn divides the 24-hour day into the daytime of
7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and the nighttime of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM. The nighttime noise level is
weighted 10 dB higher than the daytime noise level.
                                                    TABLE N-1
                                     DEFINITION OF ACOUSTICAL TERMS
Term                            Definition
Decibel (dB)                    A unit describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the
                                logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
                                measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
                                micronewtons per square meter).
Frequency (Hz)                  The number of complete pressure fluctuations per second above and
                                below the atmospheric pressure.
A-Weighed Sound Level           The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level
(dBA)                           meter using the A-weighting filter network. The A-weighting filter de-
                                emphasizes the very low and very high frequency components of the
                                sound in a manner similar to the frequency response of the human ear
                                and correlates well with subjective reactions to noise.
L01, L10, L50, L90              The A-weighted noise levels that are exceeded by 1%, 10%, 50% and
                                90% of the time during the measurement period.
Equivalent Noise Level          The average A-weighted noise level during the measurement period.
(Leq)
Ldn                             The average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained
                                after addition of 10 decibels to levels measured in the night between
                                10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Lmax, Lmin                      The maximum and minimum A-weighted noise level during the
                                measurement period.
Ambient Noise Level             The composite of noise from all sources near and far. The normal or
                                existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
Intrusive                       That noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at
                                a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon
                                its amplitude, duration, frequency, and time of occurrence and tonal or
                                informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
8 – Noise Element                                          8-2                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

C.       The Existing and Future Noise Environment
Fort Bragg experiences noise from autos and trucks on Highway One, Highway 20, local arterials, the
railroad, and several industrial uses, including the Georgia-Pacific operations and the Baxman
aggregate processing facility. Existing and year 2011 traffic noise ( Ldn) contour distances from major
thoroughfares are shown on Tables N-2 and N-3.
                                                    TABLE N-2
                            EXISTING TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                   Noise Level
                                                    50 ft. from         Contour Distances
                                                   Centerline        (in feet from Centerline)
Roadway                                               (Ldn)     70 Ldn          65 Ldn     60 Ldn
 Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                72         65             140        305
 Hwy One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)               73         75             165        350
 Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                70         50             110        240
 Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                    69         45             100        215
 Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                    69         45              95        205
 Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                 69         40              90        190
 Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                     68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                        68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)               68         35              75        160
 Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                  60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                61         ---             ---        55
 Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)             60         ---             ---        50
 Hwy. (at Hwy. One)                                    62         ---             40         70
 Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                   60         ---             ---        50
 Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                        59         ---             ---        45
 Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                    58         ---             ---        35
 Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                            61         ---        ---             60
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
8 – Noise Element                                           8-3                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                    TABLE N-3
                     FUTURE (YEAR 2011) TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                   Noise Level
                                                    50 ft. from      Contour Distances
                                                   Centerline     (in feet from Centerline)
Roadway                                               (Ldn)       70 Ldn 65 Ldn 60 Ldn
 Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                 73         80         175    380
 Hwy. One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)               74       100          205    450
 Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                 71         55         125    270
 Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                     70         50         115    245
 Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                     70         50         105    225
 Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                  69         45          90    205
 Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                      69         45          90    200
 Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                         69         45          95    195
 Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)                69         45          95    195
 Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                   61         ---         ---     55
 Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                 62         ---         ---     60
 Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                 60         ---         ---     55
 Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)              60         ---         ---     50
 Franklin St. (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                  61         ---         ---     55
 Hwy. 20 (at Hwy. One)                                  63         ---         40      85
 Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                    61         ---         ---     55
 Ocean View Drive (West of Hwy. One)                    61         ---         ---     55
 Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                         60         ---         ---     50
 Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                     61         ---         ---     60
 Oak St. (East of Hwy. One)                             61         ---         ---     60
 Oak St. (East of Franklin St.)                         60         ---         ---     50
 Redwood Ave. (West of Hwy. One)                        64         ---         45    100
 Laurel St. (West of Hwy. One)                          61         ---         ---     55
 Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                             64         ---         45      95
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
Noise from traffic on local roadways, distant industrial activities, and neighborhood activities are the
most significant sources of community noise in the majority of the City.
Noise from industrial uses was audible during the evening and nighttime hours at most noise sites
that were monitored. Background noise levels in the areas of Fort Bragg which generally contain
noise sensitive land uses would be considered to be moderately quiet and compatible with the City’s
noise exposure standards.
The principal areas that are affected by excessive noise are along both sides on Highway One
throughout the City (ranging from 160-350 feet on either side of the highway) and along Franklin
Street and several east-west arterials (ranging from 35-70 feet from the road edge). See the Draft
EIR for a more detailed discussion of the existing and projected noise environment in the City.
8 – Noise Element                                            8-4                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

   D.         Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards
   The standards listed in Table N-4 shall be used to evaluate the compatibility between land uses and
   future noise in Fort Bragg.
                                                         TABLE N-4
                                  NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
                                                               Exterior Noise Exposure
                                                                         Ldn dB
 Land Use Category                                    55      60        65      70        75     80
 Residential, Hotels and Motels
 Outdoor Sports and Recreation,
 Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds
 "Noise Sensitive" - Schools, Libraries,
 Museums, Hospitals, Personal Care,
 Meeting Halls, Churches
 Office Buildings, Business
 Commercial and Professional
 Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
 Amphitheaters
             Normally Acceptable
             Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved
             are of normal, conventional construction, without any special insulation requirements.
             Conditionally Acceptable
             Specified land use may be permitted only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
             requirements and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
             Unacceptable
             New construction or development should generally not be undertaken because mitigation
             is usually not feasible to comply with noise element policies.
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., March, 2002
   8 – Noise Element                                            8-5                                    July 2008
   Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

E.       Explanation of Table N-4: Land Use Compatibility for Community
Noise
1.       Noise Source Characteristics
Table N-4 shows the ranges of exterior noise exposure which are considered acceptable,
conditionally acceptable, or unacceptable for the specified land use. Table N-4 is used to determine
whether the noise exposure requires mitigation in order to achieve a compatible noise environment.
Where the noise exposure is acceptable for the intended land use, new development may occur
without requiring an evaluation of the noise environment.
Where the noise exposure would be conditionally acceptable, a specified land use may be permitted
only after a detailed analysis is made of the noise impacts, and the needed noise insulation features
are included in the design to protect people from exposure to excessive noise. Such noise insulation
features may include measures to protect noise sensitive outdoor activity areas (e.g. at residences,
schools, or parks) or may include building sound insulation treatments such as sound-rated windows
to protect interior spaces in residences, schools, hospitals, or other buildings which are sensitive to
noise. Noise reduction measures should be focused on reducing noise where it would have an
adverse effect for the specified land use, outdoors and/or indoors depending upon the land use.
For areas where the existing noise environment is unacceptable, new development should generally
not be undertaken, because there may not be sufficient noise reduction measures to bring the
development into compliance with the noise policies of this Element.
Sensitive receptors are land uses which are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
homes, schools, and libraries.
2.       Acceptable Noise Environments
Another consideration, which in some communities is an overriding factor, is the desire for an
acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, more restrictive standards for land use
compatibility, typically below the maximum considered normally acceptable for that land use category,
may be appropriate.
The following are the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards for noise exposure:
1.       The standard for maximum outdoor noise level permitted in residential areas is a Ldn of 60 dB.
         This standard is applied where outdoor use is a major consideration, such as backyards in
         single-family housing developments and recreation areas in multi-family developments. This
         standard should not be applied to outdoor areas such as small decks and balconies typically
         associated with multi-family residential developments, which can have a higher exposure of
         65 dB Ldn.
2.       The maximum acceptable interior noise level in new multi-family residential development
         required by the State of California Noise Insulation Standards is a Ldn of 45 dB. This standard
         is also applied to single-family and all other residential development.
3.       For projects occurring within noise environments that are conditionally acceptable, studies
         must be conducted to show how noise levels will be reduced in the areas that people use
         (which is generally the interior of offices, stores, industrial buildings, auditoriums, etc.). For
8 – Noise Element                                        8-6                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Map N-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sensitive Noise Receptors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SENSITIVE NOISE RECEPTORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highway 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.     Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.     County Public Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Airport                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.     Guest House Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.     Town Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5.     City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6.     Cotton Auditorium & Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bragg Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7.     Senior Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.     Mendocino County Libray
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9.     Veterans Building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10.    Lions Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11.    Eagles Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12.    Mobile Home Park
               AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13.    Convalescent Home
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14.    Noyo High School
       OCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                Airpor t                                            Road                                                                                                              Airport                                           Road                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15.    Redwood School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Hemlock Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16.    Dana Gray School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17.    Fort Bragg High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18.    County Courthouse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19.    Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln.                                                                                                                                                                                                     20.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 21.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        College of the Redwoods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mendocino Coast District Hospital
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Johnson
                                                                                                                             d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                                                                          Roa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Johnson                           Ln.
                                                                                                                     Hau
                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                    Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Road
PA C I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                             dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    g Cr       ing
                                                                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                                                                                                         dd             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BaldHill Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                       Pu                  k
                                                                                                                                  rt
                                                                                                                             Stewa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cr                                                    John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                     Manzanita
                                                                                                                                      St                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln.                                                                                                                                                  Creek                            Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Forster
                                                                                                                                             El m St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ro         ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Country                      Road
                                                                                                                                             Spr uce              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pudding                                               Creek                                                      Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                            in        Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                        Tr a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                          unk
                                                                                                                                                                   Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                           Fir St
                                                                                                                                      2              Ra
                                                                                                                                                       ilroa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Harold Street
                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                     n       Pi n e                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                              te r                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                                                            We
                                                                                                                                                         4 59 8
                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Alger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Huckleberry Lane
                                                                                                                                                              Lau rel                                St
                                                                                                                                            3                Redwo od Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nurnberger                   Dennison                                  Mall Lane
                                                                                                                                                            10 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Monsen Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                            McPherson St
                                                                                                                                                                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St                    St                    St                                                                                                      Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Whipple St
                                                                                                                                                             Al d er                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Howland
                                                                                                                                                                                         Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Corry                 Har ol d              Morrow                                                                                Terrace Ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Court
                                                                                                                                                         STREET
                                                                                                                                                              Oa k                                   St
                                                                                                                                                             Madr one                                St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                          Park St.                            Florence St.                         Livingston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jewett
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13               Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Acorn Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SwingTree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hocker
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sherwood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                         MAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Way
                                                                                                                                                              Ma ple                                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Willow                        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Alley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Penitenti  Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14                                                                                                                           Lyta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Str eet               Str eet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dana St.
                                                                                                                                                              Hazel                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15                                                        S. Sanderson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Susie Ct.                                                                                                          Wall St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S. Corry
                                                                                                                                                              Chestnut                               St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Street                            Str eet                                                 Har ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Chestnut                             St                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lincoln St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ebbing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Minnesota Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S. Harrison                       S. Whipple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Olsen Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Grove St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Drive              Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Walnut                                                                      Street                                                                                                                                                            Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Espey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DuBois                                                                                                                     Rive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     view
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cypr ess Street
                                                                                                                                                         18                                                                                                     River Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CIRCL                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sout                             OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                              h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SEQU
                                                                                                                                                                                                      St.                                                  Stree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     tl e                    dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d St.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Myr                    ood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               elw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Haz
                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Winding                        Way
                                                                                                                    Avenue
                                                                                       Del Mar Drive
                    Cliff Way
                                                              Monterey Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Road
                                Avenue        Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                    Harbor
                                                                                                                                                         Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Camille
                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                                  View Boat Yard
                                          Ocean           View                                           Drive
                                Neptune                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hanson
                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr.
                                              Pacific
                                                                              20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       res                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Highway 20                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Babcock
                                          Bayview Avenue                                                                                           Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane
                                                                                                               Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pine Tree Lane        Gorstrom Lane
                                                                                                                 re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Olsen Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Noyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Summers
                                                                                                                                Highway 1
                                                                                                      ad
                                                                   Ln.                             Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Highway 20
                                                               ine
                                                           rel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Terrace
                                                        ho                                              Hi gh
                                                                                                              way
                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W ay
                                                                             Cypress
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lahmon Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hare Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lane
                                                                                                       Coast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Chinquapin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Veronica                                    Sears                              Andrea     Tex-Mont                                                                              August, 2002
                                                                                                         Ol d
                                                                                                                                              Simpson                                                 Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Scale 1” = 2300’ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        For Schematic purposes only

         non-residential projects, no maximum outdoor standard is established other than the exterior
         environment cannot exceed the lower limit of the unacceptable range, since noise mitigation is
         not feasible at these noise exposure levels. Building construction will incorporate noise
         reduction measures recommended by an acoustic engineer to reduce interior noise levels to
         an acceptable level. For non-residential projects, the interior noise level is what is important.
         The conditionally acceptable noise levels indicate that interior noise levels can be reduced to
         an acceptable level given noise reduction implementation. Non-residential projects may be
         allowed even if the exterior noise environment is within the conditionally acceptable range. No
         standards are established for industrial uses since the exterior noise environment is not
         important for such uses.
4        Sensitive receptors are land uses that are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
         homes, schools, and libraries. Exterior noise levels for these types of uses where the uses
         include outdoor use locations (e.g., such as schools) should not exceed those allowed as
         normally acceptable in Table N-4. For those uses where the use areas are within buildings
         (e.g., hospitals, halls, and churches), interior noise levels should be reduced as described
         under No. 3 above, but projects can be permitted with exterior noise levels within the
         conditionally acceptable range. Map N-1: Noise Sensitive Receptors shows the location of
         some noise sensitive uses in the City.
5.       These standards are not intended to be applied reciprocally. In other words, if an area is
         currently below the desired noise standard, a project that causes an increase in noise up to
         the maximum should not necessarily be permitted. The impact of a proposed project on
         existing land use should be evaluated in terms of the potential for adverse community
         response, based on existing community noise levels, regardless of the compatibility
         standards.
6.       The Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards should be reviewed in relation to the
         specific source of noise. These standards are based on measurement systems which
         average noise over a 24-hour period and do not take into account single-event noise sources.
         Different noise sources yielding the same composite noise exposure do not necessarily create
         the same environment. Additional standards may be applied on a case-by-case basis where
         supported by acoustical analysis to assess the effects of single-event noise sources.
F.       Goals, Polices and Programs
The policies of the Noise Element are not part of the City of Fort Bragg certified Local Coastal
Program and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits.
Goal N-1          Protect City residents from harmful and annoying effects of exposure to
                  excessive noise.
     Policy N-1.1        General Noise Levels: The maximum allowable noise levels are established in
this Element.
      Policy N-1.2       Reduce Noise Impacts: Avoid or reduce noise impacts first through site
planning and project design. Barriers and structural changes may be used as mitigation techniques
only when planning and design prove insufficient.
8 – Noise Element                                      8-7                                        July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program N-1.2.1: Adopt and use a Noise Ordinance in environmental review of all
         development proposals and incorporate project design measures to reduce noise to allowable
         limits. The Noise Ordinance should include the noise standards described in this Element as
         well as consider other noise concerns, including but not limited to, allowable hours for grading
         and construction, allowable noise levels for electronic sound devices (e.g., radios, stereos,
         etc.), time restrictions on the use of mechanical devices (e.g., leafblowers and other power
         equipment), and requirements for the placement of fixed equipment (e.g., air conditioners and
         condensers).
         Program N-1.2.2: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for projects
         that would cause a “substantial increase” in noise as defined by the following criteria or would
         generate unusual noise which could cause significant adverse community response:
                  a)     cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 3 dB or more;
                  b)     cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 2 dB or more if the
                         Ldn would exceed 70 dB; or
                  c)     cause the Ldn resulting exclusively from project-generated traffic to exceed an
                         Ldn of 60 dB at any existing residence.
         Program N-1.2.3: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for
         proposed projects that City staff finds may generate unusual noise that would cause
         significant adverse community response, such as, but not limited to, night-time, single-event
         noise or recurring impulse noise.
      Policy N-1.3       Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards: Ensure that all new noise
sensitive development proposals be reviewed with respect to Table N-4: Noise and Land Use
Compatibility Standards. Noise exposure shall be determined through actual on-site noise
measurements.
      Policy N-1.4       Residential and Noise Sensitive Land Use Standards: Require a standard of 45
Ldn for indoor noise level for all new residential development including hotels and motels, and a
standard of 60 Ldn for outdoor noise at residences. These limits shall be reduced by 5 dB for senior
housing and residential care facilities.
         Program N-1.4.1: Use the standards in Policy N-1.2.2 to determine the need for noise studies
         and require new developments to provide noise attenuation features as a condition of
         approving new projects.
         Program N-1.4.2: Require an acoustical study for all new residential projects with a future Ldn
         noise exposure of 60 Ldn or greater. The study shall describe how the project will comply with
         the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards. The studies shall also satisfy the
         requirements set forth in Title 24, part 2 of the California Code of Regulations, Noise
         Insulation Standards, for multi-family attached dwellings, hotels, motels, etc. regulated by Title
         24.
       Policy N-1.5 Non-Transportation Noise Generation: For new non-transportation noise
generators, Table N-5 describes the maximum noise level at the nearest residential property line:
8 – Noise Element                                       8-8                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                                        TABLE N-5
   NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NEW PROJECTS AFFECTED BY OR INCLUDING
                                     NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                 Noise Level                         Daytime                             Nighttime
                  Descriptor                  (7 A.M. to 10 P.M.)                  (10 P.M. to 7 A.M.)
       Hourly Leq dB                                    55                                    45
       Maximum level, dB                                75                                    65
       Note: These noise levels apply to the residential property line nearest the project. Each of the noise
             levels shall be lowered by five dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or
             music, or for recurring impulsive noises. These noise level standards do not apply to residential
             units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings).
      Policy N-1.6          Mitigate Noise Impacts: Mitigate noise impacts to the maximum feasible extent.
         Program N-1.6.1: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures, when warranted,
         for new developments and roadway improvements which affect noise sensitive uses such as
         residences, schools, hospitals, libraries, and convalescent homes.
         Program N-1.6.2: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for any project
         that would potentially generate non-transportation noise levels in a residential area such that
         noise levels would exceed the planning standards set forth in Program N-1.2.2 and/or Table
         N-5.
         Program N-1.6.3: Work with Caltrans to ensure that adequate noise studies are prepared and
         alternative noise mitigation measures are considered when State and Federal funds are
         available.
         Program N-1.6.4: Consider and carefully evaluate the noise impacts of all street, highway, and
         other transportation projects.
         Program N-1.6.5: Recommend acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for all
         projects that would be exposed to noise levels in excess of those deemed normally
         acceptable, as defined in Table N-4.
         Program N-1.6.6: Consider developing an ordinance that regulates the allowable hours of
         construction activities.
         Program N-1.6.7: Consider requiring post-construction testing and sign-off by an acoustical
         engineer for residential projects exposed to an Ldn in excess of 65 dB to ensure compliance
         with applicable exterior and interior standards in the Noise and Land Use Compatibility
         Standards.
         Program N-1.6.8: Restrict truck traffic to designated routes.
8 – Noise Element                                                 8-9                                            July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

8 – Noise Element               8 - 10 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

9.       HOUSING ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Housing Element is a statement of Fort Bragg’s vision regarding existing and future housing
needs. The City’s Housing Element was originally adopted by the City Council in 1993 and was
certified by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). This revised
Housing Element consists of two sections. Section I contains the goals, policies and
implementation programs. Section II contains an analysis of the housing needs of all economic
segments of the community. The goals and policies are based on needs identified in Section II.
An essential goal of the Fort Bragg Housing Element is to achieve an adequate supply of safe,
decent housing for all residents of Fort Bragg. In order to achieve this goal, the policies and
programs of the Housing Element address several major issues:
      Maintaining and preserving the existing housing stock;
      Retaining the character of Fort Bragg's residential neighborhoods;
      Meeting the City's regional housing needs allocations; and
      Providing additional affordable housing, particularly for senior citizens.
The City has a commitment to Fort Bragg residents to maintain the identity and quality of the
residential neighborhoods. At the same time, the City also recognizes that it should meet its
share of regional housing needs. The Housing Element articulates Fort Bragg's housing goals
and establishes policies and programs to guide decision-makers to meet the community’s
housing needs.
B.       Relationship of the Housing Element to the General Plan
Consistency of the Housing Element with the other elements of the Coastal General Plan is
essential to having a complete and legally adequate General Plan. This updated Housing
Element has been prepared in conjunction with a comprehensive revision of the City's Coastal
General Plan.
The Housing Element is one of seven required general plan elements and is an integral part of
the Coastal General Plan. Since the majority of Fort Bragg's land is developed with housing, the
Housing Element is a key component of the City's future plans.
State law provides direction on how cities can maintain the General Plan as a policy guide by
requiring the Community Development Department to report annually to the City Council on "the
status of the plan and progress in its implementation" (Government Code Section 65400 [b]).
State law further provides that the housing element shall be revised periodically.
The analysis section of the Housing Element takes a 10-year perspective, whereas the policies
and programs are based on a five-year time frame. In this fashion, a review of actual results of
the previous housing goals, policies and programs can be developed by the City every five
years.
9 – Housing Element                                 9-1                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

C.       Summary of Findings
Listed below are several principal findings from Section II: Housing Background of this Element:
•    Assuming a two percent growth rate, the 2000 population of 7,026 residents will increase to
     approximately 8,563 residents in 2010 in the City.
•    The average household size in Fort Bragg is 2.38 persons per household. This is smaller
     than the Countywide average of 2.57 persons per household and the Statewide average of
     2.81 persons per household. This reflects the substantial number of elderly residents in the
     City and the aging population.
•    The median household income in Mendocino County was $41,500.00 in 2002.
•    Approximately 29 percent of Fort Bragg's households are very-low income and approximately
     14 percent are low income.
•    Groups with special housing needs include elderly residents, physically and/or mentally
     disabled persons, and single-parent households.
•    In the past 12 years (1995-2007), a total of 303 dwelling units were constructed in the City.
     Based on the regional housing needs allocation of 452 units identified in the 1993 Housing
     Element, there remains an unmet housing need for 70 very-low income, 40 low-income, and
     72 moderate-income units.
•    The existing housing stock in Fort Bragg includes 1,886 single-family residences; 811
     multiple family units; and 138 mobile homes.
•    The City of Fort Bragg contains approximately 103.75 acres of residentially zoned vacant
     land and a number of mixed use, infill parcels located in commercially zoned areas, which
     could accommodate a maximum of 1,192 more dwelling units.
D.       Format and Organization of the Housing Element
The format of the goals and policies of the Housing Element differs from the rest of the General
Plan, in large measure to meet the requirements of State Housing Law.
For every goal there are several policies – each with one or more implementation programs that
contain the following information:
    A concise statement of the specific City actions that will be taken to implement the program;
    The City department or other agency responsible for implementation; and
    The schedule for completion.
Quantified objectives are summarized in Appendix A of the Housing Element.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-2                                   July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

E.        Goals, Policies, and Programs
1.        Housing Goals
The following policies demarcated with the Fort Bragg City seal:                      are not part of the certified
LCP and do not govern the review and approval of coastal development permits: Policy H-1.1,
Policy H-2.3, Policy H-2.8, Policy H-3.1, Policy H-3.3, Policy H-3.7, Policy H-3.9, Policy H-3.10,
Policy H-3.11, Policy H-4.1, Policy H-4.2, Policy H-5.1, and Policy H-5.2.
Goal H-1            Conserve and improve the existing housing supply to provide adequate,
                    safe, and decent housing for all Fort Bragg residents.
      Policy H-1.1          Housing Rehabilitation: Continue and expand the City’s housing
rehabilitation and preservation programs.
          Program H-1.1.1 Funding Housing Rehabilitation: Seek funding through the Community
          Development Block Grant program and other State and/or Federal programs to assist in
          the rehabilitation and conservation of existing residential units.
                     Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                     Financing:          City
                     Scheduling:         Annually as an ongoing program
          Program H-1.1.2 Target Areas: Continue to identify target areas and specific properties
          where housing rehabilitation is most needed.
                     Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                     Financing:          City
                     Scheduling:         Annually as an ongoing program
          Program H-1.1.3 Rehabilitation/Preservation Program: Continue the City’s housing
          rehabilitation program which provides low interest loans for the rehabilitation of homes
          owned or occupied by very-low to moderate-income households. Facilitate citizen
          awareness of this rehabilitation loan program by a) making pamphlets on this program
          available at City Hall and at the public library, b) contacting neighborhood groups in older
          residential areas with this information, and c) continuing building code enforcement in
          cooperation with the Building Department.
                     Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                     Financing:          City, State and Federal funds
                     Scheduling:         Ongoing
          Program H-1.1.4 Housing Rehabilitation in Non-Residential Areas: Continue to permit
          substantial rehabilitation1 of, and additions to, existing housing located in zones where it
          is a nonconforming use consistent with the limitations of Chapter 18.90 (Nonconforming
          Uses, Structures and Parcels) of the coastal Land Use and Development Code. Coastal
          development permits are required for all development not otherwise exempt from permit
1
       Substantial rehabilitation or renovation occurs when 25 percent or more of the floor area is added to a
       structure and/or a building permit for construction valued at 50 percent or more of the assessed value
       of the building is required. A case-by-case review of nonconforming residential uses assures the
       health, safety, and welfare of the community, maintains the neighborhood character, and encourages
       mixed use developments.
9 – Housing Element                                             9-3                                         July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         requirements pursuant to Chapter 18.71.040 and Section 30610 of the Coastal Act.
         require a conditional use permit and Design Review approval for substantial renovations.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Ongoing
         Program H-1.1.5 Capital Improvement Program: Provide for consideration of capital
         improvement projects necessary to maintain the community’s older neighborhoods as
         part of the City Council’s annual review the Capital Improvement Program.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Annually as an ongoing program
         Program H-1.1.6 Standards for Rehabilitation of Buildings: Consider adopting all, or
         portions of, the Uniform Code of Building Conservation establishing standards which
         encourage the rehabilitation of older buildings in the community, and making it less
         burdensome for property owners to perform building maintenance.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
Policy H-1.2 Discourage Conversion of Residential Units: Discourage the conversion of
residential units to other uses.
         Program H-1.2.1 Residential Conversions: Consider revising the Very High Density
         Residential (RVH) and Medium Density Residential (RM) zones to eliminate or reduce
         potential conversion of residential properties to commercial uses, except as home
         occupations in conjunction with residential uses.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
Policy H-1.3 Energy Conservation Improvements: Promote energy conservation improvements
for existing and proposed residential units.
         Program H-1.3.1 Energy Conservation             Program:     Provide energy  conservation
         information for public distribution.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Complete public information by 2009
         Program H-1.3.2 Green Building Program: Provide expedited plan review for green
         building projects and provide green building information for the public.
Goal H-2          Provide a range of housing, including single-family homes, townhouses,
                  apartments, and other housing types to meet the housing needs of all
                  economic segments of the community.
Policy H-2.1 Regional Housing Needs: Ensure that adequate residentially-zoned land is
available to accommodate the City’s Regional Housing Needs Determinations as described in
Section II.
9 – Housing Element                                      9-4                             July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-2.1.1 Identification of Infill Sites: Develop and maintain an inventory of
         vacant and underdeveloped residentially designated land. Provide copies of the
         inventory for public distribution.
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Ongoing
Policy H-2.2 Mixed-Use Development: Encourage the development of residential uses in
conjunction with commercial enterprises in commercial zones, where the viability of the
commercial activities and visitor-serving uses would not be adversely affected.
         Program H-2.2.1 Mixed Use in the Central Business District: Continue to permit multiple
         family residential units above the ground floor after Design Review in the Central
         Business District (CBD).
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         Program H-2.2.2 Coastal LUDC Revisions: Consider the following Coastal LUDC
         amendments to provide additional housing development opportunities:
                  •         revise the CO and the CG zoning districts to include a maximum allowable
                            residential density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit;
                  •         revise the Highway Visitor Commercial CH District to allow residential uses
                            at a density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit2; and
                  •         revise the Central Business District to allow a residential density of up to
                            40 units per acre as a permitted use above the ground floor.
                  •         establish a procedure which allows for flexibility in applying development
                            standards pertaining to roadways, setbacks, minimum lot standards, and
                            parking requirements for affordable housing developments with continuing
                            affordability requirements.
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         Program H-2.2.3 Adopt revised parking standards to reduce and/or provide flexible on-
         site parking standards for residential uses, in existing residential areas which have
         significant on-street parking capacity that is not needed to serve coastal access use, to
         provide for more effective and affordable development of second/granny units.
                     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                     Financing:         City
                     Scheduling:        Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         2
           The conditional use permit requirement is established to ensure the compatibility of multi-family residential
         uses in the Highway Visitor Commercial (CH) District with surrounding land uses, namely that the proposed
         residential development is sited and designed in a manner that ensures the residential uses are adequately
         protected from noise, glare, dust, and odors which may occur in commercial districts. Although most of the
         vacant and underutilized parcels in the CH District would be suitable for multi-family mixed use developments,
         the conditional use permit process would discourage such development on the few parcels in this district not
         suited for this land use, or ensure that they are approved with conditions ensuring overall compatibility of
         mixed use development.
9 – Housing Element                                             9-5                                          July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy H-2.3         Limited Equity Cooperatives: Encourage limited equity residential
cooperatives and other non-profit enterprises such as sweat-equity projects designed to provide
affordable housing, consistent with the City’s zoning regulations.
         Program H-2.3.1 Limited Equity Cooperatives and Sweat Equity Projects: Seek
         sponsors to utilize State funds to develop a limited equity cooperative (LEC). Specific
         City actions to achieve this objective include assessing the viability and process of
         establishing an LEC; making such information available at the Community Development
         Department; identifying potential sites for an LEC; and seeking cooperation and support
         for this program from non-profit housing organizations.
                    Responsibility:     Community Development          Department     and    non-profit   housing
                                        organizations
                    Financing:          City
                    Scheduling:         Ongoing
Policy H-2.4 Large-Scale Commercial and Office Projects: Consider the impacts on housing
demand of large-scale commercial and office projects.
         Program H-2.4.1 Housing Impacts of Employment-Generating Uses: Identify housing
         impacts of new commercial, office, and industrial development that will generate a
         significant amount of housing demand as part of the development review process and
         require appropriate mitigating measures.
                    Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                    Financing:          City
                    Scheduling:         Ongoing
         Program H-2.4.2 Consider a Housing Impact Fee: Consider implementing a housing
         impact fee as condition of specific plan approval and/or annexation of commercial and
         industrial properties.
                    Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                    Financing:          City
                    Scheduling:         2008
Policy H-2.5 Secondary Dwelling Units: Continue to facilitate the construction of secondary
dwelling units on residential properties consistent with Chapter 18.42.170 (Second Units) of the
Coastal Land Use and Development Code.
Policy H-2.6 Manufactured Housing: Continue to allow placement of manufactured housing
units on permanent foundations in residential zoning districts.
Policy H-2.7 Infill Housing: Encourage housing development on existing infill sites in order to
efficiently utilize existing infrastructure. (Refer to Programs 2.2.1 to 2.2.3.)
      Policy H-2.8         Redevelopment Agency: Utilize Redevelopment Agency housing set-aside
funds to implement housing programs for lower- income households.3.
3
         The City had a total balance of $1,099,305 in the Redevelopment Housing Fund as of June 30, 2007.
9 – Housing Element                                            9-6                                      July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-2.8.1 Redevelopment Funds: Use the 20 percent Housing Set-Aside Funds
         and other Redevelopment funds as available to assist with the development,
         conservation, or rehabilitation of affordable housing consistent with community housing
         priorities.
                     Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing.
         Program H-2.8.2 Update the Five-Year Implementation Plan: Revise the Redevelopment
         Five-Year Implementation Plan to include specific criteria for use of the 20 percent of the
         tax increment revenues collected which are allocated to the Housing Fund. Include
         criteria for the provision of full or partial fee waivers for affordable housing projects.
                     Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing.
Goal H-3           Expand affordable housing opportunities for persons with special housing
                   needs such as the elderly, the disabled, households with very- low to
                   moderate incomes, and first time home buyers.
      Policy H-3.1        Available Funding Sources: Utilize County, State and Federal programs
and other funding sources that provide housing opportunities for lower-income households.
         Program H-3.1.1 Available Funding: Seek available State and Federal assistance to
         develop affordable housing for seniors, the disabled, lower-income large households, and
         households with special housing needs. Consider joint applications with the County
         Community Development Commission for HCD programs such as the California Self Help
         Housing Program (CSHHP), the Multi-family Housing Program (MHP), and/or the HOME
         Program.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      State and Federal sources
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-3.1.2 Tax-Exempt Financing: Require developers utilizing tax-exempt
         financing to include language in agreements with the City permitting persons and
         households eligible for HUD Section 8 rental assistance or Housing Voucher Folders to
         apply for below-market-rate units provided in the development.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City and housing developers utilizing tax-exempt revenue bonds
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-3.1.3 School Facility Reimbursement: Encourage developers of affordable
         housing to apply for the Proposition 1A School Facility Fee Reimbursement Program
         (SFFRP) financed by the California Housing Finance Agency. Consider making this a
         requirement for development receiving subsidies or density bonuses for very-low rental
         income units.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City and housing developers utilizing tax-exempt revenue bonds
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing
9 – Housing Element                                         9-7                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Policy H-3.2 Encourage Senior Housing: Allow senior housing projects to be developed with
density bonuses and flexible parking standards where found to be consistent with maintaining
the character of the surrounding neighborhood consistent with the requirements of Policy H-3.5.
         Program H-3.2.1 Amend the Coastal LUDC to address senior housing developments:
         Revise the Coastal LUDC to establish flexible parking requirements and to allow density
         bonuses for senior housing projects.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Completed Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
         Program H-3.2.2 Affordable Senior Housing: Establish and maintain an inventory which
         identifies properties which are potentially well-suited for senior housing funded by HUD
         202 financing or similar program. Work with developers to facilitate obtaining funding and
         construction of senior housing.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Completed
      Policy H-3.3        House Sharing: Encourage and facilitate house sharing programs for
seniors.
         Program H-3.3.1 Senior Shared Housing: Amend the Coastal LUDC to allow for
         conversion of existing residences into shared housing for seniors (i.e., suites with shared
         living/cooking facilities) and separate residential facilities for an on-site manager, with a
         use permit in all residential zones.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City to apply for available funding; non-profit organization to implement
                                     the program.
                     Scheduling:     Completion of the Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
Policy H-3.4 Increase Affordable Housing Development: Encourage the construction of
housing units which are affordable to households with very-low to moderate incomes consistent
with Chapters 18.31 and 18.32 of the Coastal Land Use and Development Code.
         Program H-3.4.1 Implement the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which requires
         residential developments of 7 or more units consistent with Chapters 18.31 and 18.32 of
         the Coastal Land Use and Development Code to:
                  a)      Provide 15 percent of for sale units at prices affordable to moderate and
                          median income households.
                  b)      Provide 15 percent of rental units at prices affordable to very-low, low -
                          income and median income households.
                  c)      Construct all required inclusionary housing on-site unless an alternative
                          equivalent action is approved by City Council.
                  d)      Implement the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which requires the
                          construction of one small secondary unit and/or one inclusionary unit in
                          projects of 4 to 6 units.
9 – Housing Element                                         9-8                                       July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-3.4.2 Inclusionary Housing Standards: Revise the Coastal LUDC to include
         the following performance criteria for inclusionary units:
                  a)     the exterior appearance of inclusionary units shall not be different than
                         other units in the housing development of which they are a part; and
                  b)     inclusionary units shall be dispersed or distributed throughout the
                         development rather than being concentrated in one portion of the
                         development.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Complete 2008
         Program H-3.4.3 Revise the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Revise the Coastal LUDC
         incorporating Programs 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 above establishing income guidelines, in-lieu
         fees, purchase or rent levels, and measures to assure a minimum 30-year affordability of
         inclusionary units.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Complete 2008
Policy H-3.5 Density Bonus Incentives: Continue to provide density bonuses to projects that
provide a required percentage of total units affordable to very-low, low-income, median, and
moderate-income households and for units meeting the special housing needs identified in this
Element and as established in conformance with State law. Density ranges described in land use
designations may be exceeded consistent with the provisions of Government Code Section
65915 to encourage affordable housing production pursuant to §65915 of the California
Government Code (Density Bonuses) provided the density bonus will not have an adverse effect
on coastal resources. Any housing development approved pursuant to Government Code
Section 65915 shall be consistent with all applicable certified Local Coastal Program (LCP)
policies and development standards. In reviewing a proposed density increase, the City shall
identify all feasible means of accommodating the density increase and consider the effects of
such means on coastal resources. The City shall only grant a density increase if the City
determines that the means of accommodating the density increase proposed by the applicant
does not have an adverse effect on coastal resources. If, however, the City determines that the
means for accommodating the density increase proposed by the applicant will have an adverse
effect on coastal resources, the City shall not grant the density increase.
         Program-3.5.1 Density Bonus Regulations: Revise the Coastal LUDC as needed to
         incorporate the Density Bonus provisions of State Law requiring the granting of a density
         bonus and additional incentives. Adopt an ordinance setting forth the requirements of the
         Density Bonus Program and defining affordable sales prices and rents, the affordability
         criteria, and additional incentives.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City and developers
                    Scheduling:     Complete 2008
Policy H-3.6 Resale and Rental Controls on BMR Units: Require resale and rental controls on
all Below Market Rate (BMR) units, which are inclusionary units and units with affordability
restrictions.
         Program H-3.6.1 Adopt Continued Affordability Measures: Prepare deed restrictions
         and/or similar covenants to ensure the continued affordability of Below Market Rate units
9 – Housing Element                                     9-9                                July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         for a specified minimum period of time for rental and ownership units which implement
         the requirements imposed by State and Federal laws.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City and developers
                   Scheduling:     2008 and ongoing
      Policy H-3.7       Large Families: Encourage housing for large families.
         Program H-3.7.1 County Community Development Commission: Work with the County
         Community Development Commission to obtain and administer a HCD HOME grant or
         CDBG grant specifically to accommodate large families.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     ongoing
Policy H-3.8 Planned Development: The Planned Development Permit process shall be used
to promote flexibility in the application of development standards under limited and unique
circumstances to allow consideration of innovation in site planning and other aspects of project
design to more effectively respond to site features, uses on adjoining properties, and
environmental resources. Planned Unit Development Permit approval does not replace,
supercede or modify the independent requirement for a CDP approved pursuant to the otherwise
applicable policies and standards of the certified LCP.
      Policy H-3.9       Housing for the Disabled: Continue to facilitate barrier-free housing in new
development.
         Program H-3.9.1 Accessible Units for the Physically Disabled: Revise the Coastal
         LUDC to establish requirements that specify a percentage of ground floor and other units
         in new residential projects which must be accessible for physically disabled persons.
         Ensure that these units are barrier-free consistent with the American with Disabilities Act
         (ADA) and State standards.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Complete Coastal LUDC revisions, 2008
      Policy H-3.10      Emergency and Transitional Housing:
         Program H-3.10.1 Ongoing Estimates of the Demand for Emergency Housing: Consult
         with the Fort Bragg Police Department and homeless providers in the community to
         maintain ongoing estimates of the demand for emergency housing in Fort Bragg.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-3.10.2 Inter-Agency Cooperation: Work with private, County, and State
         agencies to provide emergency housing for the homeless.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
9 – Housing Element                                    9-10                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      Policy H-3.11      First Time Home Buyers: Encourage affordable housing for first time home
buyers.
         Program-3.11.1 First Time Home Buyers: Include in the Density Bonus provisions of the
         Coastal LUDC incentives for the provision of housing units affordable to first time home
         buyers who qualify for affordable housing.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     2008
         Program 3.11.2: Funding Sources for First Time Home Buyers: Consider applying for
         funding sources for first time home buyers such as HCD’s HOME Program, and provide
         referrals to FHA programs offered by local lenders and sweat-equity programs operated
         by non-profit housing organizations.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-4          Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender,
                  age, sexual orientation, marital status, or national origin.
      Policy H-4.1       Equal Housing Opportunity: Continue to facilitate non-discrimination in
housing in Fort Bragg.
         Program H-4.1.1 Housing Discrimination Complaints: Facilitate equal housing
         opportunity by referring housing discrimination complaints to the Fair Housing Division of
         HUD. Information regarding equal housing opportunity laws and the equal housing
         opportunities for Fair Housing shall be distributed to the public at City Hall and the public
         library.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-4.1.2 Non-discrimination Clauses: Provide non-discrimination clauses in
         rental agreements and deed restrictions for housing constructed with City assistance.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
      Policy H-4.2       Improve Accessibility to Housing: Make it easier to develop housing for
seniors and persons with disabilities.
         Program H-4.2.1 Use Housing Funds: Consider using the City’s housing funds to
         subsidize the construction of renovations and improvements that improve the accessibility
         to housing for seniors and persons with disabilities.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      City
                   Scheduling:     Ongoing
9 – Housing Element                                    9-11                                  July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

         Program H-4.2.2 Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities: Review the
         City’s land use and building regulations to identify constraints that may exist for the
         provision of housing for persons with disabilities, and adopt measures to facilitate
         reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities. Publicize revisions to land
         use regulations providing for reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City Housing Funds, Redevelopment Housing Set Aside Funds
                    Scheduling:     2008
Goal H-5           Adopt and implement a Housing Element that complies with State Law.
      Policy H-5.1        Public Participation: Continue to encourage and facilitate public
participation in the formulation and review of the City's housing and development policies.
         Program H-5.1.1 Workshops: Continue to hold workshops and public hearings to
         discuss proposed revisions to the City’s Housing Element.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department, Community Development
                                    Advisory Board (CDAB)
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Annually (include with the annual review of the CIP by the Planning
                                    Commission)
      Policy H-5.2        Annual Review of Housing Element Implementation: Carry out an annual
progress report on implementation of the Housing Element.
         Program H-5.2.1 Annual Report: Prepare an annual report that describes the amount
         and type of housing constructed, the stock of affordable housing units, demolition
         permits, and conversion of residential units to other uses, and other housing-related
         activities for review by the CDAB, Planning Commission and City Council.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Annually (include with the annual review of the CIP by the Planning
                                    Commission)
9 – Housing Element                                      9-12                                 July 2008
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

2.       Previous Housing Element
The policies and implementing actions of the previous Housing Element adopted in 1993
concentrated on preserving existing single-family neighborhoods and encouraging the
construction of secondary dwelling units and multi-family and senior citizen housing.
The City has been quite successful in achieving the goals established by the previous Housing
Element. Since 1991, 268 affordable dwelling units were built in the City. In addition, the City
has met a substantial proportion of its overall regional housing need.
The revised Housing Element builds on the foundation established by the previous Element, but
contains more specific implementation programs and quantified objectives. Priorities of the
revised Housing Element are to conserve and rehabilitate existing homes, provide additional
housing for seniors, and provide programs to advertise, implement and fund these activities.
The revised Element recognizes the need to provide stronger incentives for the construction of
additional affordable housing. See Appendix B for an evaluation of the programs in the previous
Housing Element.
3.       Public Participation
The Housing Element was prepared as a part of a comprehensive revision of the General Plan.
An extensive public participation program was implemented to encourage the involvement of all
economic segments of the community.
A Housing Issues Report was prepared and a public workshop was conducted by the Community
Development Advisory Board. The public workshop was advertised in the local newspaper and
notices sent to affordable housing providers and housing advocates in Mendocino County.
Members of the public, and for-profit and affordable housing developers attended the workshop.
In addition, six public hearings on the Housing Element were conducted by the Planning
Commission and the City Council to solicit public input, all of which were broadcast by MCCET
television station.
F.       Housing Background
The information presented in this section is intended to summarize the following: demographic
characteristics, employment trends, inventory of vacant residential land, and the constraints that
exist to the construction of housing in Fort Bragg. The policies and implementation programs
address housing needs identified by this section.
Information in the Housing Background Section is based on the following sources: the U.S.
Census, the California State Department of Finance, the City’s Community Development
Department, and the Spatial Insights Corporation. While the General Plan takes a ten-year
perspective, the Housing Element projects population and housing needs for a five-year time
span. This is done to comply with State Housing law that requires periodic updating of housing
elements. The feedback obtained from the affordable housing developers resulted in a number
of program changes to the Element.
9 – Housing Element                           9-13                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

1.       Summary of Demographic Trends
a.       Population Growth
The population of the City grew by 2,007 persons between 1980 and 2000, which represents a
39.9 percent increase in 20 years. The population has increased on the average about 1.9
percent per year.
                          TABLE H-1: POPULATION GROWTH 1980 TO 2000
         Year                     1980             1990              1995               2000
         Population               5,019            6,078             6,180              7,026
        Source: U. S. Census, State Department of Finance. (Excludes the Sphere of Influence)
While there are no official population projections for the City, the State Department of Finance
projects that the County of Mendocino as a whole will grow from 87,143 people in 2000 to
105,225 people in 2010. This is an increase of 18,082 people, representing an overall increase
of 20.7 percent, and an average annual increase of approximately 2 percent per year.
It is assumed that the population of the City of Fort Bragg will grow at approximately the same
rate as projected for the County. It is projected that the population in the City will increase by
approximately 1,537 persons between the years 2000 and 2010.
                                TABLE H-2: POPULATION PROJECTIONS
      2000         2001     2002     2003    2004      2005      2006      2007     2008     2009   2010
      7,026        7,166    7,309    7,455   7,604     7,756     7,911     8,069    8,230    8,395  8,563
      Source: PAS & Associates (Excludes the Sphere of Influence)
b.       Household Size
Between 1990 and 2000 the average household size in Fort Bragg has remained stable at 2.38
persons per household for owner-occupied units and 2.39 for renter-occupied units respectively1.
The average household size in the County in 1990 was moderately higher at 2.57 persons per
household.
c.       Female-Headed Households
The number of single parent female-headed households is indicated in Table H-3.
                              TABLE H-3: FEMALE HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD
                                                          1985           1990           2000
               Female Headed Households                   260             323            369
             Source: 2000 U. S. Census and Spatial Insights Corp.
1
         U.S. 2000 Census.
9 – Housing Element                                 9-14                                          November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

The number of female-headed households has increased by 29 percent, which is higher than the
growth of the population during that period of time.
d.       Age Structure
Significant changes are occurring in the age structure of Fort Bragg's population. The City's
proportion of elderly residents (over 65 years old) has decreased from 17.3 percent of the
population in 1990 to 13.9 percent of the population in 2000. This decrease in Fort Bragg's
senior population is accompanied by a commensurate decrease in the proportion of children.
Children 5 to 18 years old constituted 26.8 percent of the population in 1990 and 20.1 percent of
the population in 2000. The U. S. 2000 Census states that the median age of Fort Bragg
residents is 36.2 years.
Table H-4 shows the age structure of Fort Bragg's population in 2000. State projections indicate
that the proportion of the elderly population in Mendocino County is expected to increase in the
next ten years.       Fort Bragg will likely follow this trend, despite the recent reduction in the
proportion of senior citizens between 1990 and 2000. This trend will have an impact on the
provision of health and social services, as well as on the demand for specialized housing for the
growing senior population.
                                   TABLE H-4: AGE STRUCTURE 2000
                       Age Group              Number of People     Percent
                       0 TO 4 YEARS                    475             6.8
                       5 TO 9 YEARS                    473             6.7
                       10 TO 14 YEARS                  490             7.0
                       15 TO 19 YEARS                  489             7.2
                       20 TO 24 YEARS                  457             6.5
                       25 TO 34 YEARS                1,000            14.2
                       35 TO 44 YEARS                1,108            15.8
                       45 TO 54 YEARS                  994            14.1
                       55 TO 69 YEARS                  309             4.4
                       60 TO 64 YEARS                  254             3.6
                       65 TO 74 YEARS                  419             6.0
                       75 TO 84 YEARS                  401             5.7
                       >85 YEARS                       157             2.2
                       TOTAL                         7,026           100.0
                      Source: U. S. Census 2000
e.       Minority Population
The minority population of Fort Bragg represents a relatively small proportion of the total
population. The minority population grew from 11 percent of the total population in 1990 to 26
percent in 2000. The largest increase has come from persons of Hispanic origin. Fort Bragg has
a slightly smaller proportion of minority residents than that of the State, where over one-third of
9 – Housing Element                              9-15                                November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

the population is comprised of minorities. This is probably due to Fort Bragg's relatively isolated
location with respect to the more urbanized portions of California.
      TABLE H-5: POPULATION DISTRIBUTION BY RACE IN FORT BRAGG, 1990 AND 2000
                                                          1990                        2000
             Race                              Number        Percent       Number    Percent
             White                               5,411          89.0        5,863      74.1
             Black                                   29          0.5          107        1.3
             Native American*                        98          1.6          266        3.3
             Asian                                   47          0.8          102        1.2
             Hispanic                               493          8.1        1,596      20.1
             Total                               6,078         100.0        7,934     100.0
            Source: 1990 and 2000 Census. * Includes Polynesian, Hawaiian, Samoan, Tongan,
                       and Guamanian. Note the total population figure differs from Table 1, due to
                       different source data.
f.       Household Income
The 1999 estimated median household income for Fort Bragg was $36,006, while the average
household income was $41,940. Both the median and the average household income levels are
projected to increase significantly by the year 2009. The median income is projected to increase
by 36 percent, while the average income is projected to increase by 37 percent during this
period. The median income for Mendocino County established by HUD in March 2002 was
$41,500.
               TABLE H-6: MEDIAN AND AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD INCOME
        Income                         1999                2004                 2009
        Median income               $36,006           $ 46,102              $48,836
        Average income              $41,940           $ 49,920              $57,629
       Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, Inc. In constant 1999 dollars
The increasing household income projected for the City has important effects on housing
demand. The higher income households will be able to afford new housing built in the
community and will be able to afford to renovate and repair the City’s existing older single-family
homes.
There is, however, the necessity to maintain incentives for the construction of additional housing
units affordable to lower and moderate income households. As indicated in Table H-7,
approximately 43 percent of households in Fort Bragg earn less than $30,000 per year.
9 – Housing Element                                     9-16                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                      TABLE H-7: INCOME DISTRIBUTION
                          Income                Households            Percent
                          < $20K                        706              28.9%
                          $20K to $30K                  344              14.1%
                          $30K to $40K                  313              12.8%
                          $40K to $60K                  473              19.4%
                          $60K to $75K                  238               9.8%
                          $75K to $125K                 264              10.8%
                          > $125K                       101               4.1%
                          Total                       2,439            100.0%
                          Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June, 2000
g.        Employment Trends
The majority of the employment in Fort Bragg is in the trade and services sectors, reflecting the
City’s role as the commercial hub of the coastal area of Mendocino County.
                                   TABLE H-8: EMPLOYMENT BY SECTOR
 Agriculture Constructio ManufactureTransport                   Trade       Finance      Services   Gov’t.
     116           194         910                 49         1,520          120          1,060      625
     3%            4%          20%               1%            32%            3%           23%      14%
Source: Industry Trends and Outlook, California Employment Development Department, July, 2000
Projections indicate the total number of jobs in Fort Bragg will increase by a modest 3.2 percent
between the year 1999 and the year 2009. (See Table H-9.)
It is likely that Fort Bragg will follow the labor force trends projected for the County by the State
Employment Development Department. The largest increase in projected new jobs for the
County is anticipated to be in the tourism, retail sales, and services sectors. Employment in
logging and sawmills is projected to decline by 3.4 percent, and other lumber and wood products
industries by 12.8 percent between 1998 and 2008. This follows a structural change in the
economy of Mendocino County where future job creation is becoming increasingly based on the
growth of the service and retail sectors, rather than on the growth of the manufacturing industry.
           TABLE H-9: FORT BRAGG EMPLOYMENT PROJECTIONS 1999 TO 2009
                                           1999             2004           2009
                  Total Jobs               3,110            3,176          3,210
                 Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June, 2000
Although the projected growth in labor force is modest, the income typically provided by jobs in
the growing services and retail sectors is generally not sufficient to allow households to purchase
or rent a dwelling in the community. Employment trends suggest that housing affordability will be
a continuing problem.
9 – Housing Element                                    9-17                                    November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

2.       Housing Characteristics
Fort Bragg is a predominantly residential community. The existing housing stock defines the
character of the City and its neighborhoods and is the City's most valuable resource. The
relatively high number of older homes in the City underlines the need for policies and programs
which continue to maintain and enhance the quality of older residential areas.
a.       Age of Housing Stock
The majority of homes in the City are older dwellings that were constructed prior to 1970, as
shown in Table H-10. Approximately 14 percent of the City's homes are in need of significant
rehabilitation work, such as repair or replacement of the structure, foundations, mechanical
systems, roof, or windows.2
                                  TABLE H-10: AGE OF HOUSING STOCK
                                                         Number of
                          Year Built                        Units           Percentage
                          1938 or earlier                  1,039                36.8
                          1939 to 1960                       569                20.1
                          1961 to 1975                       292                10.3
                          1976 to 1980                       349                12.4
                          1981 to 1999                       576                20.4
                          Total                            2,825              100.0
                         Source: 2000 Census and the City of Fort Bragg Community Development
                                  Department
b.       Annual Construction of Housing Units by Type, 1991-2001
Fluctuations in the type of housing built reflect not only the relative amount of land zoned for
different types of residential development in the City, but also changes in various economic
factors such as tax codes and the real estate and financial markets. Table H-11 indicates single-
family and multi-family home construction in Fort Bragg during the period 1991 to 2001.
2
         City of Fort Bragg Housing Conditions Survey, Community Development Commission of Mendocino County,
         1996
9 – Housing Element                                 9-18                                      November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

      TABLE H-11: ANNUAL CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSING UNITS BY TYPE 1991 TO 2001
                                 Percent of                     Percent of
              Single Family                                                 Demolition
                                   Total        Multiple        Total Units            Net Housing
  Year             Units                                                        s
                                Units Built   Family Units         Built                Increase
  1991                35           19.2               2           3.1          0            37
  1992                34           18.7               3           4.7          0            37
  1993                11            6.0             22           34.4          0            33
  1994                 6            3.3               0             0          0             6
  1995                28           15.4               5           7.8          0            33
  1996                28           15.4             10           15.6          0            38
  1997                19           10.4               0             0          0            19
  1998                 5            2.8               7          10.9          1            11
  1999                16            8.8             15           23.4          2            29
  2000                 9          100.0               0             0          0             9
  2001                16          100.0               0             0          3            13
  Total            207             76.0             64             24          6           265
 Source: City of Fort Bragg Community Development Department, June 2002
As shown in Table H-11, 76 percent of new housing construction during the period 1991 to 2001
was single-family units. The rate of new residential construction fluctuates significantly from year
to year, averaging 27 units per year.
c.       Housing Types and Tenure
As indicated in the tables below, Fort Bragg remains predominantly a single-family residential
community. The large proportion of single-family homes is typical for a small coastal city located
in a predominantly rural county. In addition, a relatively high proportion of housing in Fort Bragg
is renter-occupied.
                                        TABLE H-12: HOUSING TYPES
                           Type of Housing                   Number         Percent
                           Single-family                       1,886          66.5
                           Multi-family                          811          28.6
                           Mobile Home, Trailer, Other           138           4.9
                           Total                               2,835         100.0
                          Source: State Department of Finance, 1999
9 – Housing Element                                 9-19                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                                         TABLE H-13: HOUSING TENURE
                            Type of Housing                Number          Percent
                            Owner Occupied                 1,218                42.9
                            Renter Occupied                1,622                57.1
                               Total                       2,840               100.0
                            Source: U. S. 2000 Census
 According to the State Department of Finance, 4.9 percent of Fort Bragg's housing units were
 vacant in 1999. The U. S. 2000 Census reports a rental vacancy rate of 2.5 percent. Real
 estate brokers and property managers in the community report a shortage of rental units and
 rental vacancy rates of less than 2 percent. It is generally accepted that an overall vacancy rate
 of 4 percent is needed to provide for normal turnover in housing units. Despite the official
 vacancy rate figure, there appears to be a tight housing market in the community.
 3.       Special Housing Needs
 a.       The Elderly
 A relatively large proportion (21.6 percent) of Fort Bragg’s housing units is occupied by persons
 65 years of age or older. Table H-14 below shows the affordable housing developments for
 senior citizens.
                                TABLE H-14: AFFORDABLE SENIOR HOUSING
                                                                         Number of   Income Category
 Development                                                               Units
 Moura Senior Housing                                                        41      Very-Low
 Duncan Place (disabled persons and seniors)                                 43      Very-low to Low
 River Garden Apartments (2 ADA-compliant apartments)                         2      Very-Low and
                                                                                     Low
 Walnut Apartments (56 apartments, mixed family and seniors)                  2      Very-Low
 Total                                                                       88
Source: Community Development Department, City of Fort Bragg, June 2001.
 The 88 housing units currently set aside exclusively for seniors do not meet the need for this type
 of housing. There is a 2-year waiting list comprised of 80 households for the Moura Senior
 Housing. Similar waiting lists exist for other affordable senior housing developments in the
 community. At present, 26 percent of Fort Bragg’s population is comprised of persons aged 55
 or older. The median age of the community is projected to increase from 47.5 years in 1999 to
 51.1 years in 20093. The State Department of Finance projects a doubling in the number of
 seniors in Mendocino County between 1999 and the year 2010.
 The 2000 Census data indicate there were 465 elderly owner households and 221 elderly renter
 households, representing 16.3 and 13.3 percent of each elderly housing type respectively.
 Several factors will affect the future number of senior housing and care facilities that can be built:
 3
          Spatial Insights Corp. June, 2000
 9 – Housing Element                                 9-20                                   November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

    There has not been a commensurate increase in Federal and State funding to provide
     additional affordable housing for seniors.
    There are vacant bedrooms in the City. It is difficult to quantify accurately the number of
     such under-utilized housing units. The diminishing household size since the 1960s combined
     with the large number of existing single-family homes indicates that there could be significant
     source of additional housing for seniors dispersed throughout existing neighborhoods. An
     acceptable housing program for seniors could be implemented to utilize this extra housing
     capacity.
Programs to assist seniors who wish to continue living in their own homes would not only provide
important psychological and social benefits, but also reduce the need to build additional housing.
Examples of such programs include low interest loans to qualifying seniors for maintenance and
repair of their homes and matching seniors with spare capacity in their homes with other seniors
looking for housing.
In addition, this Element recognizes the urgency of providing additional senior housing and
includes new programs to meet this need. The City is working with community groups such as
Redwood Coast Seniors Inc. and the Coast Senior Housing Assistance Corporation to locate a
site and obtain funding for a senior housing development.
b.       Disabled Persons
The number of disabled persons in a city has important planning and social implications and will
affect the demand for specialized handicapped access and transportation facilities, certain social
services, and specialized housing.
The U.S. Census collects information on disabled people based on work disabilities and public
transportation disabilities. The most recent 2000 Census information regarding disabled people
indicated there were 1,467 persons with one or more disabilities of which 447 were 65 years and
older.
The Redwood Coast Seniors Inc. provides scheduled and on-demand transportation services for
disabled persons, including seniors, throughout the community and to other locations along the
coast under contract with the Mendocino Transportation Authority. This service provides a
monthly average of 38 one-way trips per day for persons with wheelchairs, of which 18 are for
non-seniors.
The affordability of housing for disabled people is an important concern for Mendocino County.
According to the Community Development Commission, most disabled persons entitled to SSDI
(Social Security Disabled Insurance) and SSI (Social Security Insurance) benefits receive only
$652.00 or less each month from these sources. The average rent in Fort Bragg is $700.00 per
month, an amount that exceeds the total monthly benefits typically received by disabled persons.
Persons receiving Section 8 housing assistance would receive assistance in meeting the market
rate rents.
9 – Housing Element                            9-21                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

c.       Single-Parent Households
Single-parent households, particularly those headed by women, are likely to have greater
demand than two-parent households for child care and other social services. There is an
obvious need for more affordable housing for this sector of the community. The waiting list for
Section 8 housing at the Community Development Commission of Mendocino County is over 600
persons, and it typically takes more than two years to obtain housing.
                TABLE H-15: SINGLE-PARENT HOUSEHOLDS IN FORT BRAGG
              Head of Household                              Number       Percent
              Male-Headed Households                           65           23.5
              Female-Headed Households                        212           76.5
              Total                                           277          100.0
             Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June 2000
d.       Farm and Fisheries Workers
There exists no data identifying the number of farm or fisheries workers in the community. There
are a number of farmworkers employed in nurseries surrounding the City and fisheries workers in
Noyo Harbor. There is no housing in the area specifically designed for migrant workers.
Although the 2000 Census indicated there were 259 persons working in agriculture, forestry,
fishing and hunting, there are no farmworkers in Fort Bragg, since there is no agriculture in the
Planning Area. The workers identified by the Census are employed in the fishing and forestry
sectors, and are therefore not eligible for farmworker housing subsidies, such as from CDBG
grants.
e.       Large Households
Large households are defined as households with five or more members. The market does not
provide sufficient housing for large households who often have limited income and require
additional rooms. The table below shows that there are 188 large households in Fort Bragg.
                                       TABLE H-16: HOUSEHOLD SIZE
                                                      Number of
               Household Size                        Households   Percent
               1 person                                  815        32.5
               2 persons                                 844        33.6
               3 persons                                 361        14.4
               4 persons                                 303        12.0
               5 or more persons                         188         7.5
               Total                                   2,511      100.0
             Source: Spatial Insights Corporation, June 2000
The 2000 Census data indicate there were 53 large owner-households and 199 large rental-
households in Fort Bragg.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-22                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Demographic trends indicate that family size will continue to decrease, thereby reducing the
demand for housing units with more than four bedrooms.
4.       At Risk Units
There are affordable housing units throughout California which were built 30 years ago with
Federal low-interest mortgages from the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
with an agreement that the rents of these units be kept at a level affordable to low income
households.
State Government Code Section 65863.10 requires owners of such projects to provide at least
nine months notice of contract termination or prepayment of Federal assistance to tenants and
public agencies. Owners who are proposing to sell or dispose of those properties must also
provide first right of refusal to purchase those properties to those agreeing to maintain the
affordability of the units.
There are no housing units in Fort Bragg listed by the California Housing Partnership Corporation
inventory of Federally subsidized housing at risk of conversion to market rate during the next five
years.
5.       Ability to Pay for Housing
In analyzing the ability of different economic sectors of the community to pay for housing costs,
four income categories are commonly used: above-moderate, moderate, low, and very-low. The
following brief definitions explain each of these income categories expressed in dollar amounts
as of March 2002 for a four-person household:4
Above-Moderate Income: Household income which exceeds 120 percent of the median income
for Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of $49,801 or more.
Moderate Income: Household income between 80 and 120 percent of the median income for
Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of $33,201 to $49,800.
Low Income: Household income between 50 and 80 percent of the median income for
Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of $20,751. to $33,200.
Very-Low Income: Household income not exceeding 50 percent of the median income for
Mendocino County. This represents an annual income of up to $20,750.
Table H-17 presents the distribution of households by these four income categories in the City.
                TABLE H-17: DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSEHOLDS BY INCOME CATEGORY
                             Very-Low         Low        Moderate      Above-Moderate         Total
          Households             706          344            313            1,076             2,439
          Percent               28.9          14.1          12.8             44.1             100.0
         Source: Spatial Insights Corporation and HUD Income Limits 2000. Note the household figures are
                   based on HUD 2000 figures and the 1999 household income figures from Spatial Insights
4
         According to data developed by the State Department of Housing and Community Development, under the
         direction of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), March 2002.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-23                                     November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

                 Corporation and are therefore approximate. These figures are used to provide an
                 approximate estimate of the proportion of households in each income category.
The average rent paid by households in Fort Bragg in the first six months of 2000 for a typical
two bedroom apartment was $700 a month, and for a two-bedroom, single-family house the
average rent was approximately $850, as reported by property managers and real estate brokers
in the community.
In addition, rents have increased by approximately 20 percent during the past two years. This
rent increase is more than five times the rate of inflation and substantially larger than the growth
in household income observed for this period.
The significant rise in rental costs is in part a reflection of the limited supply of rental units in the
community, in relation to the large demand. Property managers report having waiting lists of 40
to 50 households for available rental units. Few of the rental units that do come on the market
are advertised, since there is such a large pent-up demand.
In order to afford an average rent for an apartment in Fort Bragg of $700 per month, a household
must have an annual gross income of $25,200, assuming that a maximum of 30 percent of
household income is allocated for rent. This level of rent is affordable for above-moderate and
moderate income households in the City. It is not affordable, however, to the approximately 43
percent of households in the community with very-low and low incomes. Until additional
construction of rental units occurs, the combination of strong demand and low vacancies will
contribute to an increasingly severe shortage of rental units and a decrease in their affordability.
The situation for home ownership is similar. The average sales price of a single-family house in
Fort Bragg was $163,000 in 2000. In order to qualify for a mortgage to purchase this home, a
household would require a gross annual income of $55,869. This assumes a 20 percent cash
down payment of $13,040 and a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage at an interest rate of 8.0 percent
costing 2 points, including taxes and insurance.
The 1999 estimated median household income for Fort Bragg was $36,006, which is less than
the minimum income required to purchase an average-priced home within the City. (Note this
figure is different from the HUD 2002 median income figure for Mendocino County of $41,500).
Although many Fort Bragg residents purchased their homes many years ago, before the time
when affordability became an issue, it is evident that the majority of these people could no longer
qualify to purchase a home in their community.
Overpayment is clearly an acute problem for renters as well as for those seeking to purchase
homes. The policies and programs section of the Housing Element contains actions that seek to
address this situation.
According to the 2000 Census, the median household income for Mendocino County was
$35,996. Estimates of overpayment by owners and renters reveal 56 percent of lower-income
owner households pay over 30 percent of their household income on housing, and 69 percent of
lower-income renter households overpay for housing.
In addition, the 2000 Census data indicated that occupants of 33 owner occupied units (1.15
percent), and 94 renter households (5.6 percent) in Fort Bragg reside in overcrowded conditions.
It should be noted that 49 renter occupied units are quite overcrowded, with two or more
occupants per room.
9 – Housing Element                                  9-24                                      November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

6.       Regional Housing Needs Determinations
State legislation enacted in 1980, AB 2853, mandated that the Mendocino Council of
Governments (MCOG) determines the existing and projected regional housing needs and
determines each city’s share of the regional need for housing by housing type and cost in
Mendocino County.
The Housing Element must consider the local share for regional housing assigned to Fort Bragg
by MCOG which takes into consideration employment opportunities, the availability of suitable
sites and public facilities, market demand for housing, and the type and tenure of housing.
   TABLE H-18: REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATIONS FOR THE CITY OF FORT BRAGG
                                     JANUARY 2001 – JULY 2008
                                           Total Housing
                         Income Category   Need            Percent
                         Very-Low (0-50)   85              22
                         Low (50-80)       74              19
                         Moderate          66              17
                         (80-120)
                         Above-Moderate    163             42
                         (>120)
                         Total             388             100
  Source: Mendocino County Housing Needs Plan, Mendocino Council of Governments, as amended December
            2003.
The Housing Element must demonstrate that there is sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land
to meet Regional Housing Needs and to accommodate a range of housing for all income groups.
Table H-19 indicates that there are 103.79 acres of vacant residentially-zoned land which could
accommodate development of approximately 1,192 housing units during the time frame of this
Housing Element.
A total of 268 dwelling units, of which 84 were affordable units, were constructed in the City since
the 1991 Housing Need Allocations. Significant progress has been made towards alleviating the
shortage of affordable housing through the collaborative efforts of the City and nonprofit housing
organizations. Nonetheless, there continues to be a large unmet need for this type of housing in
the community.
a.       Residential Development Potential
Table H-19 shows remaining vacant or underdeveloped land that could accommodate housing
development within the City of Fort Bragg by General Plan designation. Total residential
development potential figures that include the Sphere of Influence are presented in the Land Use
Element.
The development potential figures shown in the table are based on a parcel-by-parcel analysis of
the number of dwelling units that could be constructed, taking into account the residential
densities permitted by the General Plan. Refer to Appendix C for a parcel-specific residential
9 – Housing Element                           9-25                                     November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

land use inventory5. All of the residential units indicated in Table H-19 can be served by City
services and infrastructure.
Several conclusions can be drawn from Table H-19. First, the City has sufficient vacant and
underdeveloped land to meet its remaining regional housing allocation of 187 units, since 1,192
units could be built within City limits. The majority (1,087) of these units would be higher-density
housing in multi-family housing and mixed use Zoning Districts.
Despite sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land, there exist constraints to increased
residential development which are discussed in the Constraints to Housing Development section.
State legislation (SB 1019) requires the City to ensure that there are adequate sites with zoning
that permits multi-family residential uses without a conditional use permit to allow the City to
meet its housing need for very-low and low income households. The RM, RH and RVH zoning
districts permit multi-family housing without a conditional use permit as indicated in Table H-19:
therefore the majority of multi-family housing can be developed as a use by right, without a
conditional use permit: namely, 40 units in the RM District, 186 in the RH District, and 520 units
in the RVH District.
                          TABLE H-19: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
       General Plan Designation            Acres of Vacant Land
                                                                                     Maximum Units
       Low Density Residential (RL)               18.45                                     75
       Medium Density Residential (RM)             4.55                                     40
       High Density Residential (RH)              16.58                                    186
       Very-High Density Residential (RVH)        31.67                                    520
       General Commercial (CG)                     5.67                                     63
       Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)            26.53                                    298
       CBD                                         0.34                                     10
       Total                                     103.80                                  1,192
      Source: Community Development Department, City of Fort Bragg, December 2001 and Buildout Projections for
               the 2001 Draft City of Fort Bragg General Plan, September 2001 LCA & Associates. Note the latter
               counts mixed use units as commercial square footage, rather than as dwelling units.
b.       Emergency and Transitional Housing
Accurate information on the number of homeless persons is impossible to obtain. No official
counts of the homeless exist. Only a small proportion of the homeless population contact
government and private agencies that provide assistance. Estimates of the number of homeless
vary greatly because this population is transient, often moving from place to place every night
seeking shelter.
The Police Department does not have statistics on the homeless population in the City. There
are several organizations in the community that provide transitional housing facilities, notably the
5
         The residential development figures in the Housing Element are different that the total buildout figures in the
         Background Report and in other parts of the General Plan. They are more conservative (i.e., assume less
         units per acre than would be allowed under the designation).
9 – Housing Element                                   9-26                                            November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Ford Street Project, the Yellow House, and the Hospitality House. They report that the demand
 for temporary housing exceeds the supply. A summary of emergency and transient housing
 facilities are presented in Table H-20.
                       TABLE H-20: TRANSITIONAL AND EMERGENCY HOUSING
 Organization                             Type of Shelter Provided                 Units/Size
 The Ford Street Project                  Emergency Housing                        3 beds
                                          Transitional Housing                     5 beds
 Hospitality House                        Emergency Housing                        15 individual beds, 9
                                                                                   family beds
 Yellow House                             Transitional Housing for families with   12 beds
                                          children and disabled individuals
 Community Development Commission         Shelter Plus Care voucher program        variable
Source: PAS & Associates
 According to Mendocino County’s Homeless Services Planning Group which coordinates public
 and private resources, the majority of homeless are County residents. In most cases,
 homelessness has occurred because local people are unable to afford housing, rather than as
 the result of an influx of homeless persons from other areas.
 The magnitude of this problem far exceeds the resources of local government, particularly
 smaller cities. The City, however, has complied with Government Code Section 65583(a)(6) and
 (c)(1) regarding the identification of adequate sites to facilitate the development of emergency
 shelters and transitional housing with programs which identify an area suitable for this use.
 Programs contained in this Housing Element require a Zoning Ordinance amendment to allow
 transitional and emergency housing as a permitted use in the CG: General Commercial district.
 The CG zoning district is an appropriate location for such a facility because:
     There are several underutilized sites within this district;
     There already exist transitional housing facilities in this zoning district;
     This area is centrally located and near public services and stores; and
     Infrastructure, such as water, sewer, roads, and sidewalks, is in place.
 The County has taken the initiative in identifying the extent of the problem locally and has
 established an organizational framework to coordinate funding and implementation of programs
 for the homeless. The policies of the Housing Element relating to homelessness are based on
 facilitating and cooperating with this County effort, commensurate with the City's population and
 resources.
 9 – Housing Element                             9-27                                        November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

7.       Constraints to Housing Development
a.       Annexation Standards
An important land use regulation affecting development in Fort Bragg, as well as other cities in
Mendocino County, is the policy adopted by the Mendocino County Local Agency Formation
Commission (LAFCO) regarding annexation proposals.
The standards and procedures set forth in the LAFCO policy affect its review of requests for City
annexation of lands proposed for development. The application of these standards does not
constitute a constraint to housing development since they do not exceed the annexation
requirements contained in State law.
b.       Land Use Controls
The Fort Bragg Zoning Ordinance, contained within the City's Municipal Code, sets forth land
use designations and development requirements for construction activity within the City. State
law requires that the Zoning Ordinance be consistent with the General Plan. The Fort Bragg
Zoning Ordinance is being comprehensively revised to be consistent with the General Plan. The
following changes to the Land Use Designations of the General Plan promote housing
development by establishing the following maximum residential densities:
    24 units per acre in the General Commercial (CG) land use designation. The previous
     General Plan specified density by means of an FAR of 0.4 and a maximum building height of
     25 feet for this designation;
    40 units per acre for the Central Business District; and
    24 units per acre for the Highway Visitor Commercial (CH) land use district. The current
     Zoning Ordinance and previous General Plan do not establish residential density limits for
     this land use designation.
    The City's zoning and development standards do not constitute a constraint to housing
     development. Regulations for residential development (e.g. required setbacks, maximum lot
     coverage, height limits, and minimum lot sizes) are no more restrictive than those of
     surrounding jurisdictions. Indeed, the Zoning Ordinance and related land use regulations
     serve to promote, rather than constrain, housing development in the following ways:
    The RM-Medium Density Residential zoning district allows up to 2 units on a lot size of 7,500
     square feet with a maximum building height of 35 feet pursuant to a conditional use permit.
     In addition, existing buildings can be divided into 3 units subject to the Subdivision Map Act
     and building code compliance. This zoning district has encouraged the restoration of older
     homes and the creation of additional infill housing units. Requiring a conditional use permit
     has not restricted the development of duplex and triplex units, and has served the function of
     ensuring that this type of residential development fits harmoniously with surrounding land
     uses.
    The RH-High Density Residential zoning district has a maximum density for 15 units per acre
     within the Coastal Zone and can be increased elsewhere in the City according to the density
     bonuses contained in the Housing Element when providing affordable housing and meeting
     other criteria. Flexible lot configuration and other site design standards provide an incentive
9 – Housing Element                             9-28                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

     for the development of rental and multi-family housing.
    The RVH-Very High Density Residential zoning district permits up to 24 units per acre in the
     Coastal Zone. In addition, this zoning district allows zero lot lines within Planned Unit
     Developments and a maximum building height of 45 feet. These regulations have resulted in
     the construction of a significant number of multi-family dwellings.
    Programs in this Housing Element and the General Plan would revise the Zoning Ordinance
     to permit multi-family residential densities in the CG-General Commercial and the CH-
     Highway Visitor Commercial zoning districts with a conditional use permit.
    The Zoning Ordinance encourages the Planned Development concept. Fort Bragg’s PD
     process permits housing developments to be built with flexible setbacks and zero lot lines.
    The Central Business District permits a residential density of up to 40 units per acre.
The standards for on- and off-site improvements contained in the Subdivision Ordinance do not
constitute a constraint to housing development. These standards are summarized below and are
no more restrictive than those typically found in other Mendocino County jurisdictions. Indeed, in
some cases, less restrictive standards exist in Fort Bragg, since sidewalks with full curb and
gutters are not required for all types of residential subdivisions.
                      TABLE H-21: ON-AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
  Sidewalks                       Sidewalks are required on both sides of the street in residentially zoned
                                  areas, with the exception that the RS district does not require a sidewalk
                                  for lots equal or larger than 15,000 square feet.
  Sidewalk Width                  Sidewalks shall be at least 4 feet with 1/2 foot. for curb, and not less than
                                  3 5/8 inches thick. Sidewalks shall be adjacent to curbs unless the
                                  conditions of tentative map approval provide otherwise.
  Curbs                           Curbs shall be provided in all residential areas with sidewalks.
  Minimum Street Widths           The minimum width of pavement for lots 6,000 square feet - 24 feet with
                                  curb, gutter and sidewalk; for lots 6,001 to 15,000 square feet - 40 foot
                                  curb-to-curb is required; for lots >15,001 square feet - 18 feet paved with
                                  a 2 foot rocked shoulder.
  Cul-de-sacs                     A paved turn around shall be provided at the ends of cul-de-sac streets.
                                  The radius for the edge of pavement or curb line shall be 50 to 30 feet
                                  depending on lot size. A hammerhead turnaround is allowed on a case-
                                  by-case basis with approval of the Fire Department.
  Standard Radii for Curb         All residential street intersections: 20 foot minimum
  Returns at Street Corners
The revised Housing Element contains many incentives that would reduce the cost of providing
inclusionary units, such as density bonuses, a higher density mixed-use land use designation,
and use of redevelopment and other housing funds.
The Inclusionary Housing Program does not constitute a constraint to housing development and
is an established and proven method to ensure the construction of affordable housing. There are
approximately 48 jurisdictions in California with inclusionary housing programs that have led to
the production of over 20,000 affordable below market rate units.6 The cost of providing
6
          Inclusionary Housing Survey Report, San Diego Housing Commission, 1992.
9 – Housing Element                                    9-29                                       November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

inclusionary units would either be passed on to the market rate units, reduce the profit margin of
the developer, be reflected in a reduction in the value of the land, be partially compensated by
density bonuses, fee reductions, or other government incentives, or a combination of these
effects. The allocation of this burden would depend on general market conditions and the
relative bargaining power of the parties.
c.       Secondary Dwelling Units
Section 18.72.200 of the Municipal Code sets forth regulations for secondary dwelling units in the
RL, RS, RR1, and RR2 single-family residential districts subject to an administrative review by
the Community Development Director. These regulations allow secondary dwelling units on
single-family residential lots provided the following conditions are met
    There may be only one secondary dwelling unit per single-family parcel.
    Secondary dwelling units must meet all standards of the zoning district.
    The secondary dwelling unit shall not exceed 960 square feet in the RL and RS Zoning
     District; 1,000 square feet in the RR1 zoning district; and 1,250 square feet in a RR2 zoning
     district.
    Impermeable surfaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area.
    Secondary dwelling units are not permitted where access is provided from streets less than
     36 feet wide.
Policies and programs of this updated Housing Element call for Design Review of the site and
design of second dwelling units to ensure neighborhood compatibility.
d.       Site and Design Review
Residential development of two or more units requires Design Review. The intent of the Design
Review process are to preserve and improve the natural beauty of the City’s setting and ensure
that the new development is visually harmonious with its surroundings. The Design Review
Guidelines establish criteria for site and building design and landscaping, with emphasis on
preserving designated scenic corridors. The Guidelines do not represent a constraint to housing
production in Fort Bragg.
e.       Development Fees
The City requires payment of different fees as a condition of development approval. All fees are
tied to the City's actual costs of providing necessary services such as project review and plan
checking fees. These fees are reviewed and adjusted periodically.
Fees for planning applications (e.g. design review, use permit, variance, rezoning, annexation,
and subdivision map approval) range from $300 to $1,500. Additional fees, including school
impact and parkland dedication fees and charges levied for building, electrical, plumbing, and
other permits apply to construction of individual housing units. For a typical three-bedroom, two-
bathroom single-family home, the City water, sewer, drainage, and water retrofit fees total
approximately $7,500.
Fee schedules are available at the Community Development Department. The fees required for
residential development are based on meeting actual costs of providing City services such as
fire, police, and potable water and wastewater treatment. The fees charged by the City staff to
9 – Housing Element                             9-30                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

process and review development applications are lower than comparable market-rate fees for
technical plan review tasks.
The fees levied for a typical 1,500 square foot single family dwelling, including all water retrofit in
lieu fees are $15,120. For a multifamily dwelling unit in a typical fourplex, fees total about $6,520
per unit. For multiple family projects, water retrofits must be performed, as in lieu fees may only
be paid for projects requiring six or fewer retrofits.
                                      1500 SF SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE
                                                ON 7500 SF CITY LOT
         FEE TYPE                                                       COST
         building permit including plan check                 $               1,700.00
         water retrofit (5 retrofits req'd or in lieu fees)   $               2,500.00
         water capital                                        $               4,070.00
         sewer                                                $               3,302.00
         storm drain service (.0388/SF)                       $                 291.00
         fire dept                                            $                  50.00
         school impact ($2.14/SF)                             $               3,210.00
         TOTAL                                                $              15,123.00
                                         TYPICAL 3800 SF MULTIFAMILY
                                                     4-PLEX UNIT
         building permit including plan check               $           2,750.00
         water retrofits (16 retrofits required)
         water                                              $           8,535.00
         sewer                                              $           6,175.00
         storm drain service                                $             400.00
         fire dept                                          $              91.00
         school impact ($2.14/SF)                           $           8,132.00
         TOTAL FOR ENTIRE COMPLEX                           $          26,083.00
         TOTAL PER UNIT                                     $           6,520.75
f.       Building Codes
Building codes and enforcement do not constrain housing development in Fort Bragg. As the
City of Fort Bragg does not maintain its own Building Department, the Mendocino County
Building Inspection Department provides building inspection and code enforcement service.
New construction is required to meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
The County Building Department inspects housing units when an owner seeks a building permit
for additional construction, or when a specific complaint relating to the health and safety of the
building occupants is received. In conformance with the UBC, the County requires new
construction to meet all building codes in effect today, but does not typically require previous
work that was completed with the necessary permits to comply with current standards.
9 – Housing Element                                     9-31                            November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

g.        Processing Time
The time taken to process development applications affects housing costs, since interest on
loans must continue to be paid and the longer it takes for the development to be approved, the
higher the costs will be. The time to process residential developments does not constitute a
constraint in Fort Bragg.
The following are estimated processing times for residential development applications for a
building permit on a dwelling with no special permit or exception to the standards required:
    Community Development Department - 1/2 to 1 hours.
    Building Department - 2 hours to 2 weeks.
Review requiring a discretionary permit involving one or more public hearings (e.g. Variance,
Design Review, and Use Permit):
    Community Development Department and Planning Commission - 3 to 8 weeks.
    Building Department - 2 hours to 2 weeks.
Review requiring a change of zoning, major subdivision approval, or preparation of an
Environmental Impact document:
    Community Development Department, Planning Commission, or City Council - 12 weeks to 1
     year.
    Building Department - 2 hours to 2 weeks (Includes code compliance, structural, grading, and
     Title 24 review. Does not include back-up time, rework by applicant, or field inspections and
     varies with the complexities of the plan. Back-up time varies with volume of applications in
     the department and can be as long as two to three weeks.)
Single-family units are a permitted use by right and do not require a conditional use permit, and
as indicated above, can take up to two months for approval, depending on whether Design
Review or another discretionary permit such as a Variance are required. The City has adopted
Architectural Review Guidelines with clear illustrations and text to streamline and facilitate this
process.
Multi-family housing is a permitted use in all multifamily residential districts. Multi-family housing
in mixed use districts requires a conditional use permit, which typically takes two months where
no other entitlements, such as a major subdivision are required.
Second dwelling units are approved administratively. The typical administrative approval time for
a second dwelling unit is less than three weeks. The time to obtain approvals for single and
multi-family housing does not constitute a constraint on housing development in Fort Bragg.
These processing times are comparable to the time taken for processing similar projects in
surrounding jurisdictions. It is anticipated that implementation of the policies contained in this
Housing Element, combined with the increased staff in the Community Development
Department, will further shorten processing time.
9 – Housing Element                           9-32                                       November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

h.       Infrastructure Constraints
Despite the development potential figures mentioned earlier, there are potentially significant
constraints to increased housing development related to the adequacy of the City’s
infrastructure. These include:
    The City’s water capacity needs to be increased to meet current and anticipated growth.
     Residential development is currently limited to projects that can meet the requirements of the
     City’s Water Retrofit Program designed to optimize existing capacity. The City is currently
     planning to make improvements to its Noyo River diversion facility. The improvements
     include adding larger pumps and a new pipeline that would deliver water to Sherwood Road
     and reconstructing the City's raw water ponds. These improvements will provide the
     necessary infrastructure to allow the City to pump its full entitlement of up to 3.0 cubic feet
     per second. Once these improvements are made, the City will have the ability to pump
     sufficient water from the Noyo River and its other two sources to meet existing and projected
     demand resulting from new development allowed under the General Plan. Once the
     improvements are completed, the City can then apply for a permanent license to divert water
     from the Noyo River. If this permanent license is granted, then the City can meet with the
     State Department of Health Services (DHS) to amend the existing limits in its Water Permit
     on how much water the City can divert from the Noyo River.
    Several areas have inadequate storm drains and others are in need of repair. This problem
     is being actively assessed by the City.
    The sewer system was found to have infiltration problems affecting approximately 146
     properties. The Municipal Improvement District is currently designing a new sand filter. The
     District is also planning to install a new secondary digester at the plant and make
     improvements to the collection system to address infiltration and inflow problems.
    Financial limitations exist, since the City has a limited retail sales tax base and relies heavily
     on transient occupancy and property taxes for its revenue.
The City's infrastructure problems have received considerable attention in the last two years.
Fort Bragg adopted a Redevelopment Plan in 1987 and a Five-Year Implementation Plan was
adopted in 1997 with a specific projects list designed to remedy many of the City's infrastructure
problems which include:
    Replace and reconstruct storm drains and sidewalks in coordination with street
     reconstruction projects on Main, Oak, Chestnut, Franklin, and Harold Streets.
    Improve traffic, parking, and pedestrian circulation in the Central Business District and
     General Commercial districts.
    Relocate the Police Station.
    Construct the North Fort Bragg water and wastewater extension.
    Implement water system improvements: develop new sources and improve the distribution
     system and the water treatment plant.
    Construct a new recreation center and rehabilitate City Hall and other public facilities.
9 – Housing Element                             9-33                                    November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Because of these actions, the City's infrastructure problems will be remedied and Fort Bragg will
have the infrastructure in place to accommodate its housing development potential well within
the five-year time frame of this Element.
i.       Market Constraints
Market constraints include the cost of land and improvements, construction costs, interest rates,
profit, property taxes and the wide range of factors which determine consumer preference in the
housing market. Most of these factors are beyond control of local governments, although
occasionally the cost of land and interest rates can be reduced in order to encourage affordable
housing production.
The availability of financing is a key component in determining the affordability of homes. Small
increases in the interest rates can have a significant impact on the amount of monthly mortgage
payments and thereby limit many people from qualifying for a home loan.
The cost of land and housing construction in Fort Bragg is generally less than in other coastal
areas in the County. An informal survey of local real estate brokers and developers indicated the
following range of costs for construction of a single-family home in the City:
Land costs               $50,000 to $55,000 for a 6,500 to 7,000 square foot lot.
Construction costs       $80 to $90 per square foot.
The cost of a typical single family lot in Fort Bragg ranged from $50,000 to $80,000. In 2002.
Construction costs for a 1,700 square foot, 3 bedroom, 2-bathroom home vary from $110 to $125
per square foot. Rising insurance costs and sharply increased worker’s compensation insurance
for contractors statewide mean that these construction cost figures will increase by
approximately 4 to 6 percent next year.
There exist little data regarding land and construction costs for multi-family housing, because few
market-rate multi-family units have been developed in Fort Bragg in recent years. One local
developer estimates that land costs (including wastewater, water, grading, and drainage
improvements) for a typical townhouse development are in the range of $25,000 to $30,000 per
unit, and that construction costs average approximately $85 per square foot.
Financing for housing development is relatively easy to obtain and there is no shortage of
construction or mortgage financing in Fort Bragg for new construction or rehabilitation. There is
no evidence of mortgage deficient areas or "redlining" practices in Fort Bragg. Interest rates are
consistent with those found throughout Mendocino County.
j.       Community Sentiment
Community attitudes toward housing play a crucial role in determining the type and cost of
housing that will be built in the City. A key to obtaining development approvals is to secure the
support of the local neighborhood. Developers of potentially controversial housing projects
should make the effort to address the legitimate community concerns regarding the type of
housing proposed, the characteristics of the potential occupants of the housing units, noise,
increases in traffic, and the impact that the proposed development will have on City services.
9 – Housing Element                           9-34                                    November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Involving the community in the early phases of a project is essential for creating the basis for
cooperation and constructive participation in the planning process.
The community of Fort Bragg values the historic character of the Central Business District and
the quietness of its residential neighborhoods. Most residents would concur that housing should
be available to all economic segments of the community, and there has been little opposition to
the many affordable housing units built to date.
k.       Opportunities for Energy Conservation
The City encourages energy conservation in residential projects. The building orientation, street
layout, lot design, landscaping, and street tree configuration of all residential projects are
reviewed in order to maximize solar access and energy conservation. Residential structures
must meet the requirements of Title 24 relating to energy conservation features of the Uniform
Building Code.
9 – Housing Element                          9-35                                 November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX A: QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES BY HOUSING UNIT
                                    Very             Moderate Above
                                    Low       Low    Income   Moderate
Program                             Income    Income          Income   Total
H-1.1.3 Rehabilitation/Preservation   20        35     15                70
H-2.2.1 Mixed Use                     10        10                       20
H-2.2.2 Zoning Ordinance Revisions    20        20                       40
H-2.5.1 Second Dwelling Units         15        25     40                80
H-2.8.1 Redv’t. Housing Set-Aside     15        15     25                55
H-3.1.4 School Facility Reimburs’t.    5         5     15                25
H-3.2.2 Senior Housing                25        35     40         80    180
H-3.4.3 Inclusionary Housing           5        15     15                35
H-3.5.1 Density Bonus                  2         5      5                12
H-3.9.1 Emergency & Transitional      49                                 48
9 – Housing Element                        9-36                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX B: EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
  Program                             Purpose                           Evaluation
  1.1.a Continue to obtain a Facilitate the construction of a Program is general and has no
  mixture of dwelling unit types variety of housing types.              quantitative objectives. The City
  through the administration of                                         has administered its General
  the General Plan, including                                           Plan, but it is not clear that this
  newly annexed areas.                                                  alone results in a variety of
                                                                        housing types (delete)7
  1.1.b Amend the Zoning              To provide a location where State law allows manufactured
  Map to include a                    manufactured homes and homes in residential zoning
  Manufactured Housing                mobile homes could be districts. The Mobile Home Park
  /Mobile Home Park Zone              constructed.                      Zone was not implemented and is
                                                                        not necessary (delete)
  I.1.c     Amend the Zoning To increase residential density While the City has a –PD overlay
  Ordinance        for     planned and thereby encourage the district, the regulations are so
  developments which will construction                  of   additional vague that there is little incentive
  allow for greater flexibility in affordable housing.                  for property owners to use the
  encouraging and approving                                             tool. We recommend that this
  higher densities, smaller lot                                         policy be refined and imple-
  sizes, manufactured housing                                           mented to encourage flexibility
  and alley homes.                                                      and creativity in providing higher
                                                                        density housing. (revise)
  1.1.d     Conduct an annual To identify public land where There is no undeveloped public
  inventory of public land below market rate housing land within the City which is
  available for below market could be constructed.                      suitable for affordable housing
  rate housing.                                                         development. (delete)
  1.1.e The City shall request Work with the County to The County has implemented this
  the County to give notice to ensure that the City’s housing policy. (delete).
  the City for all rezoning and other land use policies are
  projects within the City’s considered in the Sphere of
  Sphere of Influence.                Influence.
  1.1.f Allow second units on To increase the supply of Implemented.                      A total of 19
  single-family lots as a affordable housing and make second dwelling units were
  permitted use, subject to better use of existing stock of constructed since 1994. There
  appropriate        development land and housing.                      may be need for policy revision to
  standards for size, 7 and                                             ensure       compatibility      with
  setbacks.                                                             neighboring uses. (revise)
  1.2.a Increase base density Encourage the construction of This program is vague and its
  allocations for the ability of a variety of housing types and implementation requires a general
  proposed developments to increase housing affordability. plan amendment. The City will
  fulfill a need for a variety of                                       consider the need for increasing
  housing types.                                                        base densities as part of its
                                                                        General Plan update process.
                                                                        This is unnecessary as an on-
                                                                        going program. (delete)
7
           Delete means the program was eliminated form the Draft Housing Element; revised means the program was
           revised and included in the Draft Housing Element.
9 – Housing Element                                     9-37                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                            Purpose                           Evaluation
 1.2.b     Amend the Zoning Encourage the development of              Refer to Program 1.1.f for
 Ordinance to allow second second dwelling units.                     discussion of secondary units.
 residential     units     as    a                                    The City has amended the
 permitted       use      in    all                                   secondary          dwelling      unit
 residential zones.                                                   regulations since this policy was
                                                                      adopted. (delete)
 1.3.a Amend the General            Facilitate the conservation and Not implemented. This policy was
 Plan to allow a one-time           renovation of existing housing adopted without a full analysis of
 division of parcels which can      stock.                            potential impacts to existing
 provide two existing homes                                           roads,      infrastructure,    public
 on a residential lot with                                            services, neighborhood character,
 separate utility connections                                         etc. (delete)
 and meet the development
 standards in the particular
 zoning district.
 Program 1.4.a. Identify and        Promote       higher     density This activity is a long-range
 designate on the General           housing.                          planning effort and is part of the
 Plan and Zoning Maps                                                 City’s current General Plan
 priority sites for higher                                            update process.           It is not
 density               residential                                    necessary or appropriate as an
 development which could                                              on-going       housing      program.
 include alley houses, smaller                                        (delete)
 lot sizes, etc.
 Program 1.6a Apply to the          Facilitate    the    expeditious The City has not applied for a
 Coastal      Commission        to  approval       of     residential Categorical Exclusion order from
 exempt proposed residential        development.                      the Coastal Commission. It is
 structures situated in the                                           noted that there is only one
 Coastal Zone from obtaining                                          residential neighborhood in the
 a     Coastal     Development                                        Coastal Zone and it is nearly built-
 Permit.                                                              out. (retain)
 Program 1.7.a Continue to          Promote a variety of housing Program is general and has no
 obtain a mix of dwelling unit      types.                            quantitative objectives. (delete)
 types         through         the
 administration of the General
 Plan,      including        newly
 annexed areas.
 Program 1.8.a           Increase   Promote a variety of housing Review of residential densities is
 base density allocations for       types.                            part of the General Plan update
 the ability of proposed                                              process. (delete)
 developments to fulfill the
 need for a variety of housing
 types.
 Program 1.9a Allow renters         To protect existing mobile Not implemented. (delete)
 to convert to owning their         home           parks        from
 mobile        home          space  redevelopment to other uses.
 irrespective of rental vacancy
 rates.
9 – Housing Element                                   9-38                                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                         Purpose                       Evaluation
 2.1.a       Adopt a tiered      Reduce the cost of developing Not implemented. The City has
 infrastructure rate policy      affordable housing.           been advised that a tiered rate
 which charges lower fees for                                  base may violate Prop 218
 sewer and water hook-ups                                      requirements. (delete)
 and drainage improvements
 to developers of low and
 very-low income housing and
 higher fees to developers of
 market rate housing.
 2.1.b Waive Use Permits and     Reduce the cost of developing In the past, the City has provided
 Variance fees for projects      affordable housing.           assistance to housing developers
 involving very low and low                                    in the form of fee waivers and
 income housing.                                               infrastructure development using
                                                               Redevelopment funds. (retain)
 2.1.c Continue to assist Reduce the cost of developing See 2.1.b above (retain)
 housing for very low to low affordable housing.
 income households within
 new      developments     from
 portions of development fees
 as specified by the City
 Council.
 2.1.e      Continue to give Reduce the cost of developing The City’s permit-processing load
 priority processing to those affordable housing.              is not so substantial that a policy
 very low and low income                                       for “priority” processing makes a
 developments.                                                 difference. (delete)
 2.1.f Correlate the vacant Ensure that adequate sites for Implemented as a part of the
 land inventory with existing the development of affordable General Plan revision process.
 needs of low and median housing continue to exist.            (delete)
 income households, and
 determine the need to
 redesignate land for specific
 housing types.
 2.1.g      Apply for CDBG Reduce the cost of developing The City has a very successful
 subsidies     to   assist    in affordable housing.           Community Development Block
 providing           necessary                                 Grant program and has received
 infrastructure improvements                                   three housing related CDBG
 in developments with below                                    grants in the past five years. In
 market rate housing, and                                      addition, the City presently
 leverage these subsidies.                                     administers Federal Emergency
                                                               Shelter Grants for two local non-
                                                               profits      providing   homeless
                                                               services. (retain)
9 – Housing Element                              9-39                                     November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                           Purpose                         Evaluation
 2.1.h     Amend the Zoning Increase the amount of land Not implemented. This policy will
 Ordinance to permit housing available           for    housing be re-evaluated in the current
 in all commercial zones as a development.                         General Plan update process and
 permitted use.                                                    is unnecessary as an on-going or
                                                                   long-term policy. (delete)
 2.1.i Create a vehicle, such Facilitate the implementation The Community Development
 as an outreach program, of housing element policies Department assists local groups
 nonprofit authority, planning and programs.                       in planning for affordable housing
 commission, redevelopment                                         projects. (delete)
 agency or corporation, to
 locate, assist and plan such
 activities as below market
 rate housing for low and
 median income households.
 2.1.j     The     City      shall Facilitate housing availability This program is vague and
 acknowledge single parent for single parent households.           unimplementable. (delete)
 households as viable families
 when applying for subsidized
 housing programs.
 2.2.a. Developers of planned Facilitate housing for lower The City has not adopted an
 residential developments of 5 income households.                  inclusionary zoning ordinance,
 units or more shall provide                                       however, inclusionary units have
 10 to 15% of their units as                                       been required since enactment of
 affordable in one of the                                          this policy. (retain/revise)
 following ways: 1. 10-15% of
 the units for rent shall have
 rents affordable to very low
 and low income households;
 10 – 15% of ownership units
 shall     be   affordable     to
 households with incomes at
 or below the county median.
 Adopt       an     Inclusionary
 Housing Ordinance
 Program 2.2.b Provide a Facilitate housing for lower City has implemented this policy
 bonus to developments that income households.                     as required by State law. (retain)
 incorporate below market
 rate units in the same
 development;        to     those
 developments that exceed
 the requirements of the
 inclusionary         ordinance;
 provide      density      bonus
 increases up to 25 % for
 below market rate housing in
 designated areas.
9 – Housing Element                                9-40                                         November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                          Purpose                      Evaluation
 2.3.a Schedule an annual         Facilitate housing for lower The      City  conducts      annual
 meeting       with    nonprofit  income households.           meetings regarding the CDBG
 housing developers to assist                                  grant program and works with
 identifying appropriate sites                                 non-profit housing developers on
 and to encourage the                                          an on-going basis. (retain)
 development        of     rental
 housing and rehabilitation.
 2.4.a     Amend the Zoning       Facilitate housing for lower See 1.1.f and 1.2.b above (delete)
 Ordinance to allow second        income households.
 residential    units    as    a
 permitted      use     in    all
 residential zones.
 2.4.c Use readily available      Facilitate housing for lower Program is general and has no
 methods to encourage a full      income households.           quantitative objectives. (delete)
 range of housing types, such
 as developer agreements
 and      mortgage      revenue
 bonds.
 2.4.d Continue to participate    Increase the amount       of Implemented       and      ongoing.
 in and promote the Section 8     affordable housing units.    (retain)
 Existing Housing Program.
 The City will annually monitor
 the status of the River
 Gardens Apartments.
 2.4.e           Expand      the  Increase the amount       of Expanding the agency boundaries
 redevelopment boundaries         affordable housing units.    will not accomplish this purpose.
 for     the      purpose      of                              Housing set-aside funds can be
 encouraging the construction                                  spent outside of the RDA
 and/or      improvement       of                              boundaries. (delete)
 housing       affordable     by
 households of very low, low
 and median income.
 2.5.a     Develop an impact      Mitigate the housing impacts The scale of commercial and
 threshold level to determine     of new commercial and industrial projects within the City
 the impacts on the City’s        industrial developments.     is not large enough to justify this
 housing supply associated                                     type of program (delete)
 with new commercial and
 industrial        development.
 Those            developments
 exceeding the threshold must
 mitigate those impacts.
 2.5.b Continue to participate    Increase the amount       of Implemented and ongoing.        See
 in and promote the Section 8     affordable housing units.    2.4.d (retain)
 Existing Housing Program
9 – Housing Element                                9-41                                   November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                           Purpose                          Evaluation
 3.1.b       Annually monitor      Ensure that there will be As noted above, City has
 statistics for police, county     adequate emergency and coordinated with emergency and
 agencies         or       private transitional housing facilities. transitional housing providers to
 organizations          regarding                                   obtain grants for homeless
 emergency shelter needs,                                           shelters and services. (retain)
 and cooperate with or
 support public and private
 efforts to respond to those
 needs
 3.1.c Consider waiving the        Ensure that there will be Not implemented. Not included in
 City’s Bed Tax fees for           adequate emergency and the revised Housing Element.
 individuals      using       paid transitional housing facilities. May be considered with the
 vouchers      for     temporary                                    update of the City’s fee structure.
 shelter in City motels.
 4.1.a Apply for CDBG funds        Preserve and enhance the The City has applied for
 of other available state and      existing housing stock.          Community Development Block
 Federal funding for housing                                        Grants annually.
 rehabilitation.
 4.2.a Apply portions of the       Preserve and enhance the The RDA housing set-aside fund
 Redevelopment           Agency’s  existing housing stock.          only      recently    has    accrued
 20% housing allotment for                                          sufficient funds for establishment
 funding      to      rehabilitate                                  of a program such as this. The
 needed homes.                                                      Housing Element update should
                                                                    identify recommended uses of
                                                                    RDA housing set-aside funds.
 4.3,a Develop a voluntary         Preserve and enhance the Not implemented. City presently
 code inspection program           existing housing stock.          contracts with Mendocino Co. for
 emphasizing        rehabilitation                                  building      inspection    services.
 and energy features.                                               (delete)
 4.3.b Initiate a voluntary pre-   Preserve and enhance the Not implemented.                  See 4.3.a.
 sale      code        inspection  existing housing stock.          (delete)
 program
 5.1.a Continue to regulate        Preserve and enhance the This is an on-going responsibility
 aesthetics      through       the existing housing stock.          of the Planning Commission and
 Planning          Commission,                                      staff and is fully implemented.
 building      code,       zoning                                   (delete)
 ordinance,        Site       and
 Architectural            Review
 Committee.
 5.1.b        Permit housing       Preserve and enhance the The City’s non-conforming use
 rehabilitation in zones where     existing housing stock.          regulations would allow for this
 housing is a nonconforming                                         activity.    The program is not
 use, considering on a case-                                        necessary. (delete)
 by-case         basis         the
 neighborhood character and
 the desirability of mixed use
 developments.
9 – Housing Element                                 9-42                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 Program                           Purpose                         Evaluation
 6.1.a Continue to provide         Increase energy efficiency of Not implemented. (delete)
 density incentives for the        housing.
 installation    of      specified
 energy conservation features
 which exceed the required
 building standards in new
 housing.
 6.2.b           Establish       a Increase the energy efficiency Not       implemented.          PG&E
 weatherization        assistance  of housing.                     operates a zero interest program
 program.                                                          and either performs the work itself
                                                                   or contracts out to a local
                                                                   nonprofit housing corporation.
                                                                   (delete)
 7.1.a           Prepare        an Increase the energy and The City has a mandatory water-
 informational          pamphlet   resource efficiency of housing. retrofit    program      for    water
 demonstrating procedures to                                       conservation purposes. A street
 obtain landscaping, well, use                                     tree list identifies drought-tolerant
 of gray water in landscaping,                                     tree species and the Planning
 list of native-drought tolerant                                   Commission routinely requires
 vegetation        and      water                                  that all landscaping be drought-
 conserving plumbing that can                                      tolerant. (delete)
 reduce water consumption in
 a residence.
 7.1.b Establish a permitting Conserve water.                      Implemented. (delete)
 process on all residential lots
 to allow domestic wells
 where water supply can be
 proven safe. Periodic testing
 of wells will be instituted.
 8.1.a Continue to educate Conservation of resources.              This program is not housing-
 citizens on recycling and                                         related and should be relocated to
 provide new information as                                        another element of the General
 necessary.                                                        Plan. (delete)
 9.1. a Establish a permitting Improving air quality.              This program is not housing-
 procedure on all residential                                      related and should be relocated to
 lots to regulate wood burning                                     another element of the General
 stoves consistent with State                                      Plan. (delete)
 standards.
Comments
Government Code Section 65583(a)(3) requires “an analysis of the differences between what
was projected or planned in the earlier element and what was achieved." The table above
indicates that a number of programs in the previous element were not implemented. This was
due in part to the City’s limited financial resources. Land prices and construction costs limit
development of affordable single-family dwellings.
The revised element has recognized these limitations and contains several new programs which
will result in the construction of additional affordable housing units, a more stringent inclusionary
housing ordinance; establishment of a housing fund; establishment of a density bonus program;
9 – Housing Element                                 9-43                                        November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

and other programs to meet special housing needs. These programs recognize that the majority
of additional units will occur at multi-family densities and includes requirements for affordable
housing development as a condition of approval. This approach effectively utilizes the limited
remaining developable land in the City toward achieving the City’s housing goals.
9 – Housing Element                           9-44                                 November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX C: PARCEL-SPECIFIC INVENTORY OF VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED
LANDS
This appendix lists vacant and underutilized lands, and shows development potential for those
lands.
APN                  Address                         Area GP       Density     Units
018-090-13           330 Cypress Street              2.0  CG   15 du/ac        22
008-163-10           102 South Main Street           0.25 CG   15 du/ac         3
008-172-09           251 South Franklin Street       1.03 CG   15 du/ac        11
008-172-10           210 South Main Street           0.34 CG   15 du/ac         4
018-040-27           711 South Franklin Street       0.21 CG   15 du/ac         2
018-040-28           721 South Franklin Street       0.21 CG   15 du/ac         2
018-040-29           731 South Franklin Street       0.26 CG   15 du/ac         3
018-040-45           191 South Street                0.35 CG   15 du/ac         4
018-210-32           810 South Franklin Street       0.51 CG   15 du/ac         6
018-210-33           830 South Franklin Street       0.34 CG   15 du/ac         4
018-210-34           840 South Franklin Street       0.17 CG   15 du/ac         2
                     Subtotal CG                     5.67                      63
008-162-06           126 North Main Street           0.17 CBD  40 du/ac         5
008-162-07           120 North Main Street           0.17 CBD  40 du/ac         5
                     Subtotal CBD                    0.34                      10
008-010-31           1020 Glass Beach Drive          3.3  RH   15 du/ac        37
018-113-03           970 Chestnut Street             2.28 RH   6-15 du/ac      25
018-113-01           552 Lincoln Street              3.7  RH   6-15 du/ac      42
018-210-29           860 Hazelwood Drive             3.03 RH   6-15 du/ac      34
018-230-32           425 North Harbor Drive          4.27 RH   6-15 du/ac      48
                     Subtotal RH                    16.58                     186
069-232-06           1301 North Main Street          2.25 CH   15/ac           25
069-232-07           1291 North Main Street          2.55 CH   15/ac           29
008-034-12           855 Main Street                 0.13 CH   15 du/ac         1
008-034-07           801 North Main Street           0.34 CH   15 du/ac         4
008-044-15           734 North Main Street           0.45 CH   15 du/ac         5
018-120-47           851 South Franklin Street       0.21 CH   15 du/ac         2
018-450-39           1250 Del Mar Drive             20.6  CH   15 du/ac       232
                     Subtotal CH                    26.53                     298
008-042-01           260 Spruce Street               0.17 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-041-02           745 West Street                 0.17 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-041-01           749 West Street                 0.17 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
018-120-40           320 North Harbor Drive          0.13 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-01           1010 Glass Beach Drive          0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-08           978 Stewart Street              0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-38           950 Glass Beach Drive           0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-39           960 Glass Beach Drive           0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-350-40           964 Glass Beach Drive           0.11 RL   3-6 du/ac        1
008-290-76           371 Osprey Court                1.0  RL   3-6 du/ac        3
008-290-78           351 Osprey Court                1.0  RL   3-6 du/ac        3
020-470-21           1405 Cedar Street               1.16 RL   3-6 du/ac        3
9 – Housing Element                            9-45                            November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APN                    Address                                   Area      GP           Density         Units
020-520-22             1600 Oak Street                           5.15      RL       3-6 du/ac           23
020-530-03             21200 California                          4.7       RL       3-6 du/ac           21
018-100-42             485 South Lincoln Street                  0.78      RL       3-6 du/ac            1
018-310-54             126 Lonne Way                             0.16      RL       3-6 du/ac            1
018-310-39             119 Noyo Heights Drive                    0.11      RL       3-6 du/ac            1
                       Subtotal RL                              18.45                                   75
018-440-50             200 West Ocean View Drive                 0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-49             250 West Ocean View Drive                 0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-39             300 Ocean View Drive                      0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-38             350 Ocean View Drive                      0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
018-440-29             400 Ocean View Drive                      0.91      RM       6-12 du/ac           8
                       Subtotal RM                               4.55                                   40
008-350-60             920 Stewart Street                        3.8       RVH      15-24 du/ac         68
018-150-57             None                                      0.8       RVH      15-24 du/ac         14
018-150-56             None                                      0.65      RVH      15-24 du/ac         12
018-150-58             None                                      1.32      RVH      15-24 du/ac         14
018-150-59             None                                      5.86      RVH      15-24 du/ac         66
018-220-02             440 South Street                         11.3       RVH      15-24 du/ac        203
018-340-04             441 South Street                          7.94      RVH      15-24 du/ac        143
                       Subtotal RVH                             31.67                                  520
                       TOTAL                                   103.8                                  1192
Note: The data in this Appendix are different than the residential buildout figures contained in the Background Reports
and in references to residential buildout in other Elements of the General Plan since it uses more conservative
assumptions for calculating buildout (i.e., it reduces the development potential of multi-family properties by about 75
percent); it includes underutilized parcels; and it includes the residential component of mixed use development. The
unit development potential for underdeveloped sites was further reduced on a case-by-case basis taking into account
the existing development on the site and other constraints.
The Zoning Ordinance is being revised to ensure consistency with the updated General Plan and Housing Element.
No Zoning Ordinance or General Plan amendments would be needed to achieve the densities noted above.
9 – Housing Element                                      9-46                                           November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 APPENDIX D: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
 Listed below are the affordable housing units built in the City.
                                        AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
                                                             No. of  At Risk
Development                      Location        Year Built  Units   Status      Income Category
Habitat for Humanity             Oak Street        under           2   Protected Very Low
                                                  const’n.
Rural Communities Housing        Stewart Street    2000           10   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Rural Communities Housing        Stewart Circle    2000            6   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Community Development            John Cimolino     2000           14   Protected Very Low
Commission                       Way
Rural Communities Housing        Holmes Lane       1999            7   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Habitat for Humanity             Maple Street      1998            2   Protected Very Low
Community Development            South             1997            9   Protected Very Low
Commission                       Sanderson Way
Habitat for Humanity             South Corry       1996            2   Protected Very Low
                                 Street
Rural Communities Housing        Howland Court     1995           10   Protected Very Low/Low
Development Corporation
Habitat for Humanity             Oak Street        1994            2   Protected Very Low
Community Development            Cypress Street    1993           19   Protected Very Low/Low
Commission
Habitat for Humanity             South Harold      1991            1   Protected Very Low
                                 Street
Moura Construction               South Street      1990           38      Not    Senior Housing
                                                                       Protected Very Low/Low
Private/Federal Home             Walnut Street     1986           56      Not    Very Low
Mortgage Association                                                   Protected
 9 – Housing Element                            9-47                             November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

Rural Communities Housing        Cypress Street       1980              43        Protected Very Low
Development Corporation
River Gardens                    South Street         1979              48         Pending  Very Low
Total Affordable Housing Units                                         269
 Protected means rental or resale controls are in effect for at least the next ten years.
 9 – Housing Element                              9-48                                      November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

APPENDIX E: SB 520 COMPLIANCE ANALYSIS
The City of Fort Bragg’s existing review procedures regarding housing for persons with
disabilities is summarized below.
1        General
•    Does the City have any process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for
     reasonable accommodation with respect to zoning, permit processing or building laws?
There exists no special permit process for housing accommodating individuals with disabilities.
•    Has the City made any effort to remove constraints on housing for persons with disabilities?
Group homes with less than six residents (exclusive of staff) are allowed in all residential zoning
districts as a use by right. Group homes for 6 or more residents are allowed in all residential and
commercial zoning districts with a conditional use permit. ADA retrofits, such as a ramp or lift,
require a building permit, or if they substantially change the appearance of the structure, staff
approval or Design Review and Planning Commission approval may be required.
•    Does the City make information available about requesting a reasonable accommodation
     with respect to zoning, permit processing, or building laws?
A program addressing this requirement is included in the Draft Housing Element.
2        Zoning and Land Use
•    Has the City reviewed all of its zoning laws, policies, and practices with compliance with fair
     housing law?
The City is completing a comprehensive revision of its Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances which
includes compliance with fair housing laws.
•    Are residential parking standards for persons with disabilities different from other parking
     standards?
There are no residential parking standards for persons with disabilities different from other
parking standards. The City complies with the UBC and CALDAG for the number and
configuration of handicapped parking spaces.
•    Does the City have a policy or program for the reduction of parking requirements for special
     needs housing if a project can demonstrate a reduced need for parking?
The Zoning Ordinance provides for flexible parking standards which would allow a reduction in
parking requirements for persons with disabilities, emergency and transitional housing, and other
special housing needs, such as senior housing.
•    Does the City restrict the siting of group homes?
9 – Housing Element                             9-49                                 November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

No. As indicated above, group homes of less than six residents are permitted as a use by right
in all residential zoning districts. Group homes of six or more residents are allowed with a
conditional use permit in all residential and commercial zoning districts.
•    Does the City have occupancy standards in the zoning code that apply specifically to
     unrelated adults and not to families?
No. Fort Bragg does not have occupancy standards in its Zoning Ordinance.
•    Does the land use element regulate the siting of special needs housing in relationship to one
     another? Specifically, is there a minimum distance required between two (or more) special
     needs housing?
Neither the Land Use Element nor the Zoning Ordinance contains any regulations addressing
spacing or siting of special needs housing nor the location of such facilities with regard to one
another.
3         Permits and Processing
•    How does the City process a request to retrofit homes for accessibility?
A building permit would be required for a ramp or a lift. This is done administratively. Where
substantial modifications to the exterior appearance of a commercial or residential structure of
more than two units are needed, Design Review approval by the Planning Commission may be
required. The discretionary approval by the Planning Commission would be limited to the
exterior appearance of the structure, and not to the use or to mechanical equipment required to
improve accessibility.
•    Does the City allow group homes with fewer than six persons by right in single-family zones?
     What permits, if any are required?
This use is allowed by right in all residential zoning districts. A building permit would be required
for one dwelling, and Design Review and Planning Commission approval for design related
issues would be required for two or more dwellings.
Does the City have a set of particular conditions or restrictions for group homes with greater than
six persons? What are they? How do they affect the development of housing for persons with
disabilities?
Group homes for six or more persons are permitted with a conditional use permit in all residential
and commercial zoning districts. There no are special standards, requirements, or performance
standards applicable to group homes or for persons with disabilities. The use permit requirement
does not act as a detriment to development for persons with disabilities in Fort Bragg: two such
facilities are already located in the City; and the typical conditions of approval are no more
stringent than for other similar residential land uses requiring a conditional use permit.
•    What kind of community input does the City allow for the approval of group homes? Is it
     different than for other types of residential development?
Group homes of six or fewer residents require no public hearing or special permits. Group
homes with seven or more residents require a conditional use permit that is subject to a public
9 – Housing Element                              9-50                                  November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

hearing. The public input for group homes is no more stringent or different than for any other
type of residential development, and indeed is less than for a major residential subdivision.
•    Does the City have particular conditions for group homes which will be providing services on
     site?
No. The Zoning Ordinance is silent with regard to this matter.
4        Building Codes
•    Has the City adopted the Uniform Building Code? What year? Has the City made
     amendments that might diminish the ability to accommodate persons with disabilities?
The City has adopted the most recent UBC dated 1998. No amendments to the UBC have been
made by the City affecting housing for persons with disabilities.
•    Has the City adopted any universal design elements in the building code?
No.
•    Does the City provide reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in the
     enforcement of building codes and the issuance of building permits?
There are no special provisions, standards, or performance criteria in the Zoning Ordinance or
the Building Codes applicable to persons with disabilities.
The City will add the following program under the Special Housing Needs goals and policies:
         Program H-4.2.2 Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities:
         Review the City’s land use and building regulations to identify constraints that may
         exist for the provision of housing for persons with disabilities, and adopt measures
         to facilitate reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities. Publicize
         revisions to land use regulations providing for reasonable accommodation for
         persons with disabilities.
9 – Housing Element                             9-51                                   November 2004
Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

 APPENDIX F – RESIDENTIAL LAND USE REGULATIONS
 The following table shows land use regulations for existing zoning districts.
Zoning District                Setbacks        Lot Coverage   Building       Maximum
                                                              Height         Density
Rural Residential (RR)         Front-25’;      Max. 10,000 sf 35’            1 unit/acre
                               rear-20’; side-
                               20’
Suburban Residential (SR)      Front-25’;      25%            35’            1 unit/40,000 sf
                               rear-20’; side-
                               10% of lot
                               width (min
                               10’/max 20’)
Low Density Residential        Front-25’;      40%            35’            6 units/acre
(RL)                           rear-20’; side-
                               10% of lot
                               width (min
                               5’/max 12’)
Medium Density                 Front-25’;      50%            35’            6-12 units/acre
Residential (RM)               rear-20’; side-
                               10% of lot
                               width (min 5’)
High Density Residential       Front-20’;      As determined  45’            6-15 units/acre
(RH)                           rear-10’; side- by Planning
                               10’             Commission
Very High Density              Front-20’;      No limitation  45’            15-24 units/acre
Residential (RVH)              rear-10’; side-
                               10’
Central Business District      None            No limitation  35’            40 units/acre
(CBD)                                                                        (use permit
                                                                             req’d)
General Commercial (CG)        Front-3’; rear- No limitation  35’            As determined
                               0’; side-0’                                   by Planning
                                                                             Commission
                                                                             (use permit
                                                                             req’d)
Neighborhood Commercial        Front-10’;      No limitation  25’
(CN)                           rear-15’; side-
                               0’
Office Commercial (CO)         Front-15’;      No limitation  25’            As determined
                               rear-10’; side-                               by Planning
                               10’                                           Commission
                                                                             (use permit
                                                                             req’d)
 9 – Housing Element                              9-52                                  November 2004
 Fort Bragg Coastal General Plan

  Fort Bragg
  Inland General Plan
  Housing Element
  2014
City of Fort Bragg
                   Prepared by: Marie R Jones
                   Community Development Director
Section I: Housing Element                                                4
      A.    Purpose                                                       4
      B.    Relationship of the Housing Element to the General Plan       4
      C.    Summary of Findings                                           5
      D.    Quantified Objectives                                         7
      E.    Goals, Policies and Programs                                  8
      F.    Previous Housing Element                                     17
      G.    Public Participation                                         17
Section II: Housing Needs Assessment                                     20
1. Population, Employment & Housing Characteristics                      21
      Population Growth & Projections                                    21
      Employment Trends                                                  22
      Household Growth & Characteristics                                 23
2. Overpayment and Overcrowding                                          26
      Overpaying                                                         26
      Overcrowding                                                       27
4. Housing Stock Characteristics                                         28
      Housing Conditions                                                 29
      Housing Costs and Affordability                                    30
      Housing Construction Prices and Trends                             31
      Housing Units by Type of Unit                                      31
      Pending Housing Developments                                       32
      Vacancy                                                            32
5. Analysis of Developments At Risk of Conversion                        33
      Inventory of At-Risk Units                                         33
      Conversion Risk, Cost to Preserve, Entity & Financing              33
6. Special Housing Needs                                                 36
      Persons with Disabilities                                          36
      The Elderly                                                        38
      Large and Female-Headed Households                                 41
      Farmworkers                                                        42
      Families and Persons In Need of Emergency Shelters                 42
Section III: Housing Constraints Analysis                                44
7. Residential Land Inventory                                            44
      Regional Housing Needs Assessment                                  44
      Inventory of Available Land                                        44
      Environmental Constraints to Development of Vacant Land            47
      Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types                              49
      Zoning and Vacant Land Available for Emergency Shelters            50
8. Analysis of Government Constraints on Housing Development             51
      1. Annexation Standards                                            51
      2. Land Use Controls                                               51
      3. Development Fees                                                58
      4. Building Codes & Code Enforcement                               58
      5. Processing Time                                                 59
      6. Infrastructure Constraints                                      60
10 - Housing Element                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-2
      7. Potential & Actual Non-Governmental Constraints                              60
      8. Cost and Availability of Financing                                           61
      9. Community Sentiment                                                          62
9. Opportunities for Energy Conservation                                              63
Appendix A: Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element - Progress in Implementation & Evaluation
                                                                                      64
Appendix B: Parcel Specific Inventory of Vacant and Underutilized Lands               70
APPENDIX C: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS                                                  74
Appendix D: Community Input & Review                                                  75
Appendix E: Procedure for Processing Requests for Reasonable Accommodation            76
Appendix F: City of Fort Bragg Development Fees.                                      80
10 - Housing Element                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-3
SECTION I: HOUSING ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Housing Element is a statement of Fort Bragg’s vision regarding existing and future housing
needs. The Housing Element was adopted by the City Council in 2002, updated in 2004 and
again in 2009. It is certified by the State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD). This 2014 update achieves the State’s requirement that each community’s Housing
Element be updated every five years (by 2014). It consists of three sections: Section I contains
the goals, policies and implementation programs; Section II contains an analysis of the housing
needs of all economic segments of the community; and Section III analyses potential constraints
to new housing development such as availability of land, zoning, fees, and permit processing
time to name just a few required items of analysis. The goals, policies and programs are based
on the needs identified in Section II, the constraints detailed in Section III and required
compliance with State Housing Law.
An essential goal of the Fort Bragg Housing Element is for the City to achieve an adequate
supply of safe, decent housing for all residents of Fort Bragg. In order to achieve this goal, the
policies and programs of the Housing Element set the framework to:
1. Provide additional affordable housing through the implementation of the Inclusionary
     Housing ordinance, pre-approved second unit program, density bonus law, and the
     development of affordable housing projects for a variety of special needs populations.
2. Maintain and preserve the existing housing stock and retain the character of Fort Bragg's
     residential neighborhoods;
3. Meet the City's regional housing needs allocations; and
4. Improve the energy efficiency and sustainability of new housing development and existing
     housing (this objective is fulfilled in the General Plan’s new Sustainability Element).
The City has a commitment to Fort Bragg residents to maintain the identity and quality of the
residential neighborhoods. At the same time, the City must work to meet its share of regional
housing needs. The Housing Element articulates Fort Bragg's housing goals and establishes
policies and programs to guide decision-makers to meet the community’s housing needs.
B.       Relationship of the Housing Element to the General Plan
Consistency of the Housing Element with the other elements of the City's General Plan is
essential to having a complete and legally adequate General Plan. The City’s General Plan was
updated in 2014. The update addressed all statutory changes in State Law such as new policies
and programs regarding fire hazards, flood control, disadvantaged communities, etc. The
Housing Element is one of eight General Plan elements and it complements, and is
complemented by, policies from the other Elements. For example:
           The Land Use Element establishes the zoning designations and maximum and
              minimum densities for residential development. It also establishes policies and
              programs regarding the preservation and enhancement of residential neighborhoods
              as well as where best to locate new development.
           The Public Facilities Element sets forth goals and policies to ensure that new
              residential development is served by public services and that new development pays
              its fair share of the cost of using these services.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-4

             The Conservation, Open Space, Energy, and Parks Element sets policies and
              goals for the protection of sensitive and natural resources, reducing energy use in
              buildings, encouraging alternative energy, improving water quality establishing, and
              preserving parks and open space.
             The Circulation Element identifies the City’s existing circulation system and level of
              service for roads and streets. It also establishes policies and programs for traffic in
              residential neighborhoods and improving public transit, pedestrian facilities, and
              bikeways.
             The Community Design Element establishes a number of policies and programs
              that impact housing development and design, including policies and programs
              related to design review, landscaping, siting, property maintenance, exterior lighting,
              and more.
             The Safety Element identifies areas of the community that are subject to safety
              concerns such as flooding, tsunami events, earthquakes, and slope erosion. It
              further establishes policies and programs to minimize these risks as well as reducing
              fire hazards.
             The Noise Element establishes noise standards for residential and mixed-use
              neighborhoods, as well as specific types of development such as multi-family and
              single family developments. It also sets requirements for mitigating noise impacts in
              new developments.
             The Sustainability Element includes policies and programs to reduce energy use,
              increase energy efficiency, reduce greenhouse gasses, and improve the
              sustainability of commercial and residential development through policies and
              programs that encourage green building design, materials, and techniques in new
              construction and remodels. This element also addresses steps to reduce waste
              production. The Sustainability Element complements the Housing Element in
              achieving a sustainable Fort Bragg.
No internal inconsistencies have been identified between the goals and policies of the Housing
Element and the other Elements of the 2014 Inland General Plan. In addition, constraints
identified in other elements such as limited water supply and natural resource concerns are
recognized in the Housing Element. In order to maintain compliance and consistency between
Elements, the City conducted a consistency analysis when changes were made to the Inland
General Plan and the Inland Land Use and Development Code in 2013 and 2014 respectively.
Relationship of the Housing Element to the City’s Certified Local Coastal Program. A
portion of the City of Fort Bragg is also located within the California Coastal Zone. The City
adopted a Coastal General Plan in 2008, which is part of the City’s certified Local Coastal
Program. The Housing Element within the LCP will be updated, and essentially identical to the
Inland General Plan Housing Element, except that caveats will be added to the Coastal Housing
Element to ensure that it complies with the Coastal Act. The data included in Section II and
Section III of this Housing Element applies to the entire geography of the City of Fort Bragg,
those areas in and outside of the Coastal Zone.
C.       Summary of Findings
Listed below are the key demographic, economic and regulatory findings from Section II:
Housing Needs Assessment.
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-5

Population and Job Growth
 The City’s population increased slightly since 2010 from 7,278 residents to 7,311 residents
     in 2013. This represents an annual growth rate of 0.1%.
 In Fort Bragg, future job growth is projected to be primarily in the lower-wage services and
     retail sectors with job declines projected in the relatively better paid resource extraction and
     manufacturing sectors.
Household Characteristics, Overpayment and Overcrowding
 More than half of Fort Bragg households (54%) are renters.
 15% of households are female headed.
 60% of households pay in excess of 30% of their income on housing. Renters are more likely
     to overpay (64%) than owners (55%).
 Only 6.3% of households are overcrowded.
 Home prices have dropped from a median of $400,000 in 2008 to a median of $275,000 in
     2013, making homeownership more affordable to a larger number of families in Fort Bragg.
 According to area property managers and real estate brokers, the average rents for new
     leases signed within the last six months in Fort Bragg are as follows: $815/month for a one-
     bedroom apartment, $1,200/month for a two-bedroom apartment, and $1,300/month for a
     three bedroom house (see page 29).
 The vacancy rate is relatively low in Fort Bragg at 4.8% for renters and 2.5% for owners.
Housing Conditions
 A 2009 Housing Conditions Survey found that housing in Fort Bragg is of sound condition.
     Only 9% of all units require repairs, and half of units requiring repairs only require minor
     repairs. However this survey did not include alley houses, which comprise an estimated 25%
     of the City’s single family housing stock. Many of these houses are in poor repair and a
     subsequent housing conditions survey slated for 2015 may find additional housing conditions
     issues.
The effect of land availability, financing availability and governmental regulations on the supply
of housing is analyzed in Section III: Housing Constraints Analysis and summarized below.
Affordable Housing Goals and Availability of Vacant Land to Achieve Those Goals
 The City of Fort Bragg’s housing allocation, prepared by the Mendocino Council of
     Governments (MCOG), indicates that Fort Bragg will need to accommodate 11 affordable
     housing units and 21 units overall over the five year period of this Housing Element (2015-
     2020).
 The City has sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land to meet its regional housing
     allocation of 11 affordable units and 21 units overall, since 1,331 units could be built on
     vacant parcels within City limits given current zoning and environmental constraints. The
     majority (522) of these units could be higher-density multi-family units in high density and
     mixed use zoning districts that could accommodate low and very low incomes households.
 The rate of new residential construction fluctuates significantly from year to year depending
     on market and economic conditions, but overall it averages about 21 units per year.
Governmental Regulations and Impact on Housing Market
 Residential land use is currently allowed within six residential zones, and as part of mixed-
     use projects or multi-family projects in four commercial zones.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-6

    The City provides for two story development in all zones, and three story residential
     development in the majority of zones. In addition, the City’s lot coverage ratios and FAR
     (Floor Area Ratio) requirements allow for compact higher density residential development.
     Setbacks are reasonable given adjacent uses and the character of the community. A Use
     Permit is required for projects on land zoned for higher densities, as is a Coastal
     Development Permit required for all residential projects that are located within the City’s
     Coastal Zone.
    Fees for planning permits (e.g. Design Review, Use Permit, Variance, Rezoning, and
     subdivision map approval) range from $575 to $1,950. The fees charged by the City to
     process and review development applications are lower than comparable market-rate fees
     for technical plan review tasks.
    Additional fees include school impact fees and charges levied for building, electrical,
     plumbing, and other permits, and City capacity fees (development impact fees). For a typical
     three-bedroom, two-bathroom single-family home, City planning fees, building fees, and
     water, sewer and drainage capacity fees total approximately $16,000.
    The time taken to process development applications affects housing costs, since interest on
     loans must continue to be paid, and the longer it takes for the development to be approved,
     the higher the costs will be. The time to process residential development applications does
     not constitute a constraint in Fort Bragg. Typical ministerial permits that do not require
     Planning Commission action take from a day to three weeks to process. Standard permits
     (Use Permit, Design Review, and Coastal Development Permit) that require Planning
     Commission action take from six to 12 weeks. Larger projects can take from four months to
     a year (projects which require a change of zoning, major subdivision approval, or preparation
     of an Environmental Impact Report).
    Despite the maximum development potential figures, the lack of sufficient water storage for
     drought conditions is a potential constraint to future housing development. However the City
     is currently in the planning and environmental review process to add 45 acre feet of new
     water storage.
D.        Quantified Objectives
The objectives in this update will be quantified to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(RHNA) for the City. The City of Fort Bragg has identified four broad housing priorities:
     1. Provide additional affordable housing through the implementation of the Inclusionary
          Housing ordinance, pre-approved second unit program, density bonus law, and the
          development of affordable housing projects for a variety of special needs populations;
     2. Maintain and preserve the existing housing stock and retain the character of Fort Bragg's
          residential neighborhoods; and
     3. Meet the City's regional housing needs allocations; and
     4. Improve the energy efficiency and sustainability of new housing development and
          existing housing (this last objective is addressed in the City’s new Sustainability
          Element).
Past trends will provide a good foundation on which to project future housing development in
Fort Bragg. A total of 402 dwelling units, of which 126 were affordable units, have been
constructed in Fort Bragg since the 1991 Housing Need Allocations (see Table 4.2 on page 10-
29).
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                             10-7

Based on the trends, goals, policies, and objectives outlined above, and known projects and
funding for affordable housing project which will be implemented in the next two years, the City
has established quantified objectives illustrated in Table D-1 below. Over the next planning
period, the City’s goal is to have 85 new units constructed, of which 40 will be designated for low
and very low-income households. In addition, through the City’s rehabilitation program, the City
anticipates assisting 22 low and very low income families with home repair and weatherization.
Given past trends, the City anticipates that an additional 40 units will be repaired and or
rehabilitated with private funds and 94 units will be preserved. In total 239 units will be built,
rehabilitated or conserved in the five-year period.
 Table D-1: Quantified Objectives, City of Fort Bragg, 2014-2019
                                        New                                 Conservation/
 Income Category                                         Rehabilitation
                                   Construction                              Preservation      Total
 Extremely Low Income                    10                     4                    0           14
 Very Low Income                         10                     8                   38           56
 Low Income                              20                     8                   56           84
 Moderate Income                         20                    20                    0           40
 Above Moderate                          25                    20                    0           45
 Total                                   85                    60                   94          239
 Source: City of Fort Bragg Community Development Department, 2014
 The Construction objective refers to the number of new units that potentially may be
 constructed using public and/or private sources over the planning period of the element
 given the locality’s land resources, constraints and proposed programs.
 The Rehabilitation objective refers to the number of existing units expected to be
 rehabilitated during the planning period.
 The Conservation/Preservation objective refers to the preservation of the existing affordable
 housing stock throughout the planning period.
E.        Goals, Policies and Programs
The format of the goals and policies of the Housing Element differs from the rest of the Inland
General Plan, in large measure to meet the requirements of State Housing Element Law
(Government Code §365580 et seq.). For every goal there are several policies, each with one
or more implementation programs that contain the following information:
           A concise statement of the specific City actions that will be taken to implement the
              program;
           The City department or other agency responsible for implementation; and
           Potential financing mechanisms and a schedule for completion.
Goal H-1             Conserve and improve the existing housing supply to provide adequate,
                     safe, and decent housing for all Fort Bragg residents.
Policy H-1.1 Housing Rehabilitation: Continue and expand the City’s housing rehabilitation
and preservation programs.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                      10-8

         Program H-1.1.1 Housing Rehabilitation Projects: Seek funding through the
         Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program and other State and/or Federal
         programs to assist in the rehabilitation and conservation of multi-family residential
         projects. Work with non-profit and for-profit affordable housing developers to achieve
         successful rehabilitation of multi-family housing. Utilize CDBG housing rehabilitation
         funds to add bedrooms to overcrowded units, as feasible.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City, CDBG, HOME
                    Scheduling:      Annually as an ongoing program
                    Quantification:  30 units
         Program H-1.1.2           Target Areas: Continue to identify target areas and specific
         properties where housing rehabilitation is most needed through a periodic update of the
         housing conditions survey which identifies the neighborhoods and areas requiring
         rehabilitation assistance.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City or CDBG
                    Scheduling:      Update in 2015
         Program H-1.1.3 Housing Rehabilitation/Preservation Program: Continue the City’s
         housing rehabilitation program which provides low interest loans for the rehabilitation of
         homes owned or occupied by very low to moderate income households. Continue to
         seek funding from CDBG, HOME and other sources for the housing rehabilitation loan
         program. Facilitate citizen awareness of the City’s rehabilitation loan program.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City, CDBG, HOME and other State and Federal funds
                    Scheduling:      In place and ongoing
                    Quantification:  30 units
         Program H-1.1.4 Capital Improvement Program: Consider capital improvement projects
         necessary to maintain the community’s older neighborhoods as part of the City Council’s
         annual review of the Capital Improvement Program.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                    Financing:       City, State and Federal funding sources
                    Scheduling:      Annually as an ongoing program
Policy H-1.2 Discourage Conversion of Residential Units: Discourage the conversion of
residential units to other uses.
         Program H-1.2.1 Single-Family Homes: Consider revising the zoning ordinance so that
         single-family residences, located in commercial zones, can be used as single-family
         residences, even if their legal non-conforming status has expired due to vacancy or
         interim commercial use.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City
                    Scheduling:      2014
         Program H-1.2.2 Housing Rehabilitation in Non-Residential Areas: Continue to permit
         substantial rehabilitation of, and additions to, existing housing located in zones where it
         is a legal nonconforming use.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-9

                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
         Program H-1.2.3 Regulate Conversion of Residential Space for the Cultivation of
         Medical Marijuana: Continue to implement the City’s medical marijuana cultivation
         ordinance to limit the area in a residential structure that can be used for cultivation of
         Medical Marijuana.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department, Police Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the municipal code have been completed.
                                    Implementation is ongoing.
Policy H-1.3 Energy Conservation & Green Building: Promote energy conservation
improvements and green building improvements for existing and proposed residential units.
         Program H-1.3.1 Energy Conservation Program: Continue to provide energy
         conservation and green building materials and techniques workshops, display board and
         brochures. Continue the City’s energy conservation program as funding allows.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department, REDI
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
         See Sustainability Element for Policies and Programs regarding Green Building, Energy
         Conservation, Water Conservation and Waste Reduction.
Policy H-1.4 Preserve At-Risk Units: Work with private and non-profit affordable housing
developers to preserve at-risk affordable housing projects.
         Program H-1.4.1 Develop At-Risk Units Program: Maintain an inventory of at-risk
         affordable housing units and work with property owners and non-profit affordable
         housing organizations to preserve these units by identifying and seeking funds from
         Federal, State and local agencies to preserve the units.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      HOME Program, Federal Tax Credits, Redevelopment Agency, etc.
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-1.4.2 Require At-Risk Education Program: Work with property owners and
         non-profit affordable housing organizations to ensure that tenants receive required
         education and notifications regarding at-risk units.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-2           Provide a range of housing, including single-family homes, townhouses,
                   apartments, and other housing types to meet the housing needs of all
                   economic segments of the community.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-10

Policy H-2.1 Regional Housing Needs: Ensure that adequate residentially-zoned land is
available to accommodate the City’s Regional Housing Needs Determination as described in
Section II.
         Program H-2.1.1 Inventory of Infill Sites: Maintain the inventory of vacant and
         underdeveloped residentially designated land in the City’s GIS system. Provide copies of
         the inventory for public distribution on the City website.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City
                    Scheduling:       Ongoing, as vacant sites are developed the GIS system is updated
                                      and a map and list of vacant sites is posted on the City’s website.
Policy H-2.2 Mixed-Use Development: Encourage the development of mixed-use projects that
include multi-family residential uses (upstairs and at the rear of properties) in conjunction with
commercial enterprises on the street frontage in commercial zones and use design review to
minimize conflicts between residential and commercial uses.
Policy H-2.3 Secondary Dwelling Units: Continue to facilitate the construction of secondary
dwelling units on residential properties.
         Program H-2.3.1 Secondary Dwelling Unit Design: Continue to implement the City’s
         free secondary unit program to provide affordable and aesthetically pleasing second unit
         designs for the development of secondary units in Fort Bragg.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City and Housing Developers
                    Scheduling:       Second unit designs have been prepared and implementation is
                                      ongoing
         Program H-2.3.2 Reduce Development Impact Fees for Secondary Units and Smaller
         Units: Consider establishing an updated Capacity Fee for small residential units that
         recognizes the reduced impacts on the City’s sewer, water, drainage, parks, and streets
         of smaller units of one bedroom or less.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City and Housing Developers
                    Scheduling:       2015
         Program H-2.3.3 Develop Amnesty/Legalization Program for Illegal Residential Units:
         Consider establishing an amnesty or legalization program for illegal residential units,
         especially second units, that includes payment of capacity and connection fees and
         required improvements to meet the health and safety code.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City and property owners
                    Scheduling:       2015-2016
Policy H-2.4 Manufactured Housing: Continue to encourage manufactured homes through the
application of established design standards.
Policy H-2.5 Infill Housing: Encourage housing development on existing infill sites in order to
efficiently utilize existing infrastructure.
10 - Housing Element                                                                              2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-11

         Program H-2.5.1: Continue to update the vacant parcels map and provide information to
         potential developers about infill development opportunities in Fort Bragg.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City and Housing Developers
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing. As vacant sites are developed, the GIS system is updated
                                     and a map and list of vacant sites is posted on the City’s website.
Goal H-3           Expand affordable housing opportunities for persons with special
                   housing needs such as the elderly, the disabled, households with very low
                   to moderate incomes, and first time home buyers.
Policy H-3.1 Available Funding Sources: Utilize County, State and Federal programs and
other funding sources that provide housing opportunities for lower-income and special needs
households.
         Program H-3.1.1 Available Funding: Seek available State and Federal assistance to
         develop affordable housing for seniors, the disabled, persons with developmental
         disabilities, lower-income large households, and households with special housing needs.
         Work with the County Community Development Commission (CDC), Rural Community
         Housing Development Corporation (RCHDC), and other non-profit and for-profit
         affordable housing developers to apply for and implement HCD programs such as the
         HOME Program. Seek funding for affordable housing from other sources such as the
         United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Tax Credit financing, and CDBG.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      State and Federal sources
                     Scheduling:     Apply for funding as funding cycles occur, a minimum of one funding
                                     application per year.
Policy H-3.2 Encourage Senior Housing: Encourage affordable and market rate senior
housing projects to be developed with density bonuses and flexible parking standards where
consistent with maintaining the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
         Program H-3.2.1 Affordable Senior Housing: Maintain an inventory which identifies
         properties which are potentially well-suited for senior housing. Work with developers to
         facilitate funding and construction of senior housing.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Update inventory of properties suitable for senior housing once a year.
Policy H-3.3 House Sharing: Encourage and facilitate house sharing programs for seniors
through the conversion of existing residences into shared housing for seniors.
Policy H-3.4 Encourage Co-Housing: Encourage the development of co-housing for all family
and household types, including seniors, families and the disabled.
Policy H-3.5 Increase Affordable Housing Development: Encourage the construction of
housing units which are affordable to households with very low to moderate incomes.
         Program H-3.5.1 Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Continue to implement the City’s
         Inclusionary Housing Ordinance.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
10 - Housing Element                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-12

                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: Five inclusionary units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.5.2 Support Self Help Housing: Continue to provide one or two planning
         incentives for self-help affordable housing.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City and developers
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: Six self-help units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.5.3 Support SRO Housing: Continue to encourage and facilitate Single-
         Room Occupancy Units by allowing rooming and boarding with a Minor Use Permit in
         the RM, RH, and RVH zones.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: Twenty SRO units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.5.4 Prioritize City Services for Lower Income Developments: Continue to
         implement procedures to grant priority service for sewer and water services to lower-
         income residential developments.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Policy H-3.6 Density Bonus Incentives: Continue to provide density bonuses to projects that
provide a required percentage of total units affordable to very low and low-income households
and for seniors as required by State Density Bonus law.
Policy H-3.7      Large Families: Encourage housing for large families.
         Program H-3.7.1 Seek Funding to Develop or Rehabilitate Housing for Large Low-
         Income Families: Continue to work with affordable housing developers to identify a
         potential new construction or rehabilitation project that will serve large lower-income
         families and obtain and administer an HCD HOME grant or CDBG grant specifically to
         accommodate large families.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, CBDG, HOME
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
                    Quantification: Five large family units for the Housing Element period.
Policy H-3.8 Housing for the Disabled and the Developmentally Disabled: Continue to facilitate
barrier-free housing in new development. Continue to require that 10% of all units in multi-family
projects be developed in conformance with Universal Design to achieve accessibility for the
disabled and the Developmentally Disabled.
         Program H-3.8.1 Continue to provide expedited permit processing and reasonable
         accommodation program to projects targeted for persons with disabilities, including
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-13
         those with developmental disabilities. Encourage developers of supportive housing, on
         an annual basis, to develop projects targeted for persons with disabilities, including
         those with developmental disabilities. Work with the Redwood Regional Center to
         implement an outreach program to families with disabilities regarding the City’s services
         for this population. Place info about this program on the City’s website.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Ongoing
                   Quantification:  Ten units of housing for persons with disabilities for the Housing
                                    Element period. Five of these units will be for people with
                                    Developmental Disabilities.
Policy H-3.9 Emergency and Transitional Housing: Continue to support emergency shelters,
transitional housing and supportive housing within the City.
         Program H-3.9.1 Ongoing Estimates of the Demand for Emergency Housing: Continue
         to work with the Fort Bragg Police Department and homeless service providers in the
         community to maintain ongoing estimates of the demand for emergency housing in Fort
         Bragg and to develop strategies to meet that demand
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City
                    Scheduling:      Annual update
          Program H-3.9.2 Inter-Agency Cooperation: Continue to work with private, non-profit,
          County, and State agencies to provide transitional housing, supportive services and
          emergency housing for the homeless.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City, CDBG
                   Scheduling:      Ongoing
                   Quantification:  20 transitional units for the Housing Element period.
          Program H-3.9.3 Transitional and Supportive Housing: Continue to regulate transitional
          and supportive housing as a residential use subject to the same restrictions that apply
          to other residential use types and dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
          Program H-3.9.4 Emergency Shelters: Continue to allow emergency shelters as a
          permitted use in the General Commercial (CG) zoning district.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
Policy H-3.10 First Time Home Buyers: Encourage affordable housing for first time home
buyers.
         Program H-3.10.1 First Time Home Buyers: Continue to require through the inclusionary
         housing ordinance, the provision of housing units affordable to first time home buyers
         who qualify for affordable housing.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-14

                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: 10 inclusionary units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.10.2: Funding Sources for First Time Home Buyers: Continue applying for
         funding sources for first time home buyers such as HCD’s HOME Program and CDBG,
         and provide referrals to FHA programs offered by local lenders and sweat-equity
         programs operated by non-profit housing organizations.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, HOME, CDBG
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
                    Quantification: 20 first time home loans for the Housing Element period.
Goal H-4           Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender,
                   age, sexual orientation, marital status, or national origin.
Policy H-4.1      Equal Housing Opportunity: Continue to facilitate non-discrimination in housing.
         Program H-4.1.1 Housing Discrimination Complaints: Continue to facilitate equal
         housing opportunity by referring housing discrimination complaints to the Fair Housing
         Division of HUD. Continue to distribute information regarding equal housing opportunity
         laws and the equal housing opportunities for Fair Housing at City Hall.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-4.1.2 Non-discrimination Clauses: Include non-discrimination clauses in
         rental agreements and deed restrictions for housing constructed with City assistance.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Policy H-4.2 Improve Accessibility to Housing: Make it easier to develop housing for seniors
and persons with disabilities.
         Program H-4.2.1 Use Housing Funds: Use CDBG funds, and other funds as available,
         to support renovations and improvements to accessibility in affordable housing for
         qualified seniors, persons with disabilities and persons with developmental disabilities.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, CDBG, HOME
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
                    Quantification: Twenty units for seniors, persons with disabilities and persons with
                                    developmental disabilities in the Housing Element Period.
         Program H-4.2.2 Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities and
         Developmental Disabilities: Continue to review the City’s land use and building
         regulations to identify constraints that may exist for the provision of housing for persons
         with disabilities and developmental disabilities, and continue to implement the City’s
         policy and program to provide reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities
10 - Housing Element                                                                          2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-15

         and developmental disabilities. Publicize revisions to land use regulations and the City’s
         policy and programs for providing reasonable accommodation for persons with
         disabilities.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City
                    Scheduling:      Implemented and ongoing
                    Quantification:  Ten reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities for the
                                     Housing Element period. Five reasonable accommodations will be for
                                     people with developmental disabilities.
         Program H-4.2.3 Reasonable Accommodation: Ensure all new, multi-family construction
         meets the accessibility requirements of the federal and State Fair Housing Acts through
         local permitting and approval processes.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-5           Increase housing opportunities and improve needed services to expand
                   housing development opportunities.
         Program H-5.1.1 Continue to Pursue Strategies to Address Water Storage, Pressure,
         and Supply Issues: Continue to pursue strategies to: 1) add additional water storage
         capacity to the City’s water supply system; 2) identify and fix water leaks in the water
         supply system; 3) address water pressure issues that impact development potentials;
         and/or 4) seek new water supply as opportunities arise.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, Infrastructure Bank, Proposition 84, Development Impact Fees
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-6           Adopt and Implement a Housing Element that Complies with State Law.
Policy H-6.1 Public Participation: Continue to encourage and facilitate public participation in
the formulation and review of the City's housing and development policies.
         Program H-6.1.1 Workshops: Continue to hold workshops and public hearings to
         discuss proposed revisions to the City’s Housing Element.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Dept., Community Development Committee
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Annually
Policy H-6.2 Annual Review of Housing Element Implementation: Carry out an annual
progress report on implementation of the Housing Element.
         Program H-6.2.1 Annual Report: Prepare an annual report that describes the amount
         and type of housing constructed, the stock of affordable housing units, demolition
         permits, and conversion of residential units to other uses, and other housing-related
         activities for review by the EDAC, Planning Commission, and City Council.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-16

                   Scheduling:      Annually (include with the annual review of the Capital Improvement
                                    Program (CIP) by the Planning Commission)
F.       Previous Housing Element
The policies and implementing actions of the previous Housing Element adopted in 2009
concentrated on preserving and rehabilitation of existing housing stock, encouraging the
construction of secondary dwelling units, mixed-use residential developments, inclusionary
housing development, and multi-family and housing development for special populations
(seniors, large families, the disabled, first time buyers, etc.). Additional priorities of the 2009
Housing Element were to:
     1) Establish and incentivize green building and sustainable development;
     2) Work with housing developers and State and Federal funding sources to develop and
         rehabilitate additional low income housing;
     3) Encourage the development of affordable housing through the implementation of the
         inclusionary housing ordinance;
     4) Provide additional housing for seniors; and
     5) Provide programs to advertise, implement, and fund these activities.
The revised Element recognizes the need to provide stronger incentives for the construction of
additional affordable housing and sustainable housing. See Appendix A for an evaluation of the
programs in the previous Housing Element.
The City has successfully achieved most of the goals established by the 2009 Housing
Element.
     1) The City has adopted a Sustainability Element in its General Plan which puts forth
         significant new green building and energy conservation requirements for new
         development. Since 2009, 28 units of housing have been developed with net zero
         energy systems, and have achieved certification by USGBC as LEED Platinum.
     2) The City has met a reasonable portion of its overall regional housing need, given the
         real estate market crash during this period. Since 2009, 50 new housing units were
         developed in the City of Fort Bragg, and 27 of these are affordable for low and very low
         income households.
     3) In addition the City revised its Zoning Code in 2014 to address the previous legal deficits
         in the code. Specifically, the City now requires or allows: 1) higher density housing (24+
         units/acre) in three of its commercial zones; 2) emergency shelters in the General
         Commercial zone; 3) second units on all residentially zoned properties; 3) Single Room
         Occupancy housing with Minor Use Permit approval in the three higher density
         residential zones; 4) an inventory of all vacant land; and 5) inclusionary housing for for-
         sale units. In addition, on the programmatic side the City continues its: 1) free secondary
         unit design program; 2) housing rehab loan program; and 3) green building and
         sustainable infrastructure programs.
This 2014 Housing Element builds on the foundation established by the previous Element and
contains new policies and implementation programs.
G.       Public Participation
The community participation process for the 2014 Housing Element was incorporated into the
update process for the entire General Plan. The process for formulating and adopting the
Updated General Plan included numerous public meetings and hearings throughout 2012 and
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-17
2013. Many of the concepts in the revised Housing Element were originally brought forward as
part of this wider General Plan discussion.
Public participation specific to this Housing Element Update was undertaken through
workshops with the Planning Commission and City Council. The City Council workshop was
advertised in the local newspaper and notices sent to affordable housing providers and housing
advocates in Mendocino County. Members of the public, and for-profit and affordable housing
developers attended the workshop. In addition, one public hearing on the Housing Element was
conducted by the Planning Commission and one public hearing was conducted by the City
Council to solicit public input.
Comments and input were solicited from the following community members and partners:
     1. Affordable Housing Developers
          Habitat for Humanity
          Rural Community Housing Development Corporation
          Community Development Commission
     2. Low Income and Homeless Service Providers
          Love in Action
          Coast Community Center
          Project Sanctuary
          The Food Bank
     3. Economic Development Partners
          Developers, Architects, Real estate professionals
     4. General Public
For a complete list of all participants involved in the public process please see Appendix D.
Input from participants at various meetings, hearings, and workshops included the following
requests and City responses:
     1. Request: Consider establishing a legalization route to the considerable number of illegal
         second and third units in Fort Bragg.
         Response: The Housing Element includes a new program to consider establishing a
         legalization (possibly amnesty) program to provide an avenue to legalize second units
         that have been constructed or converted without the necessary permits.
     2. Request: Consider establishing a process so that single family residential units that are
         located in commercial districts, but that have lost their non-conforming status, may be
         used as a residential unit with Minor Use Permit approval.
         Response: The Housing Element includes a new program to consider establishing a
         legalization (possibly amnesty) program to provide an avenue to allow residential use in
         existing single family units in commercial districts that have lost their non-conforming
         status with Minor Use Permit approval.
     3. Request: Work with for profit and non-profit developers on the development of
         affordable housing in Fort Bragg.
         Response: The City worked closely with DANCO on the funding, planning and
         permitting for the new 28 unit senior affordable housing project. The City’s Housing and
         Economic Development Coordinator is responsible for pursuing CDBG, HOME and
         other funding sources to fund affordable housing projects, housing rehab loan program,
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-18

         and improvements to facilities that provide service to the homeless and implement
         various programs of the Housing Element.
     4. Request: Expand services for the homeless, in order to reduce their impact on our
         community.
         Response: The City has implemented a new CDBG funded program that provides: 1)
         intensive case management for homeless individuals and provides them with regular
         health care services, drug treatment, counseling and job skill training.
     5. Request: Increase the adoption of green building practices for all types of residential
         construction by providing incentives, workshops, and education.
         Response: The City has added a Sustainability Element to the General Plan and holds
         workshops on sustainable practices, such as Low Impact Development and Green
         Building.
     6. Request: Reduce the fees for hooking up to the public water and sewer systems.
         Response: The water enterprise is self-funded and fees pay for the provision of existing
         services and past investments in plant and equipment.
     7. Request: The City should work with homeowners to improve energy conservation in
         existing homes.
         Response: The City has completed a two year program to assist low income
         homeowners with energy efficiency. The City also has a CDBG grant application in to
         expand this program to improve water conservation in homes as well.
     8. Request: Consider creating a special improvement district and financing the purchase
         of solar panels by homeowners with a tax.
         Response: The City is going to join the PACE program, which is a tax funded
         improvement district for the installation of solar and energy efficiency improvements to a
         home.
     9. Request: Implement the program to revise development impact fees so that small units
         of one bedroom or less pay a smaller development impact fee, which reflects their
         smaller impact on City infrastructure.
         Response: Program H-2.3.3 was retained to address this request.
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-19
SECTION II: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This section analyzes the demographic, household, employment and housing stock statistics
and trends of Fort Bragg. The analysis is for the entire City of Fort Bragg. It is the basis for the
City’s housing goals, policies and programs as it identifies housing issues, needs and
opportunities as required by State Law. Specifically, the information presented in this chapter
summarizes the following:
              1. Population and employment trends, qualification of existing and projected housing
                  needs for all income levels, quantification of the City’s regional share of housing
                  allocation
              2. Household and housing characteristics analysis
              3. Inventory of land suitable for housing development
              4. Indication of zones for emergency shelters
              5. Analysis of potential and actual government constraints upon maintenance
                  improvement and development of affordable housing
              6. Analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental constraints, including financing,
                  land prices, cost of construction
              7. A Special Housing Needs Analysis
              8. Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to residential
                  development
              9. Analysis of existing affordable housing developments
Information in this analysis is based on the most up-to-date data available from the following
sources: the U.S. Census, the California State Department of Finance, the California
Employment Development Department, a 2009 income and housing conditions analysis
completed in conformance with Housing and Community Development (HCD) guidelines, the
City’s Department of Community Development, and Realfacts. Since the City of Fort Bragg is
very small (7,000 residents) it is not included in the American Community Survey data set, and
for some data points the most up-to-date data is the 2010 census.
While the General Plan takes a ten-year perspective, the Housing Element projects population
and housing needs for a five-year time span to comply with State Housing law that requires
periodic updating of housing elements.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-20

1. POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT & HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS
Population Growth & Projections
The population of the City grew by 38 persons between 2010 and 2013, which represents a 0.1
percent annual increase. See Table 1.1 below.
 Table 1.1 - Population Growth Trends 2010 -2013
                                                                                                    Average Annual Change
   COUNTY/CITY           Population           Population        Population        Population
                                                                                                  Number            Percent
                               4/1/2010            1/1/2011           1/1/2012        1/1/2013                #                  %
 Fort Bragg                       7,273               7,278              7,287           7,311               11               0.1%
  Source: State of California, Department of Finance, E-4 Population Estimates for Cities, Counties, and the State, 2011-2013,
Census
 with 2010 Census Benchmark. Sacramento, California, May 2013.
This slow rate of population growth mirrors past trends. For example, the City’s population
increased by 0.14 percent between 2000 and 2008 from 6,814 residents to 6,868 residents.
Growth over the next five years will also reflect past trends, with growth anticipated to stay in the
0.1% to 0.3% per year range. As the economy has recovered from the recession in Fort Bragg,
development appears to be picking up, hence the slight population growth projected for the next
five years. Additionally, if the City adopts the proposed Specific Plan for the Fort Bragg Mill Site
reuse, this could increase population growth further in Fort Bragg, although the certification of
the Specific Plan is unlikely to happen before 2017. Fort Bragg’s relatively slow growth rate is a
result of slow job growth and geographic isolation.
Neighboring cities and the County of Mendocino have also grown slowly as illustrated in Table
1.2 below. Population growth in Mendocino County generally is very slow, with the
unincorporated parts of the county growing more quickly than the incorporated parts, as retirees
settle in the unincorporated parts of the county.
 Table 1.2 Population Growth Trends 2010 -2013
                                                                                                           Average Annual Change
   COUNTY/CITY             Population             Population             Population       Population
                                                                                                           Number           Percent
                                    4/1/2010                1/1/2011           1/1/2012        1/1/2013                #              %
 Mendocino County
 Fort Bragg                             7,273                  7,278              7,287           7,311              11            0.1%
 Point Arena                              449                    448                448             449                0           0.0%
 Ukiah                                16,075                  15,926             16,030          16,065               -3           0.0%
 Willits                                4,888                  4,879              4,879           4,893                1           0.0%
 Unincorporated                       59,156                  59,181             59,321          59,573             116            0.2%
 County Total                         87,841                  87,712             87,965          88,291             125            0.1%
Fort Bragg’s population also includes a relatively large senior population as illustrated in Table
1.3 below.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                 10-21

 Table 1.3 Population Age 2010
                               Total      Percent
   Total population            7,273      100.0
    Median age (years)         37.4        ( X)
    1 to 18 years              1793       24.7
    18 years and over          5,480      75.3
    21 years and over          5,233      72.0
    62 years and over          1,274      17.5
    65 years and over          993        13.7
 Source: US Census, American Factfinder
Employment Trends
The Arts, Entertainment, Recreation and Accommodation sector is the largest source of
employment at 22.6% of all jobs, because Fort Bragg is a tourist destination. Other significant
employment sectors include retail trade, education, and health care reflecting our role as the
commercial hub of the coastal area of Mendocino County (see Table 1.4). All of these sectors
offer relatively low wages, and consequently our community has a very sizable low income
population.
                                                                    Fort Bragg City, CA
  Table 1.4 - Employment by Industry
                                                                    Estimate Percent
    Civilian employed population 16 years and over                  3,274
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining           104        3.2%
   Construction                                                     434        13.3%
   Manufacturing                                                    154        4.7%
   Wholesale trade                                                  55         1.7%
   Retail trade                                                     368        11.2%
   Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                    64         2.0%
   Information                                                      112        3.4%
   Finance and insurance, real estate, rental, leasing              96         2.9%
   Professional, scientific, and management, and administrative and 266        8.1%
     waste management services
   Educational services, and health care and social assistance      621        19.0%
   Arts, entertainment, and recreation, and accommodation and food  741        22.6%
     services
   Other services, except public administration                     148        4.5%
   Public administration                                            111        3.4%
  Source: ACS DP-03 2007-201; Census FactFinder
The informal and underground economy, while not quantified above, contribute to unreported
income and along with a significant retirement community drive housing prices higher for those
who do not participate in the normal formal economy.
Specific Employment Trends.
Employment growth is very slow in Fort Bragg due to the City’s geographic isolation and is the
primary drag on population growth, as many of our young people leave the community for higher
education and/or jobs elsewhere. Some employment growth is anticipated in retail and
accommodations as a new hotel development and retail shopping mall are proposed for the City
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                       10-22

of Fort Bragg. Additional employment is anticipated in manufacturing as the City’s largest
manufacturer, the North Coast Brewing Company, has expanded operations. None of these
changes will significantly change the total number of jobs or have a noticeable impact on
demand for housing.
Jobs & Housing Balance.
As the center of employment opportunities on the North Coast of Mendocino County, the Fort
Bragg businesses provide more jobs than current City residents can fill and thus the City’s jobs
housing balance is tilted slightly towards jobs. The City currently allows residential development
in every zone except for industrial zoning. Mixed use development requires a Use Permit in all
commercial zones. Additionally, the City recently adopted new Live-Work regulations which
make live-work housing easier to develop in industrial and commercial zoning districts.
Larger Employers, Typical Jobs & Wages.
Fort Bragg’s larger employers include the local hospital, school district, City government, Caito
Fisheries, a number of retailers including Safeway, Harvest Market, Rite Aid, Mendo Mill, Rossi’s
Lumber Company, and a number of restaurants and hotels. Typical occupations include: nurse,
food service, retail sales, clerical office worker, maid, inventory stocker, teacher, waiter, etc. In
general, wages of most service sector jobs are relatively low in the $10 to $15/hr. range, while
professionals such as nurses and teachers earn between $20 to $25/hr.
Household Growth & Characteristics
Number of Housing Units by Tenure and Growth Trends by Tenure. As shown in Table 1.5,
46% of households live in owner-occupied units, while 54% live in renter occupied units. The City
has a relatively high proportion of rental occupied units even through it has relatively few multi-
family units: this is partly because most second units are renter-occupied and second units
comprise a significant proportion of the single family homes in Fort Bragg. The rate of owner-
occupied housing has increased since 2000, when 42.9% of units were owner-occupied. Given
the mortgage crisis and the significant number of people who lost their homes as a result of
foreclosure, one could have anticipated an increase in the percentage of rental properties as
these properties were purchased by investors. However this has not occurred. The decline in
housing prices may have allowed residents who were previously priced out of the market to
purchase a home.
 Table 1.5 – Fort Bragg Households by
 Tenure 2011
 Total
                 Owner         Renter
 Households
 2,913              1,342        1,571
 Percentage          46%          54%
Trends Related to Needed Housing Types.
Fort Bragg needs more multi-family housing units to serve younger families, more large units to
serve large families and more affordable units to serve low-income families, as shown in the
following analysis. Table 1.6 below illustrates that most of Fort Bragg’s rental units are rented by
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-23

younger householders between the ages of 25 and 55, while most of the owner-occupied homes
have householders of more than 45 years of age.
 Table 1.6 - Households by Tenure and Age (2007-2011)
                                         Mendocino County, CA    Fort Bragg City, CA
                                         Estimate     Percent    Estimate       Percent
 Total:                                  34,102                  2,913
  Owner occupied:                        21,020       61.6%      1,342          46.1%
    Householder 15 to 24 years           236          0.7%       0              0.0%
    Householder 25 to 34 years           1,049        3.1%       122            4.2%
    Householder 35 to 44 years           2,535        7.4%       185            6.4%
    Householder 45 to 54 years           4,289        12.6%      286            9.8%
    Householder 55 to 59 years           2,943        8.6%       168            5.8%
    Householder 60 to 64 years           3,296        9.7%       162            5.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years           3,654        10.7%      166            5.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years           2,088        6.1%       152            5.2%
    Householder 85 years and over        930          2.7%       101            3.5%
  Renter occupied:                       13,082       38.4%      1,571          53.9%
    Householder 15 to 24 years           1,072        3.1%       118            4.1%
    Householder 25 to 34 years           3,163        9.3%       335            11.5%
    Householder 35 to 44 years           2,583        7.6%       339            11.6%
    Householder 45 to 54 years           2,819        8.3%       320            11.0%
    Householder 55 to 59 years           1,025        3.0%       83             2.8%
    Householder 60 to 64 years           799          2.3%       76             2.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years           860          2.5%       137            4.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years           537          1.6%       136            4.7%
    Householder 85 years and over        224          0.7%       27             0.9%
 Source: ACS 2011, 5 Year (B25009)
Table 1.7, below illustrates that Fort Bragg has proportionally more large families than the
County as a whole, which is not surprising as Fort Bragg has more rentals than the County, and
larger families are often renters.
 Table 1.7 - Household Size by Tenure (Including Large Households) (2007-2011)
                                   Mendocino County, CA              Fort Bragg City, CA
                                        #              %              #               %
 Owner                                    21,020       61.6%            1,342           46.1%
          Householder living alone         5,498       26.2%              340           25.3%
           Households 2-4 persons        13,832        65.8%              844           62.9%
      Large households 5+ persons          1,690         8.0%             158           11.8%
10 - Housing Element                                                                      2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-24
 Rental                                      13,082          38.4%              1,571              53.9%
          Householder living alone            4,586          35.1%                606               38.6%
           Households 2-4 persons              7301          34.7%                897                4.3%
      Large households 5+ persons              1195           5.7%                 68                0.3%
 Total:                                      34,102                             2,913
    Total Householder living alone           10,084          29.6%                946               32.5%
           Households 2-4 persons            21,133          62.0%              1,741               59.8%
      Large households 5+ persons             2,885           8.5%                226                7.8%
 Source ACS B25007
Table 1.8 below shows that about 15% of Fort Bragg households are female headed households
and 11% are female headed households with children. Overall 50% of all households are under
the poverty line in Fort Bragg, and this statistic holds true for female headed households as well.
 Table 1.8 - Female Headed Households, Fort Bragg, CA (2010)
                                                                                    Percent of
 Householder Type                                                   Number
                                                                                    households (1)
 Female Headed Householders                                                   437           15%
 Female Heads with Own Children                                              307            11%
 Female Heads without Children                                               130             4%
 Female Headed Householders Under the Poverty Level                          218            50%
 Total Households Under the Poverty Level                                  1,451            50%
 Note (1) - the percentages provided by HCD were incorrect. They have been corrected in this table.
Number
In conclusion, slightly more than half of Fort Bragg’s households live under the poverty line. A
relatively small number of these poor households are female headed households. Additionally,
Fort Bragg has more large households and more renting households than the surrounding
county. Overall Fort Bragg has a positive jobs housing balance, with a number of people
commuting into town for employment.
How are Housing Needs of Owners and Renters Being Met
With the State’s elimination of Redevelopment funding for affordable housing, the City’s ability to
assist with the development of affordable housing is limited. However the City has partnered with
Danco Corporation to use Tax Credit funding to construct affordable senior housing. The City
only requires a building permit for the construction of new single family residences and second
units. There is no private market for new multi-family development, unless it is subsidized
through tax credits, CDBG, HOME or some other mechanism and therefore affordable.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-25

2. OVERPAYMENT AND OVERCROWDING
Overpaying
In general, housing is less affordable for low-income households than for higher income
households. However, since many lower income households, especially retirees, may have
purchased their homes many years ago this is not always the case. Table 2.1 presents the
distribution of households by income categories and illustrates the percentage of households
that own or rent at each income category. It is clear from a review of the table that a majority of
both owners and renters at every income level (except for above moderate) are overpaying for
their housing. This reflects the reality that Fort Bragg is a high housing cost retirement
community with limited employment opportunities. Working residents pay relatively high prices
for their housing relative to their incomes, while retirees don’t generally have incomes, but have
wealth and therefore can afford to purchase more expensive homes. The relatively high rate of
overpayment may also be in part due to the underground and illegal economies of Mendocino
County resulting in lower overall reported income. The mismatch may be somewhat overstated
in the table below, as incomes are higher than reported for the portion of the population that
works in the informal economy.
 Table 2.1 - Households by Income Category Paying in Excess of 30% of Income for Housing Cost
 (Overpayment by Income), Fort Bragg, CA
                                  Extremely   Very                           Above             Lower
            Household                Low      Low       Low      Moderate   Moderate   Total   income
 Ownership Households             195       198      247        235        356        1,232   641
 Overpaying owner households      137       117      163        235        21         686     417
 Percentage of overpaying owners  70.2%     59.1%    65.9%      100%       5.9%       55.7%   65.1%
 Renter Households                441       297      341        165        165        1,410   1,080
 Overpaying renter households     367       239      223        73         0          902     829
 Percentage of overpaying renters 83.1%     80.5%    65.4%      44.3%      0.0%       64.0%   76.8%
 Total Households                 637       495      589        401        521        2,642   1,720
 Overpaying households            504       356      386        321        21         1,588   1,246
 % of overpaying households       79.1%     71.9%    65.6%      80.1%      4.0%       60.1%   72.4%
 Source: ACS 2007-2011 B25106
Low-income employed and unemployed are the most likely to pay more than 30% of their
incomes for housing costs. The City assisted this population with the Home Energy Link
Program (HELP) which provides much needed assistance with the payment of electricity bills.
This program ended in April of 2013 due to a lack of funding. The City hopes to re-start the
program, if it is funded through CDBG, for both energy and water conservation. Additionally the
City continues to partner with non-profit housing developers to assist with the development of
affordable housing for seniors, low income and special needs populations.
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-26

Overcrowding
The U.S. Bureau of the Census defines overcrowding as an average of more than one person
per room in a housing unit (excluding kitchens, porches, and hallways). The percentage of
overcrowded housing units is a general measure of the availability of housing units with
adequate rooms for the households who occupy them. In 2011, overcrowding was not much of
an issue in Fort Bragg, with only 7.3 percent of households overcrowded (see Table 2.2), which
is a significant reduction from the 15% rate of overcrowding in 2000. By comparison,
overcrowding has nearly doubled in the State as a whole and is 15% for all housing and 24% for
renter housing.
 Table 2.2 - Overcrowded Households (2011)
                                                                                        Mendocino         Fort Bragg        Percent
                                                                                          County,          California1       Over-
                                                                                        California                          crowded
                                                                                         Estimate           Estimate
 Total:                                                                               34,102            2,832
  Owner occupied:                                                                     21,020            1,154
    0.50 or less occupants per room                                                   15,599            871
    0.51 to 1.00 occupants per room                                                   4,653             228
    1.01 to 1.50 occupants per room                                                   575               30
    1.51 to 2.00 occupants per room                                                   137               25
    2.01 or more occupants per room                                                   56                0
  Renter occupied:                                                                    13,082            1,678
    0.50 or less occupants per room                                                   7,192             893
    0.51 to 1.00 occupants per room                                                   4,992             662
    1.01 to 1.50 occupants per room                                                   579               123
    1.51 to 2.00 occupants per room                                                   263               0
    2.01 or more occupants per room                                                   56                0
 Owner Occupied                           Overcrowded              1.01 or more                  768                 55         4.8%
 Renter occupied                          Overcrowded              1.01 or more                  898                123         7.3%
 Total overcrowded                                                 1.01 or more                 1666                178         6.3%
 Owner Occupied                 Severely Overcrowded                1.5 or more                  193                 25           2%
 Renter occupied                Severely Overcrowded                1.5 or more                  319                   0          0%
 Total severely overcrowded                                         1.5 or more                  512                 25           1%
 Note (1) the data provided by HCD was incorrect. City Staff obtained the correct data from table B25014 from Census FactFinder
 Website.
 Source: ACS 2007-2011 Table B25014
Overcrowding can lead to serious health and safety issues and a more rapid deterioration of the
units. Overcrowding is best reduced by increasing the supply of larger affordable units and
improving workplace opportunities. Accordingly, the City has recently reduced the parking
requirements for large units in the zoning code, thereby reducing the disincentive for production
of these units. Additionally, the Housing Element includes a new program to target a portion of
the CDBG rehab funds to add additional bedrooms to overcrowded units.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                           2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                         10-27
As shown in Table 3.1, low income renters are the most likely to have housing problems, which
are defined as: 1) incomplete kitchen facilities; 2) incomplete plumbing facilities; 3) more than 1
person per room; and/or 4) cost burden greater than 30%. As shown in Table 3.1 below, 97% of
renters with very low incomes (less than 30% Median Family Income (MFI)) have 1 or more
housing problems. Even low income renter households (less than 80% MFI) have a high (81%)
incidence of housing problems. Low income homeowners are similarly burdened with low
affordability and housing problems. To address these issues the City has initiated a housing
rehabilitation loan program which is available for rental properties and home-owner properties
with low income household tenants. Additionally the City engages in an active code enforcement
program for multi-family developments with code violations that impact health and safety.
  Table 3.1 - Housing Problems for All Households - CHAS Data Book, City of Fort Bragg
                                                                    Total         Total                Percent       Percent
                                                                   Owner         Renter       Total    of Owner      of Renter
  Household Income ≤30% MFI                                           55           350         405
     Household has 1 of 4 Housing Problems                            50           340         390           91%           97%
     Cost burden > 30%                                                44           340         384           80%           97%
     Cost burden > 50%                                                40           310         350           73%           89%
  Household Income >30% to ≤50% MFI                                  260           275         535
     Household has 1 of 4 Housing Problems                           160           190         350           62%           69%
     Cost burden > 30%                                               160           190         350           62%           69%
  Household Income >50% to ≤80% MFI                                  255           375         630
     Household has 1 of 4 Housing Problems                           120           305         425           47%           81%
     Cost burden > 30%                                               120           260         380           47%           69%
  Source: State of Cities Data Systems: Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data
Table 3.2 below provides income limits for extremely low income, very low income, low income,
moderate income and above moderate income for the City of Fort Bragg.
 Table 3.2 : Affordability Income levels, City of Fort Bragg, 2010
                                                   All Households      By Household Size
                               % of Area
                                                Low End of High End of 1 Person 2 Person 3 Person  4 Person 5 Person  6 Person
    Affordability Level     Median Income
                                                   Range     Range        HH       HH       HH        HH       HH        HH
                                   (AMI)
 Extreamly Low Income      Below 30% AMI $              -  $ 10,917    $ 7,642 $ 8,733 $ 9,825 $ 10,917 $ 11,790 $ 12,663
 Very Low Income           Below 50% AMI $ 10,918          $ 18,195    $ 12,736 $ 14,556 $ 16,375 $ 18,195 $ 19,650 $ 21,106
 Low Income                50 to 80% AMI        $ 10,918   $ 29,111    $ 20,378 $ 23,289 $ 26,200 $ 29,111 $ 31,440 $ 33,769
 Moderate Income           80 to 120% AMI $ 29,112 $ 36,389            $ 25,472 $ 29,111 $ 32,750 $ 36,389 $ 39,300 $ 42,211
 Above Moderate Income 120%+ AMI                $ 43,667 NA            $ 30,567 $ 29,111 $ 32,750 $ 36,389 $ 39,300 $ 42,211
 Median Income                                  $ 36,389
 Source: American Factfinder, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
4. HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
Fort Bragg is a predominantly residential community. The existing housing stock defines the
character of the City and its neighborhoods and is the City's most valuable resource. The
relatively high number of older homes in the City underlines the need for policies and programs
which continue to maintain and enhance the quality of older residential areas.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                            2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                               10-28

Housing Conditions
In 2009, PMC completed a Housing Conditions Survey that complies with HCD guidelines. The
survey found that, overall, housing in Fort Bragg is of sound condition. Only nine percent of all
units require repairs, and half of units requiring repairs only require minor repairs. Only one
percent of all units are dilapidated or require substantial repair. However this survey did not
include alley houses, which comprise an estimated 25% of the City’s single family housing stock.
Many of these houses are in poor repair and a subsequent housing conditions survey slated for
2015 may find additional housing conditions issues. Please see Table 4.1 below for a review of
the overall housing conditions by unit type.
Table 4.1 - Overall Housing Conditions, Fort Bragg, 2009
Structure Type                       Sound     Minor   Moderate     Substantial  Dilapidated    Total
Single Family, detached garage       89.5%      5.0%        4.0%          0.8%          0.8%   100.0%
Single Family, attached garage       95.5%      2.7%        1.6%          0.3%  -              100.0%
Duplex                               92.1%      7.9%  -            -            -              100.0%
Multi-Family                         94.4%      4.8%        0.8%   -            -              100.0%
 nd
2 Dwelling Unit                      86.4%      7.1%        5.1%          0.5%          1.0%   100.0%
All types                            91.0%      4.7%        3.2%          0.5%          0.5%   100.0%
Source: City of Fort Bragg Housing Conditions Survey Report, PMC, 2009
Annual Construction of Housing Units by Type, 1991-2014
Fluctuations in the type of housing built reflect not only the relative amount of land zoned for
different types of residential development in the City, but also changes in various economic
factors such as the real estate market, availability of financing and the local economy. Table 4.2
indicates the total number of single-family and multi-family homes constructed and demolished
in Fort Bragg from 1991 through March of 2014.
 Table 4.2 - Annual Construction & Demolition of Housing Units By
 Type - 1991 to 2014
 Year         Single   Percent   Multiple    Percent    Demolitions      Net
             Family    of Total   Family     of Total                 Housing
              Units     Units     Units*       Units                  Increase
                         Built                 Built
 1991             35       95%            2        5%             0          37
 1992             34       92%            3        8%             0          37
 1993             11       33%          22       67%              0          33
 1994              6      100%            0        0%             0           6
 1995             28       85%            5      15%              0          33
 1996             28       74%          10       26%              0          38
 1997             19      100%            0        0%             0          19
 1998              5       42%            7      58%              1          11
 1999             16       52%          15       48%              2          29
 2000              9      100%            0        0%             0           9
 2001             16      100%            0        0%             3          13
10 - Housing Element                                                                      2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-29

 2002                  0           NA             NA        NA   NA     NA
 2003                15          47%              17      53%     0     32
 2004                  6         40%               9      60%     1     14
 2005                15          71%               6      29%     3     18
 2006                  6         75%               2      25%     1      7
 2007                  6         43%               8      57%     1     13
 2008                  2         67%               1      33%     0      3
 2009                  5         71%               2      29%     0      7
 2010                  3         38%               5      63%     1      7
 2011                  1         20%               4      80%     0      5
 2012                  1         50%               1      50%     0      2
 2013                  0           0%             28     100%     0     28
 2014 -                0           0%              2     100%     1      1
 March
 Total             267           64%             149      36%    14    402
 Annual
 Average             11                            6              1     17
 Source: City of Fort Bragg Community Development Department, 2014
 Note: * includes second units
As shown in Table 4.2, new housing starts contracted significantly with the recession and have
remained low. The only significant new project was a tax credit funded affordable senior housing
project of 28 units which is located in the Coastal Zone. No housing units were demolished or
converted within the Coastal Zone during this Housing Element period.
Total New Units in 5 Year Housing Element Period
In total, 50 new units were built between the start of the 2009 Housing Element projection period
and the deadline for the adoption of the new Housing Element.
Housing Costs and Affordability
The high, low and average rent for rentals on the market in March of 2014, in the City of Fort
Bragg, are as shown in Table 4.3.
 Table 4.3 - Fort Bragg Rental Rates, March 2014
                          High             Low        Average  N
    1 bedroom          $   1,100       $      550    $    815  7
    2 bedroom          $   1,350       $    1,150    $ 1,213   5
    3 bedroom          $   1,500       $    1,125    $ 1,291   8
    4 bedroom          $   3,400       $    1,850    $ 2,625   2
   Source: Craigslist, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
In addition, property managers and realtors note that rents are increasing. Property managers
have noted a decrease in vacant rental housing and multiple applicants for available units.
Since 2009, rents have increased by an average of 7% for 1 bedrooms, 28% for two bedrooms
and stayed flat for three bedrooms.
10 - Housing Element                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                        10-30
Figure 4.1 illustrates that home prices dropped
from a median sales price in 2008 of nearly
$400,000 to a median sales price of around
$200,000 in 2011. The median home price has
increased more recently to $275,000 in the 4th
quarter of 2013. Foreclosure units are now
uncommon, although there are still distressed
properties on the market.
As shown in Table 4.4, in 2013, 42 units sold
within City limits at a median sales price of
$265,4242. The median price for a two
bedroom unit was $237,262 and the median
sales price for a three bedroom was $282,614.
                                                       Figure 4.1: Home Sales in Fort Bragg, 2008-2013
 Table 4.4 - Average Sales Price, City of Fort Bragg, 2013
           Average Sales                      Sales
 # BR           Price        Average SF     Price/SF    # Sold
 1 BR         233,500.00         526.00     $ 471.48       2
 2 BR         237,262.00       1,489.00     $ 193.37      13
 3 BR         282,614.00       1,606.00     $ 165.87      21
 ALL          265,424.00       1,515.00     $ 200.24      42
Housing Construction Prices and Trends
New housing units are being constructed at a very slow rate in Fort Bragg due to low market
demand for new units, given the relative affordability of existing for-sale units. This is especially
true at the lower end of the market. Additionally because Fort Bragg has a very slow market and
a limited supply of vacant single family lots, new single family residential development is typically
build to suit. There is no speculative single family development, nor has there been in the past
seven years. Thus from zero to three new single family homes have been constructed each year
for the past five years. The last two years have seen no new single family homes built. The
majority of new units are subsidized multi-family units. Given the paucity of new construction
starts for single family residential, it is not feasible to provide a construction price for this type of
activity in Fort Bragg. Although historically, $150 to $200/sf is a good rule of thumb for building
new residential units, depending on design and finishes.
Housing Units by Type of Unit
As indicated in the tables below, Fort Bragg remains predominantly a single-family residential
community. The large proportion of single-family homes is typical for a small coastal city located
in a predominantly rural county. However, relative to many small communities, Fort Bragg has a
fairly significant number of multi-family units which comprise 27 percent of the total housing
stock. Another 15% of “single detached” units are actually secondary units which are typically
rented at affordable rates according to a housing conditions survey completed for the City of Fort
Bragg in 2009.
10 - Housing Element                                                                          2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-31

 Table 4.5 - Fort Bragg, Total Housing Units by Type of Unit, 2011
                                                    Single             Single        Two to         Five       Mobile
                                     Total        Detached          Attached          Four          Plus       Homes
 Total Units                          3,213              2,014              145          386           354             314
 Percent of Units                     100%                 63%              5%          12%           11%             10%
 Source : State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties and the
 State — January 1, 2011- 2013. Sacramento, California, May 2013
The majority of multi-family units are in small apartments of 3 to 19 units and only 1.5% of units
are in multi-family projects of more than 50 units. In the near term the City does not anticipate
any large developments, because the real estate market does not appear to support large multi-
family development and Fort Bragg has relatively few large parcels that can accommodate larger
multi-family projects.
Pending Housing Developments
There are relatively few pending housing developments in Fort Bragg. Habitat for Humanity is
constructing an eight-unit project, two units of which are completed and another two units of
which will be completed within the year. The City is working with Danco Corporation to construct
12 to 15 special needs affordable housing units, however funding for this project has not yet
been secured. The City anticipates that seven or so single family and second units will be
constructed in 2014.
Vacancy
According to the US Census, 10.4 percent of Fort Bragg's housing units were vacant in 2010; by
comparison, vacancy in 2008 was just 8%. Fort Bragg’s housing market has a healthy vacancy
rate, however it is too low to generate market demand for new construction. Please see Table
4.6 to review vacancy data for Fort Bragg.
 Table 4.6 - Housing Stock By Vacancy, 2010
                                                                    Units
 Total housing units                                                    3,196
 Occupied housing units                                                 2,863
  Vacant housing units                                                    333
   For rent                                                                87
  Rented, not occupied                                                      6
   For sale only                                                           30
  Sold, not occupied                                                        5
 For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use                            127
 All other vacants                                                         78
                                                                    Percent
 Vacancy rate                                                         10.40%
 Home owner vacancy rate (1)                                           2.50%
 Rental vacancy rate (1)                                               4.80%
 Census 2010 - SDC - Demographic Research - Department of Finance
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                 10-32

5. ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENTS AT RISK OF CONVERSION
Inventory of At-Risk Units
There are affordable housing units throughout California which were built 30 years ago with
Federal low-interest mortgages from the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
with an agreement that the rents of these units be kept at a level affordable to low income
households. State Government Code Section 65863.10 requires owners of such projects to
provide at least twelve months’ notice of contract termination or prepayment of Federal
assistance to tenants and public agencies. Owners who are proposing to sell or dispose of those
properties must also provide first right of refusal to purchase those properties to those agreeing
to maintain the affordability of the units.
The following units in Fort Bragg are listed by the California Housing Partnership Corporation’s
inventory of Federally Assisted Multi-family Housing. The units are at risk of conversion to
market rate during the next 20 years.
 Table 5.1 Fort Bragg Affordable Housing At Risk, 2014
        Property Name          Street Address   Total Low-  Total  Type of  Elderly   Current Owner   Expiration    Options for  At Risk
                                                  Income    Units  Subsidy   Units                       Date        Renewal
                                                   Units
 FORT BRAGG DEVELOPMENT      520 CYPRESS ST          42       42  Section 8    10   Rural Community    02/28/2031 Non-profit    Not at      515/8 
                                                                                    Housing                        Owned        Risk
                                                                                    Development
                                                                                    Coalition
 RIVER GARDEN APARTMENTS 421 SOUTH ST                40       48  Section 8    34   Orchard River      12/31/2028 CDBG, LIHTC,  At Risk     515/8 
                                                                                    Associates                     HOME Funds
 Moura Senior Housing        400 South Street        38       38    LIHTC      38   Moura Housing   Passed, Not    CDBG, LIHTC, At Risk
                                                                                    Developers      Converted      HOME Funds
 River Gardens Apartments    421 South Street        47       48    LIHTC      34   Orchard River   20+ years      CDBG, LIHTC, At Risk
                                                                                    Associates                     HOME Funds
 Duncan Place Apartments     301 Cypress Street      43       44    LIHTC      ?    Rural Community 20+ years      CDBG, LIHTC, Not at Risk
                                                                                    Housing                        HOME Funds
                                                                                    Development
                                                                                    Coalition
 Source: CHPC http://www.chpc.net/preservation/MappingWidget.html
Conversion Risk, Cost to Preserve, Entity & Financing
Duncan Place - 301 Cypress Street
            Type of Assistance. This project received a loan of $1.5 million in 1984. RCHDC
                rehabilitated these units using Redevelopment funds in 2008 and a title restriction
                was placed on the property to ensure affordability for an additional 55 years.
            Units. The project provides 43 very low income rental units.
            Cost to Preserve. RCHDC is a non-profit affordable housing provider and has no
                intention of converting this project to market rate units as it would be at odds with the
                organization’s mission. These units are not considered at risk by the City of Fort
                Bragg. The estimated total cost of purchasing this project is estimated at $4.9 million.
            Entity to work on preservation. RCHDC.
            Financing. Unnecessary.
Fort Bragg Development - 520 Cypress Street
10 - Housing Element                                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                           10-33

             Type of Assistance. Section 8
             Units. The project provides 42 very low income units.
             Cost to Preserve. This project is not at risk as it is owned by RCHDC. RCHDC is a
              non-profit affordable housing provider and has no intention of converting this project
              to market rate units as it would be at odds with the organization’s mission.
             Entity to work on preservation. RCHDC.
             Financing. Unnecessary.
Moura Senior Housing - 400 South Street
          Type of Assistance. This project received a loan of $1.5 million in 1988, and the
              restrictive clause on the loan was set to expire in 2008.
          Units. The project provides 38 rent assisted elderly units.
          Cost to Preserve. The City estimates that the project could be purchased for
              approximately $4 million. At this time, Moura Housing continues to be operated as an
              affordable senior housing development with a fairly long waiting list. The property
              owner continues to invest in the maintenance and management of the units. The
              property owner continues to operate the project as an affordable senior facility.
          Entity to work on preservation. DANCO Community Partners approached the
              property owner regarding the purchase of the units and an adjacent five acre high
              density parcel. The property owner is not interested in selling the units.
          Financing. HOME funding could be used to purchase the at-risk senior housing
              project. Affordable Housing Tax Credits and CDBG funds are also feasible funding
              options. However the property owner remains opposed to selling the units and
              continues to operate the units as affordable housing.
River Gardens Apartments - 421 South Street
          Type of Assistance. This project received LIHTC funds.
          Units. The project provides 47 very low income units.
          Cost to Preserve. The City estimates that the project could be purchased at current
              prices for market rate housing for approximately $3 million.
          Entity to work on preservation. CDD, Danco Community Partners, RCHDC.
          Financing. Home, Tax Credits, CDBG funding, Home Funds.
Walnut Avenue Apartments - 311 Walnut Avenue
          Type of Assistance. This project received a loan of $2 million in 1982.
          Units. The project provides 56 very low income units.
          Cost to Preserve. The City estimates that the project could be purchased at current
              prices for market rate housing for approximately $3 million.
          Entity to work on preservation. CDD, Danco Community Partners, RCHDC.
          Financing. Home, Tax Credits, CDBG funding, Home Funds.
The City has one inclusionary unit that will expire in 2038. The City has one density bonus
affordable unit. Table 5.2 below lists all affordable housing units in the City of Fort Bragg. There
are 317 affordable housing units within the City of Fort Bragg and 29% of them are at risk.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-34

Table 5.2 All Affordable Housing Projects, Fort Bragg CA
Development                           Location             Year                       Income
                                                           Built Units    Status      Category
                                                                                      Low & Very
Cottages & Cypress Street             Cypress Street       2014   28    Protected
                                                                                      Low
                                                          2010 -                      Low & Very
Habitat for Humanity                  McPherson Street             4       2020
                                                           2014                       Low
Inclusionary Housing Unit             Wipple               2007    1    Protected     Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Dana Street          2004    1    Protected     Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Dick Williams Way   2004 &   6    Protected     Low
                                                           2005
Habitat for Humanity                  Hocher Lain          2003    8    Protected     Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Oak Street           2003    2    Protected     Very Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Stewart Street       2000   10    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Stewart Circle       2000    6    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Community Development Commission      John Cimolino Way    2000   14    Protected     Very Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Holmes Lane          1999    7    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Maple Street         1998    2    Protected     Very Low
Community Development Commission      South Sanderson Way  1997    9    Protected     Very Low
Habitat for Humanity                  South Corry Street   1996    2    Protected     Very Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Howland Court        1995   10    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Oak Street           1994    2    Protected     Very Low
Community Development Commission      Cypress Street       1993   19    Protected     Very
                                                                                      Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                  South Harold Street  1991    1    Protected     Very Low
Moura Construction                    400 South Street     1990   38   Not Protected Senior
                                                                                      Housing Very
                                                                                      Low/Low
Private/Federal Home Mortgage         Walnut Street        1986   56   Not Protected Very Low
Association
Rural Communities Housing Development 330 Cypress Street   1980   43    Protected     Very Low
Corporation
River Gardens                         421 South Street     1979   48    Protected     Very Low
Total Affordable Housing Units                                    317
Total Affordable Units at Risk                                   29.7%
10 - Housing Element                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-35
6. SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Persons with Disabilities
The number of disabled persons in a city has important planning and social implications and will
affect the demand for specialized handicapped access and transportation facilities, certain social
services, and specialized housing. The most recent (2000 Census) information regarding
disabled people in the City indicated there were 730 persons with one or more disabilities, of
whom 292 (40%) were 65 years and older.
 Table 6.1 Persons with Disability by Employment Status (2000 Census)
                                       5-64 persons     5-64 persons
                                       with             with            Persons Age Total persons
                                       disability,      disability,     65 Plus with with disability % of Total
                                       employed         unemployed a disability (1)                  Population Total Pop.
 Fort Bragg                                       141              297           292           730           11%      6,406
 Percent of Disabled Populations                   19%              41%          40%
 Source: 2000 Census PCT 028
 Note: 1) the data provided by HCD was incorrect.
As shown in Table 6.2 young people Table 6.2 Persons with Disabilities
are most likely to be developmentally                                                                 Fort Bragg (1)
disabled, while working age residents                                                            Number         Percent
of Fort Bragg are most likely to be Total Disabilities Tallied:                                         730
physically, mentally or have an
                                                      Total Disabilities tallied for people 5
employment disability. Seniors are                                                                        53       7%
                                                     to 15 years:
most likely to be physically disabled or
unable to go outside the home.                         Sensory disability                                  -       0%
According to the Redwood Coast                         Physical disability                                 -       0%
Regional Center, the City of Fort                      Mental disability                                  53       7%
Bragg has approximately 147 persons                    Self-care disability                                -       0%
with developmental disabilities.                      Total Disabilities tallied for people
                                                                                                        385       53%
                                                     16 to 64 years:
Developmental disability means a                       Sensory disability                                 43       6%
disability that originates before an                   Physical disability                              104       14%
individual attains age 18 years,
                                                       Mental disability                                  98      13%
continues, or can be expected to
continue, indefinitely, and constitutes                Self-care disability                               28       4%
a substantial disability for that                      Go-outside-home      disability                    82      11%
individual. As defined by the Director                 Employment disability                            149       20%
of     Developmental           Services,       in Total Disabilities Tallied for people
consultation with the Superintendent 65 years and over:                                                 292       29%
of Public Instruction, this term shall                 Sensory disability                                 40       6%
include mental retardation, cerebral
                                                       Physical disability                                70      10%
palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term
shall also include disabling conditions                Mental   disability                                23       3%
                                                       Self-care disability                               24       3%
found to be closely related to mental
retardation or to require treatment                    Go-outside-home      disability                    56       8%
similar to that required for individuals             Source:  2000   Census P 041
with mental retardation, but shall not Note: 1) the data provided by HCD was incorrect.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                          2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                        10-36
include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Housing Needs of Disabled.
People with physical and sensory disabilities are best serviced by housing conforming to
universal design. People with mental and developmental disabilities are best served by
supportive housing. People with go-outside-home disability are best served with meals on
wheels services.
Existing Resources.
 The Redwood Coast Seniors Inc. provides scheduled and on-demand transportation
     services for disabled persons, including seniors, throughout the community and to other
     locations along the coast under contract with the Mendocino Transportation Authority. This
     service provides a monthly average of 38 one-way trips per day for persons with
     wheelchairs, of which 18 are for non-seniors.
 Redwood Coast Senior Center provides a variety of services to disabled seniors including
     stimulating activities, essential programs, and services for active elders. The Center provides
     a daily lunch, calendar of social and educational programs especially designed by and for
     seniors, field trips, special dinners, Meals on Wheels, consultation on any matter of
     importance to independent senior living, high speed internet in a computer lab, secure daily
     care for seniors who are experiencing cognitive decline, and all day transportation service for
     seniors (60+).
 Parents and Friends provides assistance to people with mental and developmental
     disabilities. This organization provides extensive training and assistance to people with
     mental and developmental disabilities.
 Mendocino Coast Hospitality Center provides extensive case management and
     counseling for the homeless mentally ill and mentally ill individuals in transitional housing.
 Mendocino Coast Clinics provides case management and psychological housing for
     individuals with developmental disabilities.
 Ortner provides adult mental health services.
 Redwood Quality Management Services provides mental health services for children.
Zoning and Capacity Available to Serve the Needs of Disabled Residents
The affordability of housing for disabled people is an important concern for Fort Bragg.
According to the Community Development Commission, most disabled persons entitled to SSDI
(Social Security Disabled Insurance) and SSI (Social Security Insurance) benefits receive less
than $800 per month from these sources. The average rent in Fort Bragg is $800 per month, an
amount that exceeds the total monthly benefits typically received by disabled persons. Persons
receiving Section 8 housing assistance would receive assistance in meeting the market rate
rents.
The City is developing a written procedure for processing requests for reasonable
accommodation. A copy of the draft procedure is attached as Appendix E.
The City provides opportunities for housing for persons with disabilities as follows:
 The City of Fort Bragg’s zoning code does not have a definition for “family” nor does it have
     special siting requirements for group homes.
 Transitional housing is allowed in all residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts
     that allow residential development. Transitional housing projects are required to get the
     same type of permit as any comparable unit type (single family, multi-family, live-work) in the
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-37

     residential, commercial or industrial zone. In general, a building permit is required for a single
     dwelling, and Design Review/Use Permit is required for two or more dwelling units.
    Organizational houses of more than 3,000 sf or any project of more than three units requires
     a Use Permit in RM, RH and RVH zones and is not permitted in RS or RL zones. There are
     no special standards, requirements, or performance standards applicable to organizational
     homes or group homes for persons with disabilities or developmental disabilities. The Use
     Permit requirement does not act as a detriment to development for persons with disabilities
     in Fort Bragg: two such facilities are already located in the City; and the typical conditions of
     approval are no more stringent than for other multi-family residential land uses requiring a
     conditional use permit.
    The City completed a comprehensive revision of its Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances
     which included changes to ensure compliance with fair housing laws in 2014.
    With regard to parking, the City complies with the UBC and CALDAG for the number and
     configuration of handicapped parking spaces. Disabled individuals can request a designated
     disabled parking space on the street in front of their residence. In addition, the Zoning
     Ordinance provides for flexible parking standards which would allow a reduction in parking
     requirements for developments for persons with developmental and physical disabilities,
     emergency and transitional housing, and other special housing needs, such as senior
     housing.
    Neither the Land Use Element nor the Zoning Ordinance contains any regulations
     addressing spacing or siting of special needs housing nor the location of such facilities with
     regard to one another.
Housing Programs for Persons with disabilities and developmental disabilities. The City’s
2014 Housing Element will retain the following policy and program from the 2008 Housing
Element.
Policy H-3.1 Available Funding Sources: Utilize County, State and Federal programs and
other funding sources that provide housing opportunities for lower-income and special needs
households.
         Program H-3.1.1 Available Funding: Seek available State and Federal assistance to
         develop affordable housing for seniors, the disabled, lower-income large households,
         and households with special housing needs. Work with the County Community
         Development Commission (CDC), Rural Community Housing Development Corporation
         (RCHDC), and other non-profits to apply for and implement HCD programs such as the
         California Self Help Housing Program (CSHHP), the Multi-family Housing Program
         (MHP), and/or the HOME Program. Seek funding for affordable housing from other
         sources such as the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Tax Credit
         financing, etc.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      State and Federal sources
                   Scheduling:     Application for funding as funding cycles occur, at least once per year.
The Elderly
The City's proportion of elderly residents (over 65 years old) has remained at a constant 13 to 14
percent since 2000, as shown in Table 6.3. State projections indicate that the proportion of the
elderly population in Mendocino County is expected to increase in the next ten years. Fort Bragg
will likely follow this trend, but at a slower pace, as seniors from other communities don’t
generally retire to Fort Bragg, rather they tend to retire to the unincorporated areas of the
county.
10 - Housing Element                                                                           2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-38

 Table 6.3 - Fort Bragg Senior Population, 2000, 2008 and 2010
                                          2000      2008      2010      Percent
                                                                        of Total
 Total Population                          7026       7077      7273       7240
 Senior Population (65 Years+)              977        963       993       1,013
 Percentage of Total                     13.9%      13.6%     13.7%       14.0%
 Source: US Census, 2000, 2010, 2012
Table 6.4 illustrates the number and percent of households in 2011 that are senior within the
City of Fort Bragg and more generally in the county. As shown in Table 6.4, 29% of all
households are seniors living in owner-occupied units, this is a much higher percentage than the
19.9% of households that live in owner-occupied units within the City of Fort Bragg. The
proportion of households that are renter occupied by seniors is 7% in the county and 12% in the
city. Overall 32% of units within Fort Bragg are occupied by seniors and 60% of Fort Bragg
senior households live in their own homes, with the remainder 40% living in rental units.
 Table 6.4 - Senior Households by Tenure and Age (2007-2011)
                                       Mendocino County,      Fort Bragg City,
                                       California             California
                                        Estimate     Percent  Estimate    Percent
                                                     of Total             of Total
 Total:                                34,102                 2,913
   Owner occupied:                     21,020       61.6%     1,342      46.1%
 Householder 15 to 60 Years            11052        32.4%     761        26.1%
 Senior Households                     9968         29.2%     581        19.9%
    Householder 60 to 64 years         3,296        9.7%      162        5.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years         3,654        10.7%     166        5.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years         2,088        6.1%      152        5.2%
    Householder 85 years and over      930          2.7%      101        3.5%
   Renter occupied:                    13,082       38.4%     1,571      53.9%
 Householder 15 to 60 years            10662        31.3%     1195       41.0%
 Senior Households                     2420         7.1%      376        12.9%
    Householder 60 to 64 years         799          2.3%      76         2.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years         860          2.5%      137        4.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years         537          1.6%      136        4.7%
    Householder 85 years and over      224          0.7%      27         0.9%
 Source: ACS 2011, 5 Year (B25009)
Poverty. According to the 2012 American Community Survey, 14.4% of seniors live below the
poverty line.
Senior Services and Senior Housing. Table 6.5 below illustrates the affordable housing
developments that serve senior citizens. Three of these projects are age limited to seniors,
10 - Housing Element                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-39
namely Cottages at Cypress (27 units), Moura Senior Housing (38 units) and Ocean Lake Senior
Mobile Home Park (70 units). All projects are limited to low and very low income residents except
for the mobile home park which also serves moderate income residents.
 Table 6.5 - Senior Affordable Housing Projects
          Property Name              Street Address        Low-       Total      Elderly      Affordability
                                                         Income       Units       Units
                                                           Units
 Cypress Cottages                 330 Cypress Street        26          27         26      Low and Very Low
 Fort Bragg Development           520 Cypress Street        42          42         10      Low and Very Low
 River Garden Apartments          421 South Street          40          48         34      Low and Very Low
 Moura Senior Housing             400 South Street          38          38         38      Low and Very Low
 River Gardens Apartments         421 South Street          47          48         34      Low and Very Low
 Duncan Place Apartments          301 Cypress Street        43          44         NA      Low and Very Low
 Ocean Lake Senior Mobile                                   NA          70         70
                                  Ocean Lake Drive                                         Moderate and Low
 Home Park
 Total                                                     236         317         26
There is a waiting list for senior housing at the Cypress Cottages, Moura Senior Housing and
Ocean Lake.
The absolute decline in the amount and types of both Federal and State funding and tax credits
to finance development of new housing units for seniors, will limit the ability of the City, non-
profits and for-profit housing developers to develop new units. This is the single largest hurdle to
the development of new affordable senior housing units. However the City continues to assist
developers interested in developing affordable senior units. The Danco Corp just completed 26
units of affordable housing for seniors. The project is a model green project as all the homes are
net-zero energy users and the project is also a model pocket development consisting of 27
separate cottages, with a commons building that has a kitchen and a meeting space. The
beautiful facility was 100% occupied
within one week of opening.
Programs to assist seniors who wish to
continue living in their own homes
provides important psychological and
social benefits, and reduces the need to
build assisted living units. The City of
Fort Bragg provides low interest loans,
funded through CDBG, to qualifying
seniors for maintenance and repair of
their homes.
                                               Danco “Cottages at Cypress” Senior Housing Community
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-40

Large and Female-Headed Households
Female-headed households, are likely to have greater demand than two-parent households for
child care and other social services. There is a clear need for more affordable housing for this
sector of the community. The waiting list for Section 8 housing at the Community Development
Commission of Mendocino County is over 600 persons, and it typically takes more than two
years to obtain housing.
Table 6.6, below illustrates that Fort Bragg has proportionally (%) more large families than the
County as a whole. This is not surprising as Fort Bragg has proportionally more rentals than the
County, and larger families are often renters.
  Table 6.6 - Household Size by Tenure (Including Large Households) (2007-2011)
                                            Mendocino County, CA          Fort Bragg City, California
                                            Number                %        Number                %
                                             21,020             61.6%       1,342             46.1%
  Owner
           Householder living alone           5,498             26.2%        340              25.3%
            Households 2-4 persons           13,832             65.8%        844              62.9%
      Large households 5+ persons             1,690              8.0%        158              11.8%
  Rental                                     13,082             38.4%       1,571             53.9%
           Householder living alone           4,586             35.1%        606              38.6%
            Households 2-4 persons            7301              34.7%        897               4.3%
      Large households 5+ persons             1195               5.7%         68               0.3%
  Total:                                     34,102                         2,913
     Total Householder living alone          10,084             29.6%        946              32.5%
            Households 2-4 persons           21,133             62.0%       1,741             59.8%
      Large households 5+ persons             2,885              8.5%        226               7.8%
  Source ACS B25007
Large families are readily accommodated in Fort Bragg as our community has many larger
single family homes and apartments with three or more bedrooms for rent or sale at any given
time as illustrated below in Table 6.7.
  Table 6.7 - Available Units by Size of Unit, 2014
                                  Rental Units Available                              Units Sold
                     Average Rent         Number of          % of Units  Average Sales       Units    Percent
                      March, 2014      Units available       Available       Price           Sold       Sold
  1 bedroom          $        815              7                32%     $ 233,500              2        6%
  2 bedroom          $      1,213              5                23%     $ 237,262             13       36%
  3 bedroom          $      1,291              8                36%     $ 282,614             21       58%
  4 bedroom          $      2,625              2                 9%     NA                     0        0%
  Total                                        22                  100%                       36          100
  Source: Craig’s List, Century 21 Reality, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                         10-41

Table 6.8 below shows that about 15% of Fort Bragg households are female-headed households
while 11% are female-headed households with children. Overall 50% of all households are under
the poverty line in Fort Bragg, and this statistic holds true for female headed households as well.
In 2000 there were 212 female headed households, thus between 2000 and 2010 the number of
female headed households more than doubled. In general female-headed households face the
same challenges as other households, as they have the same poverty rates as households in
general in Fort Bragg.
 Table 6.8 - Female Headed Households (2010)
                                                                                Fort Bragg
                         Householder Type                              Number           % of HH (1)
 Female Headed Householders                                                   437           15%
    Female Heads with Own Children                                           307            11%
    Female Heads without Children                                            130             4%
 Female Headed Householders Under the Poverty Level                          218            50%
 Total Households Under the Poverty Level                                  1,451            50%
 Note (1) - the percentages provided by HCD were incorrect. They have been corrected in this table.
Farmworkers
The 2010 Census indicated there were 104 persons working in agriculture, forestry, fishing and
hunting in Fort Bragg. This is significantly less than the 259 people employed in this sector in
2000. Most of the workers identified by the Census are employed in the fishing and forestry
sectors, and are therefore not eligible for farmworker housing subsidies, such as from CDBG
grants. Additionally, workers in the fishing and forest industries tend to be fairly well paid and
have low rates of poverty. The City had a community-based farm on three acres up until 2013,
but the farmer has retired.
Families and Persons In Need of Emergency Shelters
Accurate information on the number of homeless persons is not available for the City of Fort
Bragg, however according to Ann Shaw who runs the Mendocino Coast Hospitality Center (the
regional homeless services organization) about 40 to 50% of the county’s homeless are located
in or around Fort Bragg. According to the County’s 2012 Continuum of Care report, there are
around 1,400 homeless people in Mendocino County’s unincorporated area and cities at any
given time, including those in emergency shelters, transitional housing, and permanent
supportive housing for homeless populations (see Table 6.9).
 Table 6.9 - Countywide Homeless Households 2012 CoC
                                                                   Sheltered     Unsheltered         Total
 Households without children                                           93            1,241          1,334
 Households with at least one adult and one child                      12              20             32
 Households with only children                                         0               13             13
 Total Homeless Households                                            105            1,274          1,379
 *Numbers are provided for the Mendocino Continuum of Care. Number represent homeless needs for the
 total Continuum of Care area
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-42

There are about 1,441 homeless persons in total and of these there are 267 chronically
homeless individuals. Most of the homeless are unsheltered; a very small proportion (7.6%) are
sheltered. Homeless individuals and families have a range of special housing needs, including:
 Emergency shelters which provide immediate short-term housing typically limited to less
     than six months.
 Transitional housing, which provides housing between six-months and two years, often
     coupled with intensive case management, alcohol and drug abuse assessment and
     treatment, mental health treatment, life skills and employment training, and assistance with
     credit worthiness. The Hospitality House provides transitional housing facilities. They report
     that the demand for temporary transitional housing exceeds the supply.
 Permanent supportive housing, which offers a stable residential environment with mental
     health counseling, job training, and case management among other services to reinforce the
     advancements of formerly homeless persons up the ladder of the continuum of care.
In 2008, Fort Bragg had 6 transitional housing facilities offering 83 beds for individuals and
families. However, a number of these transitional housing facilities were closed when the non-
profit operating them closed its doors. Consequently, as shown in Table 6.10 below, there are
only 39 transitional housing beds in two facilities in Fort Bragg at this time. The City has
submitted a CDBG grant application (2014) to establish 5 additional transitional housing units
with an additional 15 beds.
Table 6.10 - Transitional and Emergency Housing
Organization                            Type of Shelter Provided                Units/Size
Hospitality House                       Emergency Housing                       20 individual beds, 4
                                                                                family beds
331 N Harrison St 1/2                   Transitional Housing for families with  15 family & individual
                                        children                                beds
Community Development Commission        Shelter Plus Care voucher program       variable
In most cases, homelessness has occurred because local people are unable to afford housing,
rather than as the result of an influx of homeless persons from other areas. The magnitude of
this problem exceeds the resources of the City of Fort Bragg, although the City has initiated a
cutting edge program to provide wrap around supportive services for the most chronically
mentally ill homeless in order to improve outcomes for these individuals and reduce the cost of
services.
The City has complied with Government Code Section 65583(a)(7) and (c)(1) regarding the
identification of adequate sites to facilitate the development of emergency shelters and
transitional housing with programs which identify an area suitable for this use. The City has
amended its Zoning Ordinance to allow transitional housing in every residential zoning district as
a permitted use and emergency housing as a permitted use in the General Commercial (CG)
district. The CG zoning district is an appropriate location for such a facility because:
      There are several underutilized sites within this district;
      There already exist transitional housing facilities in this zoning district;
      This area is centrally located and near public services and stores; and
      Infrastructure, such as water, sewer, roads, and sidewalks, is in place.
The City works with the Mendocino Coast Hospitality Center to identify, acquire, and expand
facilities to serve the homeless in Fort Bragg.
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-43

SECTION III: HOUSING CONSTRAINTS ANALYSIS
This section analyzes the land, financing and regulatory constraints to the successful production
of housing. It informs the City’s housing goals, policies and programs. Specifically, the
information presented in this section includes the following:
              1. Inventory of land suitable for housing development and how it satisfies the ability
                  to comply with the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
              2. Environmental constraints to development of vacant land
              3. Zoning for a variety of housing types, including emergency shelters
              4. Analysis of potential and actual government constraints on maintenance
                  improvement and development of affordable housing, including annexation
                  standards, land use controls, infrastructure, development fees, building codes
                  processing time, and community sentiment
              5. Analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental constraints, including financing,
                  land prices, cost of construction.
7. RESIDENTIAL LAND INVENTORY
This residential site inventory identifies parcels potentially suitable for residential use, especially
multiple-family units. Staff utilized a recent aerial photo, the parcel inventory from the 2008
Housing Element, and staff knowledge to create an updated map and table with up-to-date
vacant land which can accommodate residential development. All parcels are located in
developed areas within the City with water and sewer service.
Regional Housing Needs Assessment
As shown in Table 7.1, the City’s share of the regional housing need is 20 units. The City is
responsible for identifying the land that is both suitable for and can accommodate this level of
residential development. The City is not responsible for the actual construction of the units.
 Table 7.1 - Fort Bragg Regional Housing Needs Assessment
 Allocation by Income Group
                     Very                               Above
      Income                  Low Moderate                           Total
                     Low                              Moderate
 Housing Units        5        3           3              9           20
 Source: MCOG, Draft Mendocino County Regional Housing Needs Assessment
 Plan, 2013
Inventory of Available Land
The City undertook a comprehensive GIS-based analysis to identify the size and number of
vacant parcels in each zoning district. Overall there are approximately 120 acres of vacant and
underutilized residential and mixed-use parcels available for development, as shown in Table
7.2. The residential development potential for each parcel noted in Table 7.2 was calculated in
two ways:
 Potential Maximum Units illustrates the maximum number of units that are developable on
     the site given the site size and units/acre allowed under the zoning. This calculation identifies
     a theoretical maximum if all land use and infrastructure constraints were removed and the
     property built out to its fullest extent.
10 - Housing Element                                                                      2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-44

    Likely Units Given Development Constraints estimates potential unit build-out given all
     known site constraints (slope, soils condition, botanical resources, access issues, etc.). The
     potential units were calculated by taking the area available for residential use and multiplying
     by a factor that represents staff’s estimate of the realistic development envelope on the site.
     This analysis is necessarily a best estimate given staff’s current knowledge. More or less
     development may be possible than this estimate and can only be determined through the
     completion of all relevant studies and analysis on a parcel-by-parcel basis. The resulting
     number was then multiplied against the units per acre density allowed by the zoning to arrive
     at the theoretical maximums.
All sites in the analysis are currently served by City water and sewer services. Some of the
parcels are sufficiently large that they will require the development of internal circulation (streets)
which is a significant expense to development and may reduce overall feasibility of some of the
sites.
 Table 7.2 - Vacant Land Analysis for Residential Development Potential,
 Fort Bragg, 2014
                                                                        Likely Units
                                 Maximum       Acres of
                                                            Maximum        Given
    General Plan Designation     Units Per     Vacant
                                                               Units   Development
                                   Acre          Land
                                                                        Constraints
 Low Density Residential (RL)         6           24.1          144          96
 Medium Density Residential (RM)     12            6.2           75          67
 High Density Residential (RH)       15           18.9          283         198
 Very-High Density Residential       24           47.6         1,143        522
 (RVH)
 Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)     24           10.0          241         183
 General Commercial (CG)             24            4.8          116         104
 Central Business District (CBD)     40            8.5          339         160
  Total                                          120.2         2,342       1,331
 Source: Community Development Department, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
Several conclusions can be drawn from Table 7.2. First, the City has sufficient vacant and
underdeveloped land to meet its regional housing allocation of 21 units, since 1,331 units could
be built within City limits, given environmental constraints. The majority of these units could be
higher-density multi-family units in very high density and mixed use Zoning Districts. For a
complete list of all vacant properties (by parcel number), zoning, and potential units please see
Appendix B. The total acreage of available multi-family land and the total number of units has
declined from the 2009 housing element, because some parcels have been developed for
housing, including 30 units of affordable housing, and significant environmental constraints have
been discovered on three large parcels which will significantly reduce the development feasibility
and envelope. However, despite sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land, our relatively weak
housing market limits the actual amount of housing that is built each year. However, as shown in
Table 7.3 below, the City has more than adequate zoning to meet the current Regional Housing
Needs Assessment (RHNA) requirements.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-45

 Table 7.3 - Summary of Vacant Sites by Income in Comparison to the RHNA
                                                                              Likely Units RHNA
       General Plan Designation                Likely Income Category            Given     Require-
                                                                              Constraints  ments
 Low Density Residential (RL)           Above Moderate Income                       96         9
 Central Business District (CBD)        Moderate Income                            160
                                                                                               3
 Medium Density Residential (RM)        Moderate Income                             67
 High Density Residential (RH)          Low, Very Low Income, Extremely Low        198
                                        Income
 Very-High Density Residential (RVH)    Low and Very Low Income, Extremely         522
                                        Low Income
                                                                                              8*
 Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)        Low and Very Low Income, Extremely         183
                                        Low Income
 General Commercial (CG)                Low and Very Low Income, Extremely         104
                                        Low Income
  Total                                                                           1331        21
Note: * 50% of the eight units (i.e. four units) are for Extremely Low Income households.
State legislation (SB 1019) requires the City to zone an adequate number of sites that permit
multi-family residential uses without a conditional use permit to allow the City to meet its housing
need for very-low and low income households. The RVH zoning district permits multi-family
housing without a conditional use permit, and these vacant sites can accommodate up to 522
units. Additional multi-family housing can be built with a conditional use permit: namely, 67 units
in the RM District, and 198 units in the RH District. A conditional use permit can be obtained if
the developer provides a traffic study for a project. However, a significant portion of parcels
zoned for higher density housing are located within the Coastal Zone and require a Coastal
Development Permit. In addition, all multi-family development of three or more units requires
Design Review.
State law requires the City to have sufficient vacant land with zoning to accommodate housing
for lower-income households (GC Section 65583.2 (c) (3)). State law allows the City to meet this
requirement by zoning sufficient vacant land with default densities of 15 units per acre to
encourage the development of housing for lower-income households. As shown in Table 7.2
above, there are currently 71 acres of vacant land within City limits which is zoned for 24 units
per acre or greater, which is more than adequate to accommodate the needed 21 units of
extremely low, very low and low income affordable housing mandated by our RHNA housing
allocation. These vacant properties can accommodate up to 970 units given known site
constraints.
Significant progress has been made toward alleviating the shortage of affordable housing
through the collaborative efforts of the City and nonprofit housing organizations. Nonetheless,
there continues to be a large unmet need for this type of housing in the community. The City is
currently in discussions with a number of affordable housing developers to develop additional
affordable housing in Fort Bragg.
Specifically, the City of Fort Bragg is working with the Danco Communities, which is an
affordable housing development company. Danco Communities specializes in the use of tax
credits, HOME funds, CDBG, and Redevelopment funds in order to offer rents that, combined
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                    10-46
with tenants’ utilities, do not exceed one third of their monthly income. These projects can help
cities and counties meet their state mandated housing element and contribute to a healthier local
economy. Danco Communities’ affiliates maintain ownership of these developments for a
minimum of 55 years, ensuring that they are well-managed and well-maintained. Danco just
completed a 27 unit 100% affordable senior housing project and is now working with Parents
and Friends to develop a 20 unit affordable housing project for people with developmental
disabilities.
Habitat for Humanity. The City continues to work with Habitat for Humanity and has changed
the zoning code to provide one planning incentive for sweat-equity affordable housing, such as
that developed by Habitat for Humanity. Habitat for Humanity is currently constructing an eight
unit, in-fill, self-help affordable housing development in Fort Bragg.
Environmental Constraints to Development of Vacant Land
Environmental constraints to housing development include the following key issues:
 Botanical resources. Known and potential botanical and wetland resources on undeveloped
     sites can constrain the development envelope and therefore the total number of units on a
     vacant site. Where these constraints are known the number of likely units has been reduced
     in Table 7.2 above. Within the Coastal Zone, this constraint becomes even more significant
     as the Local Coastal Program requires a 50 to 100 foot setback from any Environmentally
     Sensitive Habitat Areas.
 Traffic and access. A few of the sites are constrained by limitations of access, such as
     requirements for easements for access and limitations by Caltrans on the number of
     additional encroachments onto Route 1. In addition, some sites will require street and
     frontage improvements for development. These improvements would be required as part of
     the subdivision process, use permit, or coastal development permit process and would be
     borne by the developer.
 Water storage. The City of Fort Bragg has a deficit of adequate water storage in a 50 year
     drought condition and this may limit development of units in the near term. In order to
     remedy this issue the City of Fort Bragg is in the design, engineering and environmental
     review phase of the construction of a 45 acre foot reservoir which will address the water
     storage issue for the next five to ten years. The City anticipates completion of the reservoir
     by 2016.
 Water pressure. The south Fort Bragg pressure zone may not be adequate to serve an
     additional large two story development of more than 50 units. The City has undertaken an
     analysis of the pressure zone and has identified a potential solution. The solution will be
     implemented as part of the City’s regular Capital Improvement Plan or as a condition of
     approval for a significant development that will impact the water pressure in the zone to a
     sufficient degree to impact the City’s ability to fight fires.
Existing and Planned Water, Sewer and Dry Utilities
Most sites have ready access to water, sewer and dry utilities. All residential development must
pay for the physical connection to the City’s water and sewer systems, and the cost of this
connection depends on the distance of the project from the main lines. Within City limits all
parcels with residential zoning are within a reasonable connection distance for sewer and water.
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-47

Map 1: Vacant Land
10 - Housing Element                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                               10-48
Appendix B provides a detailed list of all vacant sites which includes APN numbers, street
addresses, acreage, and a description of known site specific development constraints such as
slope, presence of wetlands, bluff retreat buffers, presence of botanical resources, etc.
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Zoning for Transitional and Supportive Housing
The City’s Land Use and Development Code treats transitional and supportive housing in all
residential, commercial, and industrial zones as multi-family, live-work, or single family housing,
depending on design. As such, it is permitted as a single-family home and as a use by right
without any need for a use permit or design review in all residential zoning districts. Multi-family
developments require a Use Permit approval in the RM, RH, RVH, CG, CH and CBD zones.
Live-work developments require a Use Permit approval in the Light Industrial (IL) zone. There
are 89 vacant acres of RM, RH, RVH, CG, CH and CBD zoned land in Fort Bragg which can
accommodate up to 1,116 units.
Zoning for Single Room Occupancy
SRO housing (also known as rooming or boarding) is permitted with Minor Use Permit and
Design Review approval in the RM, RH, and RVH zones. The City has 72 acres of vacant land
which can accommodate up to 787 dwelling equivalent units of SRO housing.
Zoning for Second Units
Second units are a permitted use in any residential zoning district (RR, RS, RL, RM, RH, RVH)
so long as the site is at least 6,000 SF and adjacent to a street width of 36 feet or more. Second
units of more than 18 feet in height require a Minor Use Permit. There are significant
opportunities for secondary units especially in single family residential zones which are already
developed with single family homes. Indeed, this is one of the most common types of
development that occurs in the City of Fort Bragg. In order to encourage additional second unit
production, the City of Fort Bragg established a secondary unit program, which provides free
architectural drawings, building permit level detailed plans, Title 24 analysis, and structural
analysis for any property owner in Fort Bragg who would like to construct a second unit. The
second units range in size from 522 SF to 767 SF and include efficiency, one and two bedroom
designs.
Zoning for Farmworkers
Fort Bragg does not have any agriculturally zoned land within City limits and therefore does not
address farmworker housing specifically.
Zoning for Employee Housing
For Bragg allows employee housing in all residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts
and employee housing is regulated identically to nonemployee housing. It is regulated
according to the number and type of units, not according to the type of resident.
Manufactured Housing and Mobile homes
A mobile home park is a conditional use requiring a Use Permit in all residential districts.
Individual mobile homes and manufactured homes are a permitted use in all residential districts.
Mobile homes outside of mobile home parks must have exterior siding as found in conventional
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                            10-49

residential structures, 12 inch overhangs on roofs, and a foundation. Manufactured homes do
not have any specific design requirements and are not subject to Design Review. The City has
37 acres of property zoned for single family use (the most likely location for a manufactured
home) which could accommodate 216 units of manufactured housing.
Zoning for Multi-family
The City of Fort Bragg has 96 acres of vacant land which can accommodate up to 1,235 multi-
family housing units at a verity of densities.
Zoning and Vacant Land Available for Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters provide homeless persons with short-term housing accompanied by limited
supplemental services. Transitional housing, which provides housing for a period between six
months and two years, assists individuals and families to move from homelessness to
permanent housing. Transitional housing facilities usually provide supportive services to assist
formerly homeless persons. These stages are described in the “Continuum of Care” model
utilized by the County.
The City of Fort Bragg allows emergency shelters as a permitted use in the General Commercial
(CG) zoning district. As shown in Table 7.2 above, there are currently 4.8 acres of vacant land
zoned as CG. This vacant land is more than adequate to meet the community’s need for
emergency shelters. The City does not require any special development or management
standards for emergency shelters. Emergency shelters are subject to the same land use and
zoning controls as any development that is a permitted use within the General Commercial
zoning district.
In addition, the City of Fort Bragg works extensively with local non-profit service providers to
develop and expand emergency shelters, transitional housing, and homeless services. A list of
City Facilities is included in Table 6.10 above. These facilities are appropriately located in areas
with access to supportive health, welfare, social, employment, and public transportation services.
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-50

8. ANALYSIS OF GOVERNMENT CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT
Annexation Standards
The policy adopted by the Mendocino County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO)
regarding annexation proposals is an important land use regulation affecting development in Fort
Bragg, as well as other cities in Mendocino County. The standards and procedures set forth in
the LAFCO policy affect its review of requests for City annexation of lands proposed for
development. The application of these standards does not constitute a constraint to housing
development since they do not exceed the annexation requirements contained in State law.
Land Use Controls
Zoning
The Fort Bragg zoning ordinance, the Inland Land Use and Development Code (ILUDC),
contained within the City's Municipal Code, sets forth zoning designations and development
requirements for construction activity within the City. State law requires that the zoning
ordinance be consistent with the General Plan. The Fort Bragg’s ILUDC underwent a
comprehensive update in 2014 to implement the 2009 Housing Element update and the overall
2013 General Plan Update. The following changes were made to the Land Use and
Development Code to promote housing development.
The inclusionary Housing Ordinance was modified to comply with new case law and City
Council direction as follows:
      1. Inclusionary Housing Requirements: Provide a graduated                       requirement  for
         inclusionary housing proportional to the number of units built.
               a. Exempt projects of four units or less (rental, for-sale, multi-family and single-
                  family) from the inclusionary housing requirement, consistent with the existing
                  ordinance.
               b. For projects with five to ten units: Require 20% of units to be “affordable by
                  design” (i.e., small units, second units – less than 600 sf) with no income or price
                  limits. This recommendation is based on the fact that a 10% inclusionary
                  requirement for projects of less than 10 units would result in a fractional unit.
                  Requiring a higher percentage (20%) but with a lower cost to the project (smaller
                  units that are affordable by design) is fairer than rounding up to a whole number.
               c. For projects of 10 to 20 units: 10% inclusionary requirement. This would result in
                  one to two units per project.
               d. For projects of 20 units or more: 15% inclusionary requirement. A 15%
                  requirement is significant and may incentivize smaller projects as directed by
                  Council. The current ordinance has a 15% inclusionary requirement for projects
                  of 7 units or more.
               e. When imposition of the inclusionary requirements results in a fractional number of
                  units, the applicant would pay a fraction of the in-lieu fee proportional to the
                  fraction number.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-51

      2. Rental Unit Requirements: Developers of rental housing complexes could meet the
          inclusionary requirements through any of the following mechanisms:
              a. For projects of less than 10 units, construct a minimum of 20% of units as
                  “affordable by design” units; or
              b. Enter into a contract with the City to provide on-site inclusionary housing as
                  defined in #1 above, with income-determined rents, if a developer requests and
                  receives an incentives or a density bonus from the City; or
              c. Pay an in-lieu fee based on Inclusionary Housing Requirements established in #1
                  above.
      3. For-Sale Unit Requirements:
              a. Inclusionary housing would be required as defined in #1 above; or
              b. Alternative equivalent action to build second units at a 2:1 ratio to meet the
                  inclusionary requirement for the first 30 units of a single family project; or
              c. Payment of an in-lieu fee.
     4. Exemptions from Inclusionary Housing Requirements: Projects of less than 4 units,
         affordable housing units in affordable or mixed-income developments, sweat equity
         housing projects, affordable senior housing developments, housing projects for persons
         with special needs, units of less than 600 SF, and other exemptions as approved by City
         Council.
     5. Subdivisions: Inclusionary housing would be required for major subdivisions (5 or more
         parcels) regardless of the acreage. Currently the City’s Inclusionary Housing ordinance
         requires that subdivisions of more than 5 acres, without development, donate enough
         land to accommodate required inclusionary units.
     6. Inclusionary Housing Resale Limitations: Revise resale limitations so that owners can
         gain equity over time.
         a.       Allow for equity to build over time. The ad hoc committee recommends that
                  Council adopt Habitat for Humanity’s affordability and equity-building timeframe
                  for for-sale inclusionary units. Habitat for Humanity’s sweat equity formula
                  includes:
                        i. Equity accrual during the first 5 years is limited to equity accrued through
                           the mortgage and down payments; it does not include any market related
                           appreciation.
                       ii. Equity accrual in years 6 through 15 would include 10% of the market
                           appreciation per year of extra ownership plus equity accrued through the
                           mortgage payment and the property owner’s down payment.
                      iii. After 15 years the family would accrue all market and mortgage pay-off
                           related equity.
                  If a home is sold prior to 15 years of ownership, the equity that is not accrued by
                  the homeowner would go into City’s Housing Trust Fund to support affordable
                  housing development.
         b.       Reduce the required time for affordability. The ad hoc committee recommends 15
                  years for for-sale units and 25 years for rental units.
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-52

           c.      Provide flexibility in how developers can comply with the regulations.
                      i.  Continue to provide for a waiver of all or a portion of the inclusionary
                          requirements as established for rental housing in CLUDC Section
                          17.32.060(A)(1)(c) which states:
                          “To the extent necessary to avoid a hardship or taking, upon a showing by
                          the applicant that imposition of the requirement on the residential project
                          will cause undue hardship or legal taking under the California or United
                          States constitutions, and that the residential project will contribute
                          significantly to affordable housing opportunities in the City.”
                     ii.  Expand this waiver to apply to both rental and for-sale housing projects.
                    iii.  Allow for alternative equivalent actions, such as: donation of land,
                          payment of in-lieu fee, compliance through developer-proposed and
                          Council-approved mechanism such as second units, smaller units,
                          inclusionary by design.
A number of changes were made to the City’s parking requirements to create more flexibility
when requiring parking as part of residential and affordable housing developments. Changes
include:
1. Allow a reduction in the parking requirement through a Minor Use Permit (MUP).
2. Revise the multi-tenant site parking requirements to reflect best practices in setting parking
     requirements for shared use parking facilities.
3. Allow the use of on-street parking through an MUP for projects located in areas with extra
     available on-street parking.
4. Reduced parking requirements for deed restricted senior and affordable housing to reflect
     current best practice.
5. Revise parking requirements to: 1) eliminate separate parking requirements for residential
     care facilities and 2) provide for a minimum and maximum parking requirement for each
     category to reflect best practice.
6. Require a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces for multi-family and non-residential
     projects.
7. Revise mixed-use residential/commercial projects which should be allowed to share parking
     if the different uses have different peak parking periods.
8. Provide an opportunity to approve reduced parking if certain bicycle facilities are
     incorporated into a project.
Additionally a number of changes were made to provide for more flexibility for and opportunities
to develop housing, as follows:
 1. Revise live-work limitations on use, to provide more feasible use for light industrial
       activities. Revise floor area requirements to provide more flexibility in design and size of
       live-work unit. Eliminate requirement that ground floor must be used for non-residential
       uses. Eliminate requirement to integrate living and work space. Eliminate parking
       requirement as it is already stated in parking section.
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-53

 2. Revise mixed use projects section to allow residential uses on the ground floor (on non-
       primary street frontage) and to address hours of operation for commercial components of
       mixed use projects. Implements program H-2.2.2 and program H-2.2.3 of the 2009
       Housing Element.
 3. Multi-Family Projects: Add requirement to develop one universal design unit in projects of
       more than ten units (according to the universal design concept for handicapped
       accessibility). Implements Program H-3.7.1, H-3.7.2 and H-4.2.2 of the 2009 Housing
       Element.
 4. Revise second unit requirements to eliminate all reference to design review so that second
       units are reviewed based on non-discretionary standards and as a ministerial action.
 5. Allow Cohousing as a use permit use in the RM, RH and RVH zoning districts. Cooperative
       Housing (Co-Housing) is defined in the ILUDC as “a type of Multi-Family residential
       development. It typically consists of smaller units (which may or may not include a kitchen)
       and a larger cooperative kitchen and gathering space for residents.”
 6. Revise the zoning ordinance to allow ground floor residential in mixed-use projects in the
       CBD along the rear of properties that back onto alleys.
As shown in Tables 8.1, Table 8.2, Table 8.3 and Table 8.4, residential land use is currently
allowed within six residential zones, and as mixed-use projects in four commercial zones. The
City’s land use controls are not restrictive and in some cases more permissive of residential
development than land use controls in similar small towns. As illustrated in the tables, the City
provides for two story development in all zones, and three and four story residential development
in the majority of zones. In addition, the City’s lot coverage ratios and FAR requirements allow
for significantly compact higher density residential development. Setbacks are reasonable given
adjacent uses and the character of the community. A Use Permit is required for projects on land
zoned for medium densities or 6-15 units, as is a Coastal Development Permit required for all
projects with the exception of single family homes that are located within the City’s Coastal
Zone. A conditional use permit is not required for Very High Density Residential zone which
allows 12 to 24 units per acre.
 Table 8.1- Permit Requirements by Type of Residential Development in
 Residential Zoning Districts
                                          PERMIT REQUIRED BY
                                               DISTRICT
                                                  RR          RS   RL   RM   RH    RVH
 Condominium conversion - 3 units maximum
                                                  —            —   —     P   —      —
 per parcel
 Home occupation                                   P           P    P    P    P     P
 Mobile home park                                 UP          UP   UP   UP   UP    UP
 Mobile/manufactured home                          P           P    P    P    P     P
 Multi-family housing, 2 or 3 units               —            —   —     P    P     P
 Multi-family housing, 4 or more units            —            —   —    UP   UP     P
 Co-Housing, 4 or more units                      —            —   —    UP   UP     P
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-54

 Organizational house (sorority, monastery,
 residential care, care for the elderly, etc.) of         —                 —  —      UP  UP     UP
 more than 3,000 SF or three units.
 Residential accessory use or structure                    P                P   P      P   P      P
 Residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE),
                                                          —                 —  —      UP  UP     UP
 6 or more clients
 Rooming or boarding, 6 or more persons                   —                 —  —     MUP MUP    MUP
 Second units (2)                                          P                P   P      P   P      P
 Single-family dwelling                                    P                P   P      P   P      P
 Table 8.2 - Permit Requirements by Type of Residential
 Development in Commercial Zoning Districts
                                                           CN  CO       CBD   CG     CH
 Emergency/transitional shelter                            —    —        —      P     —
 Home occupation                                            P    P        P     P      P
 Live-work unit                                           MUP  MUP     MUP    MUP     —
 Multi-family dwellings                                     P   UP       UP    UP     UP
 Residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE)          —    UP       UP    UP     —
 Residential care facility, 7 or more clients              —    UP       UP    UP     —
 Residential component mixed use project                    P   UP      P(2)    P      P
Table 8.3 - Residential Land Use Controls, 2014
    Table 4.2.3 City of Fort Bragg Current Land Use Controls, 2014
                                                   Max
                                                   Units
                                                   per              Lot       Minimum    Height
                                                   Acre  FAR    Coverage       Lot Size  Limit
    Residential
       Suburban Residential                        3     NA        25%        15,000      28 ft
       Low Density Residential                     6     0.4       40%         6,000      28 ft
       Medium Density
    Residential                                    12    0.4       50%         6,000      35 ft
       High Density Residential                    15    0.4       75%            A       35 ft
       Very High Density
    Residential                                    24    0.4       None           A       45 ft
    Commercial
       Central Business District                   40     A        None          2,000    35 ft
       General Commercial                          24     A        None          5,000    35 ft
       Highway Visitor
    Commercial                                     24     A        None          6,000    35 ft
    Notes: A = determined by review authority
    Source: City of Fort Bragg, 2014
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                         10-55

Table 8.4 - City of Fort Bragg Development Standards, 2014
                                       Front        Side        Rear       Coastal
                                      Setback     Setback      Setback      Zone
Residential
   Suburban Residential                 25 ft        10 ft       20 ft     None
   Low Density Residential              20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     None
   Medium Density Residential           20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     CDP
   High Density Residential             20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     CDP
   Very High Density
Residential                             20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     CDP
Commercial
   Central Business District           None         None         15 ft     CDP
   General Commercial                   10 ft        10 ft        5 ft     CDP
   Highway Visitor Commercial           15 ft        15 ft       10 ft     CDP
Notes: CDP = Coastal Development Permit required in Coastal Zone
Source: City of Fort Bragg, 2014
Taken together, the residential and commercial zones provide for residential development either
through a Use Permit process or as a permitted use in over 50 percent of the land within City
limits for a variety of housing types including multi-family rental housing, mobile homes,
emergency shelters and transitional and supportive housing which are treated as either single
family or multi-family residential depending on the project configuration.
Subdivision Standards
The standards for on- and off-site improvements contained in the Subdivision Ordinance do not
constitute a constraint to housing development. These standards are summarized below and are
no more restrictive than those typically found in other Mendocino County jurisdictions. Indeed, in
some cases, less restrictive standards exist in Fort Bragg, since sidewalks with full curb and
gutters are not required for all types of residential subdivisions.
Table 8.5 - On and Off-site Improvement Standards
   Sidewalks                     Sidewalks are required on both sides of the street in residentially zoned
                                 areas, with the exception that the RS district does not require a sidewalk
                                 for lots equal to or larger than 15,000 square feet.
   Sidewalk Width                Sidewalks shall be at least 4 feet with 1/2 foot for curb, and not less than
                                 3 5/8 inches thick. Sidewalks shall be adjacent to curbs unless the
                                 conditions of tentative map approval provide otherwise.
   Curbs                         Curbs shall be provided in all residential areas with sidewalks.
   Minimum Street Widths         The minimum width of pavement for lots 6,000 square feet - 24 feet with
                                 curb, gutter and sidewalk; for lots 6,001 to 15,000 square feet - 40 foot
                                 curb-to-curb is required; for lots >15,001 square feet - 18 feet paved with
                                 a 2 foot rocked shoulder.
   Cul-de-sacs                   A paved turn around shall be provided at the ends of cul-de-sac streets.
                                 The radius for the edge of pavement or curb line shall be 30 to 50 feet
                                 depending on lot size. A hammerhead turnaround is allowed on a case-
                                 by-case basis with approval of the Fire Department.
   Standard Radii for Curb       All residential street intersections: 20 foot minimum.
   Returns at Street Corners
10 - Housing Element                                                                              2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                    10-56
Inclusionary Housing Requirements
The Inclusionary Housing Program does not constitute a constraint to housing development and
is an established and proven method to ensure the construction of affordable housing. There are
approximately 48 jurisdictions in California with inclusionary housing programs that have led to
the production of over 20,000 affordable below market rate units.1 The cost of providing
inclusionary units would either: 1) reduce the profit margin of the developer; 2) be reflected in a
reduction in the value of the land; 3) be partially compensated for by density bonuses, fee
reductions, or other government incentives; or 4) a combination of these effects. The allocation
of this burden would depend on general market conditions and the relative bargaining power of
the parties.
In addition, the revised Housing Element contains many incentives that would reduce the cost of
providing inclusionary units, such as density bonuses, a higher density mixed-use land use
designation, and use of housing funds.
Secondary Dwelling Units
Section 18.42.170 of the Land Use and Development Code sets forth regulations for secondary
dwelling units which are permitted in all residential zones. These regulations allow secondary
dwelling units provided the following standards are met:
      There may be only one secondary dwelling unit per single-family parcel.
      The parcel shall have a minimum lot size of 6,000 SF.
      Secondary dwelling units must meet all standards of the zoning district. They are limited
         to 18 feet in height, unless located over a garage, in which case they can be 24 feet with
         a minor use permit.
      A separate entrance is required.
      The secondary dwelling unit shall not exceed 960 square feet.
      Impermeable surfaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area. Secondary
         dwelling units are not permitted where access is provided from streets less than 36 feet
         wide.
Site and Design Review
Residential development of two or more units requires Design Review. The intent of the Design
Review process is to preserve and improve the natural beauty of the City’s setting and ensure
that the new development is visually harmonious with its surroundings. The Citywide Design
Guidelines establish illustrated and objective criteria for site and building design, landscaping,
lighting and signage. The Design Guidelines clearly state required design elements and
encouraged design elements for incorporation into residential projects. In addition, the illustrated
and objective design criteria are clearly stated for all types of residential development including:
single-family, additions, and multi-family development. Single family homes and second units are
not subject to design review. The Guidelines do not represent a constraint to housing production
in Fort Bragg.
Coastal Act Regulations
In the Coastal Zone, the City’s Local Coastal Program poses limitations on development,
particularly higher density development. Projects in the Coastal Zone are regulated under the
City Coastal General Plan, and Coastal Land Use and Development Code. Residential
development of more than one unit must obtain a Coastal Development Permit (CDP) and a Use
1
         Inclusionary Housing Survey Report, San Diego Housing Commission, 1992.
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-57

Permit for conditional uses. A Coastal Development Permit is required for new construction and
for some additions and expansions. Coastal Development Permits are reviewed by the Planning
Commission, are appealable to the City Council. The cost of a typical Coastal Development
Permit is $1,950. Coastal Development Permits for properties located to the west of the first
public road can be appealed to the State Coastal Commission.
3. Development Fees
The City requires payment of various fees such as application, processing, development impact
fees, connection fees, etc. All fees are tied to the City's actual costs of providing necessary
services. These fees are reviewed and adjusted periodically.
Fees for planning applications (e.g. Design Review, Use Permit, Variance, Rezoning, and
subdivision map approval) range from $150 to $1,950. The fees charged by the City to process
and review development applications are lower than comparable market-rate fees for technical
plan review tasks. For a complete list of development fees, please see Appendix F.
Additional fees include statutory school impact fees and parkland dedication fees, charges levied
for building, electrical, plumbing, and other permits, and City capacity fees (development impact
fees).
          For a typical three-bedroom, two-bathroom single-family home, City planning fees,
              building fees, and water, sewer and drainage capacity fees total approximately
              $16,000.
          For a typical multi-family project, the City planning fees, building fees, water, sewer
              and drainage capacity fees total approximately $13,000.
Fee schedules are available at the Community Development Department. The fees required for
residential development are based on meeting actual costs of providing City services such as
fire, police, potable water and wastewater treatment.
4. Building Codes & Code Enforcement
Building codes and enforcement do not constrain housing development in Fort Bragg. As the
City of Fort Bragg does not maintain its own Building Department, the Mendocino County
Building Inspection Department provides building inspection and code enforcement service.
New construction is required to meet the requirements of the most recent version of the Uniform
Building Code (UBC) including the Uniform Housing Code. The code sets forth building
standards and requires inspections to ensure compliance. In accordance with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act, the City’s building code includes requirements that new
residential construction have a minimum percentage of units that are fully accessible to the
physically disabled. While the building codes and their enforcement may increase the cost of
housing, they are designed to ensure the provision of safe and structurally sound housing.
The County Building Department inspects housing units when an owner seeks a building permit
for additional construction, or when a specific complaint relating to the health and safety of the
building occupants is received.
The City’s Code Enforcement officer addresses violations of the City’s codes and receives
approximately 50 complaints a year. About 10-15 of these cases relate to housing issues. Most
10 - Housing Element                                                                  2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-58

involve substandard housing, health and safety complaints, unpermitted construction, and illegal
travel trailer occupancy.
5. Processing Time
The time taken to process development applications affects housing costs, since interest on
loans must continue to be paid and the longer it takes for the development to be approved, the
higher the costs will be. The time to process residential development applications does not
constitute a constraint in Fort Bragg.
The following are estimated processing times for residential development applications for a
building permit for a dwelling with no special permit or exception to the standards required:
           Community Development Department - ½ to one hour.
           Public Works – ½ hr. to three weeks.
           Building Department - two hours to two weeks.
Review requiring a discretionary permit involving one or more public hearings (e.g. Variance,
Design Review, Coastal Development Permit and Use Permit):
           Community Development Department and Planning Commission – 8 to 12 weeks.
           Building Department – 2 to 4 weeks.
Review requiring a change of zoning, major subdivision approval, or preparation of an
Environmental Impact Report (EIR):
           Community Development Department, Planning Commission, or City Council – four
              months to one year.
           Building Department - two hours to two weeks (Includes code compliance, structural,
              grading, and Title 24 review. Does not include back-up time, rework by applicant, or
              field inspections and varies with the complexities of the plan. Back-up time varies with
              volume of applications in the department and can be as long as two to three weeks.)
Single-family units are a permitted use by right and do not require a conditional use permit or
Design Review and as indicated above typically take one to two days but can take up to two
months if a Coastal Development Permit is required. The City has adopted Citywide Design
Guidelines with clear illustrations and text to streamline and facilitate the Design Review
process.
Multi-family housing development requires a conditional use permit in the RM and RH zoning
districts and in all commercial districts. A use permit typically takes two to three months to
process where no CEQA review or other entitlements are required. The use permit requirement
for multi-family housing provides the City with the opportunity to require a traffic analysis for the
project. Specifically the ILUDC requires the following:
18.71.060 - Use Permit and Minor Use Permit
       Application filing and processing. An application for a Use Permit or Minor Use Permit shall be filed and processed in
       compliance with Chapter 18.70 (Permit Application Filing and Processing). The application shall include the information
       and materials specified in the Department handout for Use Permits, and the following information.
       1.    Fiscal and economic analysis. An application for a warehouse retail project as defined in Article 10 (Glossary)
             shall include a fiscal and economic analysis.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                           2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                          10-59

        2.   Traffic Study. A traffic study shall be required for uses determined by the Director or City Engineer to be high trip
             generators.
             a. The traffic study shall identify both cumulative and project-specific traffic impacts.
             b. All traffic impacts shall be reduced, to the maximum extent feasible, through compliance with applicable
                   development standards and/or conditions of approval.
A traffic study can be completed fairly quickly at a reasonable cost by a consultant and is
required so that the City can complete the necessary environmental review (compliance with
CEQA) for projects that are likely to be high trip generators. This is not a significant inhibitor to
development and is necessary so that the City can comply with the requirements of CEQA.
Multi-family housing in the RVH zone only requires Design Review and typically takes two to
three months from the time of a submission of a complete application. The time to obtain
approvals for single and multi-family housing does not constitute a constraint on housing
development in Fort Bragg.
These processing times are comparable to the time taken for processing similar projects in
surrounding jurisdictions.
6. Infrastructure Constraints
Despite the development potential figures mentioned earlier, there are potential constraints to
increased housing development related to the adequacy of the City’s infrastructure. These
include:
 The City’s water storage capacity must be increased to meet current and anticipated growth.
     The City is currently developing a 45 acre raw water reservoir to address this issue. The
     project is in the design and environmental review phase and staff anticipates that it will be
     completed within two to three years.
 Several areas have inadequate storm drains and others are in need of repair. This problem
     is being actively assessed by the City.
 The sewer treatment system will be significantly upgraded over the coming ten years with
     significant investments in the equipment, financed through increases in user fees.
 Financial limitations exist, since the City relies on retail sales tax and transient occupancy for
     its revenue.
7. Potential & Actual Non-Governmental Constraints
Cost of Land and Construction
Market constraints include the cost of land and improvements, construction costs, interest rates,
profit, property taxes and the wide range of factors which determine consumer preference in the
housing market. Most of these factors are beyond the control of local governments, although
occasionally the cost of land and interest rates can be reduced in order to encourage affordable
housing production.
The availability of financing is a key component in determining the affordability of homes. Small
increases in the interest rates can have a significant impact on the amount of monthly mortgage
payments and thereby limit many people from qualifying for a home loan.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                          10-60

The cost of land and housing construction in Fort Bragg is generally less than in other coastal
areas in the County. An informal survey of local real estate brokers and developers indicated the
following range of costs for construction of a single-family home in the City:
          Land costs                      $100,000 to $125,000 for a 6,500 to 7,500 square foot lot.
          Construction costs              $125 to $200 per square foot, although construction costs
                                           exhibit a high degree of variability depending on the type of
                                           amenities included
          Permit and fees                 $15,000/unit
          Total average cost              $200/SF2
There is little data regarding land and construction costs for multi-family housing, because few
market-rate multi-family units have been developed in Fort Bragg in recent years. However, land
costs (including wastewater, water, grading, and drainage improvements) for a typical
townhouse development are in the range of $25,000 to $35,000 per unit, and construction costs
average approximately $105 per square foot. According to Terra Partners, construction costs for
affordable single-family units generally range from $100 to $120 per square foot. Utilizing self-
help programs, single-family unit construction costs can be reduced to $90 to $110 per square
foot. Multi-family units using tax credit financing range from $130 to $170 and higher per square
foot. Construction costs and home prices can be reduced by reducing the amount of amenities
and the quality of building materials. Furthermore, larger developments or higher-density
projects can reduce the per-unit costs.
8. Cost and Availability of Financing
Financing issues impact sales prices or rental payments in a variety of ways.
 When the interest rate charged for construction loans is too high, developers will choose to
     forgo a project because it will not be financially feasible. Typically when construction loans
     get too pricy relative to the sales price for new developments, development as a whole will
     slow or stop. This constrains supply and increases the prices of existing units.
 The ability to construct affordable Tax Credit financed projects depends on the strength of
     the overall economy and the demand for tax credits. Currently the demand for tax credits is
     somewhat suppressed because of the overall decline in the economy. This kind of financing
     has become harder to obtain even for affordable housing developers.
 The rate charged for a long-term mortgage affects the prospective buyer or renter and is
     fluctuating between 4.5 and 5 percent over the past five years. Rates are currently below 5
     percent. The decline in home prices coupled with low interest rates has resulted in many
     home sales over the past three years.
 Prices have fallen by between 25 to 50 percent since 2010. Combined with low mortgage
     rates and federal incentives, housing affordability rates have improved dramatically.
 Financing for new housing development is currently constrained due to the nationwide credit
     tightening. Table 8.6 shows the disposition of home loan applications for residents within the
     Santa Rosa Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) in 2006, which includes Sonoma and
     Mendocino Counties. Applications are broken down by applicant income level.
2
  According to North Coast Builders Exchange
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-61

 Table 8.6 - Conventional Home Loan Applications
 Santa Rosa MSA (Sonoma and Mendocino Counties), 2012
                                                        Conventional Loans
 Applicant Income Level                         %
                                                           % Denied           % Other
                                          Approved
 Very Low (<50% Median
                                              59%            24%               16%
 Family Income (MFI))
 Low (50-80% MFI)                             65%            16%               19%
 Moderate (80-120% MFI)                       70%            13%               17%
 Upper (120%+ MFI)                            69%            12%               18%
 Total                                        68%            14%               18%
 Source: FFIEC, Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) Data, 2014
 The OTHER column represents mortgage offers extended by the bank but rejected by the
 borrower (for any reason), incomplete applications as well as any other circumstance that
 could not be construed as a “rejection” by the lender.
9. Community Sentiment
Community attitudes toward housing play a crucial role in determining the type and cost of
housing that will be built in the City. City staff works proactively with developers of potentially
controversial housing projects to help them address legitimate community concerns regarding
the type of housing proposed, the design, and the impacts of the development on noise, traffic,
parking, and City services. Staff works with the developer to involve the community in the early
phases of a project to inform the developers of the community’s desires. Typically the City holds
a pre-application meeting with the applicant and staff. A pre-application workshop with the
community and Planning Commission can also be held at the applicant’s request on projects
that are anticipated to be controversial due to their location, size, and/or design. The pre-
application meetings are not required.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                           10-62

Overall, the community of Fort Bragg values the historic character of the Central Business
District and the quietness of its residential neighborhoods. Most residents would concur that
housing should be available to all economic segments of the community, and there has been
little opposition to the many affordable housing units built to date.
9. OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION
The City encourages energy conservation in residential projects and through long range
planning activities. The City has undertaken the following activities to reduce energy use and
encourage green building practices.
      1. Design Review process includes energy use criteria. The building orientation, street
         layout, lot design, landscaping, and street tree configuration of all residential projects and
         subdivision proposals are reviewed in order to maximize solar access and energy
         conservation.
      2. The City has established minimum densities for all medium and high density zoning
         districts.
      3. The City allows flexible parking standards for mixed-use development projects and for all
         projects in the Central Business District.
      4. The City is working with Georgia-Pacific (GP) on the completion of a Specific Plan for the
         former GP Mill Site. The preferred land use plan includes significant higher density
         housing development adjacent to the City’s downtown.
      5. The City has completed a Green House Gas Inventory and a Climate Action Plan which
         identifies opportunities to improve energy conservation and reduce greenhouse gas
         emissions throughout the municipal operations.
      6. The City provides green building workshops and green building information to builders
         and homeowners
      7. The City’s housing rehabilitation program addresses underperforming heating and
         cooling systems in low-income units.
      8. The City implements a construction and demolition waste recycling ordinance which has
         resulted in significant recycling of materials.
In addition, the City has adopted a new Sustainability Element that includes a number of new
energy conservation and green building policies and programs which will be implemented over
the next five years.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-63

 Appendix A: Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element - Progress in Implementation & Evaluation
#
                                   Program                                                 Purpose - Implementation of        Evaluation                               Status
                                                                                           Policy Indicated
Program H-1.1.1
                                   Housing Rehabilitation Projects: Seek funding           Policy H-1.1: Housing              The City received CDBG funds to       Retain. The City will begin its third
                                   through the Community Development Block Grant           Rehabilitation: Continue and       offer single and multi-family housing round of CDBG funded housing
                                   (CDBG) program and other State and/or Federal           expand the City’s housing          rehab loan program for two 2-year     rehab program in 2014.
                                   programs to assist in the rehabilitation and            rehabilitation and preservation    programs. The City successfully
                                   conservation of multi-family residential projects.      programs.                          implemented the programs with more
                                   Work with non-profit and for-profit affordable                                             than ten units successfully
                                   housing developers as possible to achieve                                                  rehabilitated.
                                   successful rehabilitation of multi-family housing.
Program H-1.1.2
                                   Target Areas: Continue to identify target areas and See above                              Achieved. The City used its 2008         Retain. A new housing conditions
                                   specific properties where housing rehabilitation is                                        housing conditions survey to target      survey will be completed in the
                                   most needed through a periodic update of the                                               rehab funds to specific challenged       2014 to 2019 timeframe.
                                   housing conditions survey which identifies the                                             neighborhoods and blighted
                                   neighborhoods and areas requiring rehabilitation                                           properties. A number of blighted
                                   assistance.                                                                                properties were rehabilitated and
                                                                                                                              increased code enforcement which
                                                                                                                              resulted in the demolition of two
                                                                                                                              severely blighted and problematic
                                                                                                                              properties.
Program H-1.1.3
                                   Housing Rehabilitation/Preservation Program:        See above                              Achieved. The City obtained funding      Retain
                                   Continue the City’s housing rehabilitation program                                         for a CDBG housing rehab loan
                                   which provides low interest loans for the                                                  program in 2009 and again with
                                   rehabilitation of homes owned or occupied by very-                                         HOME funds in 2013, which have
                                   low to moderate-income households. Continue to                                             been very successful. The City has
                                   seek funding from CDBG, HOME and other                                                     applied for an additional HOME grant
                                   sources for the housing rehabilitation loan                                                to continue the housing rehab
                                   program. Facilitate citizen awareness of the City’s                                        program.
                                   rehabilitation loan program.
Program H-1.1.4
                                   Capital Improvement Program: Consider capital       See above                              The City implemented a number of         Retain
                                   improvement projects necessary to maintain the                                             capital improvements projects in
                                   community’s older neighborhoods as part of the                                             older neighborhoods, namely, a safe
                                   City Council’s annual review of the Capital                                                routes to schools project, a sidewalk
                                   Improvement Program.                                                                       installation project, a number of street
                                                                                                                              resurfacing projects, and a traffic
                                                                                                                              calming project.
Program H-1.2.1
                                   Housing Rehabilitation in Non-Residential Areas:        Policy H-1.2: Discourage           The City permitted three substantial     Retain. The new housing element
                                   Continue to permit substantial rehabilitation of, and   Conversion of Residential Units:   renovations to legal non-conforming      also includes a new program to
                                   additions to, existing housing located in zones         Discourage the conversion of       housing units.                           consider permitting single family
                                   where it is a legal nonconforming use. Require a        residential units to other uses.                                            residential use of SFR structures
                                   conditional Use Permit and Design Review                                                                                            that have lost their non-conforming
                                   approval for substantial renovations.                                                                                               status as housing units in
                                                                                                                                                                       commercial and industrial zones.
                                                                                                                                                                       This would allow for the successful
                                                                                                                                                                       reuse of a number of debilitated
                                                                                                                                                                       SFRs in commercial zones.
                                   Regulate Conversion of Residential Space for the see above
Program H-1.2.2 Program H-1.3.1
                                                                                                                              The City closed down seven illegal       Retain and continue to enforce
                                   Cultivate of Medical Marijuana: Continue to                                                grow houses in residential homes as      ordinance.
                                   implement the City’s medical marijuana cultivation                                         part of a coordinated coed
                                   ordinance to limit the area in a residential structure                                     enforcement program with law
                                   that can be used for cultivation of Medical                                                enforcement. This ordinance has
                                   Marijuana.                                                                                 been very useful.
                                   Energy Conservation Program: Continue to provide Policy H-1.3 Energy Conservation          Staff has not had sufficient time to     Retain. Funding for the REDI
                                   energy conservation and green building materials & Green Building: Promote energy          provide green building workshops.        program has been exhausted. The
                                   and techniques workshops, display board and conservation improvements and                  However the City did implement an        City has applied for new funding for
                                   brochures. Consider establishing an energy green building improvements for                 energy conservation program with         this program from CDBG and if
                                   conservation program with a local energy audit non-existing and proposed residential       REDI which was very successful and       funded will continue the program in
                                   profit to work with home owners to identify energy units.                                  served hundreds of clients.              2015.
                                   saving improvements to homes.
Program H-1.3.2 Program H-1.3.3
                                                                                          See above                           A successful program. In 2014,           Remove. Program has been
                                   Green Building Program: Provide expedited plan                                             DANCO completed 26 LEED                  superseded by policies and
                                   review for green building projects and provide                                             Platinum net zero senior homes.          programs in the new Sustainability
                                   green building information for the public.                                                 This project received expedited          Element.
                                                                                                                              review (2 months) for a CDP/UP and
                                                                                                                              DR.
                                                                                           See adobe                          The zoning ordinance was not been        Remove. Program has been
                                                                                                                              revised to include incentives. Instead   superseded by policies and
                                   Incentives for Green Building: Consider revising
                                                                                                                              green building features are included     programs in the new Sustainability
                                   the Zoning Ordinance to allow the City Council to
                                                                                                                              as part of design review.                Element.
                                   authorize one or more planning incentives for
                                                                                                                              Consequently 30 residential units
                                   development projects that achieve a USGBC LEED
                                                                                                                              have been constructed with green
                                   Certification rating or higher or that achieve
                                                                                                                              building features. Additionally with
                                   compliance with another comparable green building
                                                                                                                              the new California Building Code
                                   certification program, such as the Build It Green
                                                                                                                              requiring green building as a normal
                                   program.
                                                                                                                              part of construction, inclusion of
                                                                                                                              incentives in no longer a useful or
                                                                                                                              necessary incentive.
                                  ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                  10 - Housing Element                         10-64                                       2014
                                  Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Program H-1.3.4
                                                   Financing for Alternative Energy and Energy See above                                            This program will be implemented          Remove, this program is being
                                                   Conservation: Consider establishing a special                                                    through the PACE program, which will      implemented by the County. All
                                                   improvement district for alternative energy                                                      be implemented at a County level.         green building programs and
                                                   (photovoltaic, wind, etc.) and energy conservation                                               The City may chose to implement a         policies are now in the new
                                                   projects. With the establishment of a special                                                    City level PACE program if the            Sustainability Element.
                                                   improvement district home and business owners                                                    County fails to do so.
                                                   would be able to apply for funding from the City for
                                                   the installation of alternative energy systems and/or
                                                   energy conservation measures (better insulation,
                                                   appliance upgrades, etc.), and pay the funds back
                                                   through a special district tax amortized over the life
                                                   of the system.
Program H-1.4.1
                                                                                                          Policy H-1.4. Preserve At Risk            This program is being implemented         Retain.
                                                   Develop At-Risk Units Program: Maintain an Units: Work with private and non-                     as staff resources and funding
                                                   inventory of at risk affordable housing units and profit         affordable   housing            sources allow. Currently it is very
                                                   work with property-owners and non-profit affordable developers to preserve at-risk               difficult to obtain funding to preserve
                                                   housing organizations to preserve these units by affordable housing projects.                    at risk units. Our focus has been on
                                                   identifying and seeking funds from Federal, State                                                developing new affordable projects
                                                   and local agencies to preserve the units.                                                        with very long terms of affordability.
Program H-2.1.1
                                                                                                             Policy H-2.1 Regional Housing          The City maintains an inventory of       Retain.
                                                   Inventory of Infill Sites: Maintain the inventory of      Needs: Ensure that adequate            vacant infill sites in our GIS database.
                                                   vacant      and     underdeveloped        residentially   residentially-zoned     land      is   It is available to any who are
                                                   designated land in the City’s GIS system. Provide         available to accommodate the           interested.
                                                   copies of the inventory for public distribution on the    City’s Regional Housing Needs
                                                   City website.                                             Determination as described in
                                                                                                             Section II.
Program H-2.2.1
                                                                                                             Policy        H-2.2      Mixed-Use     This has been implemented in the        Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                                                                             Development:       Encourage    the    zoning code. However most of the        language and incorporated it into
                                                   Mixed Use in the Central Business District:               development of residential uses in     CDB is built out and no new             policy H-2.2.
                                                   Continue to permit multiple family residential units,     conjunction      with   commercial     residential development has occurred
                                                   at a residential density of up to 40 units per acre,      enterprises in commercial zones,       within the CBD. As the GP Mill Site
                                                   above the ground floor in the Central Business            where the viability of the             is developed there will be an
                                                   District (CBD).                                           commercial activities would not be     opportunity to complete new mixed
                                                                                                             adversely affected.                    use higher density residential projects
                                                                                                                                                    in the expanded downtown.
Program H-2.2.2 Program H-2.2.3 Program H-2.2.4
                                                   Consider Allowing Ground Floor Residential: See above                                            Implemented in the zoning code.        Deleted.
                                                   Consider revising the zoning ordinance to allow                                                  This has not yet resulted in new units
                                                   ground floor residential in mixed-use projects in the                                            but may do so as the economy
                                                   CBD along the rear of properties that back onto                                                  recovers and there is increased
                                                   alleys.                                                                                          demand for new residential units.
                                                   Mixed Use Zoning Regulations: Revise the zoning See above                                        Implemented in the zoning code.           Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                   ordinance to clarify permitting and performance                                                                                            language and incorporated it into
                                                   standards for commercial uses in mixed-use                                                                                                 policy H-2.2.
                                                   districts in order to minimize conflicts between
                                                   residential and commercial uses.
                                                   Mixed Use Development in Commercial Districts:                        See above                  Implemented in the zoning code.        Deleted.
                                                   Continue to provide for additional housing                                                       This has not yet resulted in new units
                                                   development opportunities in commercial districts,                                               but may do so as the economy
                                                   through the implementation of mixed use zoning                                                   recovers and there is increased
                                                   which provides for residential density of 24 units                                               demand for new residential units.
                                                   per acre in the CO, CH and the CG zoning districts
                                                   with a conditional Use Permit.
Program H-2.3.1 Program H-2.3.2
                                                   Secondary Dwelling Unit Design: Continue to               Policy H-2.3 Secondary Dwelling        Secondary unit designs have been          Revised to reflect the ministerial
                                                   implement the City’s pre-approved secondary unit          Units: Continue to facilitate the      prepared and are available free of        approval process for secondary
                                                   program to provide affordable and aesthetically           construction of secondary dwelling     charge. The pre-approval aspect is        units.
                                                   pleasing second unit designs for the development          units on residential properties.       no longer applicable because all
                                                   of secondary units in Fort Bragg.                                                                second units are approved
                                                                                                                                                    ministerial.
                                                   Parking Requirements for Secondary Units:                             See above                  Implemented in the zoning code.           Deleted.
                                                   Consider revising the zoning ordinance so that a                                                 This has increased the production of
                                                   new parking space is not required where the                                                      secondary units.
                                                   establishment of the required on-site parking space
                                                   for a secondary unit would result in a new curb cut
                                                   and the elimination of an on-street parking space.
                                                   Reduced Development Impact Fees for Secondary
Program H-2.3.3
                                                                                                                         See above                  Not yet implemented. The City will        Retained.
                                                   Units and Smaller Units: Consider establishing an                                                revise this fee when it completes a
                                                   updated Development Impact Fee for small                                                         comprehensive development impact
                                                   residential units that recognizes the reduced                                                    fee update.
                                                   impacts on the City’s sewer, water, drainage,
                                                   parks, and streets of smaller units of one bedroom
                                                   or less.
Program H-2.4.1:
                                                   Continue to apply established design standards to         Policy   H-2.4    Manufactured Implemented in the zoning code.          Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                   applications for the placement of manufactured housing    Housing: Continue to encourage There has been relatively limited new language and incorporated it into
                                                   units on permanent foundations in residential zoning      manufactured homes.            construction of residential units so its policy H-2.4.
                                                   districts.
                                                                                                                                            not clear if this policy is working or
                                                                                                                                            not.
                                                  ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                  10 - Housing Element                         10-65                                       2014
                                                  Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Program H-2.5.1
                                                  Continue to update the vacant parcels map and provide   Policy      H-2.5      Infill Housing:    Implemented and ongoing. Tis          Retained.
                                                  information to potential developers about infill        Encourage housing development             information is provided to developers
                                                  development opportunities in Fort Bragg.                on existing infill sites in order to      interested in undertaking new project
                                                                                                          efficiently       utilize      existing   in Fort Bragg.
                                                                                                          infrastructure.
Program H-2.6.1 Program H-2.6.2
                                                  Redevelopment Funds: Use           the 20 percent       Policy H-2.6 Redevelopment        Redevelopment Agency has been                       Deleted.
                                                  Housing Set-Aside Funds to          assist with the     Agency: Utilize Redevelopment     disbanded by the State. Program is
                                                  development, conservation, or       rehabilitation of   Agency housing set-aside funds to not working.
                                                  affordable housing consistent       with community      implement housing programs for
                                                  housing priorities.                                     lower- income households.
                                                  Update the Five-Year Implementation Plan: Revise See above                                        Redevelopment Agency has been               Deleted.
                                                  the Redevelopment Five-Year Implementation Plan                                                   disbanded by the State. Program no
                                                  to include specific criteria for use of the 20 percent                                            longer necessary.
                                                  of the tax increment revenues collected which are
                                                  allocated to the Housing Set Aside Fund. Include
                                                  criteria for the provision of full or partial fee waivers
                                                  for affordable housing projects.
Program H-3.1.1
                                                  Available Funding: Seek available State and             Policy H-3.1: Available Funding           The City has worked with two non-     Retain and revise language slightly.
                                                  Federal assistance to develop affordable housing        Sources: Utilize County, State and        profits on the development of
                                                  for seniors, the disabled, lower-income large           Federal programs and other                affordable housing. Specifically the
                                                  households, and households with special housing         funding sources that provide              City has worked with Habitat for
                                                  needs. Work with the County Community                   housing opportunities for lower-          Humanity on an 8 unit project and
                                                  Development       Commission       (CDC),     Rural     income    and     special   needs         Danco on a 28 unit project. The City
                                                  Community Housing Development Corporation               households.                               assisted with grant writing for the
                                                  (RCHDC), and other non-profits to apply for and                                                   Danco project and assisted both
                                                  implement HCD programs such as the California                                                     projects with the planning process by
                                                  Self Help Housing Program (CSHHP), the Multi-                                                     providing planning incentives for the
                                                  family Housing Program (MHP), and/or the HOME                                                     projects. This program is very
                                                  Program. Seek funding for affordable housing from                                                 successful.
                                                  other sources such as the United States
                                                  Department of Agriculture (USDA), Tax Credit
                                                  Redevelopment Financing: Require developers
Program H-3.1.2
                                                                                                          See above                                 Program no longer relevant as the           Deleted.
                                                  utilizing redevelopment financing or funding to                                                   Redevelopment Agency has been
                                                  include language in agreements with the City                                                      disbanded by the State.
                                                  permitting persons and households eligible for HUD
                                                  Section 8 rental assistance or Housing Voucher
                                                  Folders to apply for below-market-rate units
                                                  provided in the development.
Program H-3.1.3
                                                  School Facility     Reimbursement:       Encourage      See above                                 Funding program is no longer                Deleted.
                                                  developers of affordable housing to apply for the                                                 available at the state level.
                                                  Proposition 1A School Facility Fee Reimbursement
                                                  Program (SFFRP) financed by the California
                                                  Housing Finance Agency. Consider making this a
                                                  requirement for development receiving subsidies or
                                                  density bonuses for very-low rental income units.
Program H-3.2.1
                                                                                                          Policy H-3.2: Encourage Senior            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Deleted.
                                                                                                          Housing: Allow affordable and             Use and Development Code. This
                                                  Flexible Parking: Continue to allow flexible parking    market    rate senior     housing         has made affordable housing projects
                                                  requirements and a density bonus for affordable         projects to be developed with             for seniors easier to develop.
                                                  and market rate senior housing projects as              density bonuses and flexible
                                                  required by law.                                        parking standards where found to
                                                                                                          be consistent with maintaining the
                                                                                                          character of the surrounding
                                                                                                          neighborhood.
Program H-3.2.2 Program H-3.3.1 Program H-3.3.2
                                                  Affordable Senior Housing: Maintain an inventory        See above                                 This inventory is available to the     Retain.
                                                  which identifies properties which are potentially well-                                           public and is maintained in the City's
                                                  suited for senior housing. Work with developers to                                                GIS system.
                                                  facilitate obtaining funding and construction of
                                                  senior housing.
                                                  Senior Shared Housing: Continue to allow the Policy H-3.3: House Sharing:                         Implemented in 2014 update of Land          Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                  conversion of existing residences into shared Encourage and facilitate house                      Use and Development Code. Its               language and incorporated it into
                                                  housing for seniors (i.e., suites with shared sharing programs for seniors.                       unclear if many shared living               policy H-3.3.
                                                  living/cooking facilities) and separate residential                                               situations for seniors have resulted
                                                  facilities for an on-site manager, with a use permit                                              from this program. Its difficult to track
                                                  in all residential zones.                                                                         as no permit is required.
                                                  Encourage Co-Housing: Evaluate the Land Use See above                                             Implemented in 2014 update of Land          Revised language and made
                                                  and Development Code to determine if the code                                                     Use and Development Code. There             program into a policy.
                                                  inhibits  the   development     of   co-housing                                                   is one developer interested in
                                                  developments in the medium, high and very-high                                                    creating a cohousing project. No new
                                                  density zoning districts. Consider revising the                                                   co-housing projects have been built
                                                  LUDC to better accommodate co-housing                                                             although the new Cypress Street
                                                  developments as needed.                                                                           senior project has some
                                                                                                                                                    characteristics of co housing.
                                                    ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                    10 - Housing Element                         10-66                                       2014
                                                    Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
Program H-3.4.1
                                                                                        Policy H-3.4: Increase Affordable    Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain in modified form.
                                                                                        Housing Development: Encourage       Use and Development Code as
                                Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Amend the               the construction of housing units    allowed by the Palmer Case. This
                                Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which requires           which are affordable to households   policy has not resulted in new
                                residential developments of seven or more units to:     with   very-low     to    moderate   development of inclusionary units.
                                a) provide 15 percent of for sale units at prices       incomes.                             Most residential development in Fort
                                affordable to moderate and median income                                                     Bragg is one or two infill units. The
                                households; b) construct all required inclusionary                                           only large project is an affordable
                                housing on-site unless an alternative equivalent                                             housing project which did not need to
                                action is approved by City Council; c) implement                                             comply with the inclusionary
                                the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which                                              ordinance because the funding's
                                requires the construction of one small secondary                                             sources for the project and the
                                unit and/or one inclusionary unit in projects of four                                        covenants were more limiting than
                                to six units.                                                                                the City's inclusionary ordinance and
                                                                                                                             the Director determined that the
                                                                                                                             project was an equivalent project.
Program-3.4.2
                                                                                        See above                            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain in modified form.
                                Support Self Help Housing: Consider revising the                                             Use and Development Code. One
                                Zoning Ordinance to allow City Council to provide                                            project of eight units has utilized the
                                one or two planning incentives for self-help                                                 program and resulting changes in the
                                affordable housing based on the level of                                                     zoning ordinance to fit two additional
                                affordability, project design, and neighborhood                                              units on the project that site, which
                                character and constraints (circulation, scale,                                               would not have been feasible without
                                parking availability, playground access, etc.)                                               the change in the ordinance.
Program H-3.4.3
                                                                                        See above                            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain in modified form.
                                Support SRO Housing: Continue to encourage and                                               Use and Development Code. No new
                                facilitate Single-Room Occupancy Units by allowing                                           SRO housing has been permitted.
                                rooming and boarding with a Minor Use Permit in                                              However the City has received an
                                the RM, RH, and RVH zones.                                                                   application for a hostel which will
                                                                                                                             benefit from this ordinance change.
Program H-3.4.4 Program-3.5.1
                                                                                        See above                            Not implemented. This program has Retain.
                                Prioritize City Services for Lower Income                                                    not been implemented.
                                Developments: Establish procedures to grant
                                priority service for sewer and water services to
                                lower-income residential developments.
                                Density Bonus Regulations: Revise the Zoning            Policy H-3.5: Density Bonus          Implemented in 2009 update of Land Delete.
                                Ordinance as needed to incorporate the Density          Incentives: Continue to provide      Use and Development Code. No
                                Bonus provisions of State Law requiring the             density bonuses to projects that     projects have taken advantage of the
                                granting of a density bonus and additional              provide a required percentage of     density bonus incentives.
                                incentives. Adopt an ordinance setting forth the        total units affordable to very-low
                                requirements of the Density Bonus Program and           and low-income households and
                                defining affordable sales prices and rents, the         for seniors as required by State
                                affordability criteria, and additional incentives.      Density Bonus law.
                                Seek Funding to Develop or Rehabilitate Housing
Program H-3.6.1
                                                                                        Policy H-3.6: Large Families:        Difficult to implement due to             Retain with minor modifications.
                                for Large Low-Income Families: Work with CDC,           Encourage housing for large          recession and lack of funding for
                                RCHDC, or other affordable housing developer to         families.                            affordable housing projects.
                                identify a potential new construction or
                                rehabilitation project that will serve large lower-
                                income families and obtain and administer a HCD
                                HOME grant or CDBG grant specifically to
                                accommodate large families.
                                Consider Developing a Program to use the HCD
Program H-3.7.1
                                                                                        Policy H-3.7: Housing for the Implemented. 28 units were                       Delete.
                                Universal Design Checklist as part of Design            Disabled: Continue to facilitate developed with universal design
                                Review for all Multi-family Projects. HCD’s             barrier-free housing in new access.
                                Universal Design Checklist was formulated as a          development.
                                contract between a builder and buyer. However
                                this checklist may be modified for inclusion into the
                                design review procedure for a subset of the units in
                                new multifamily developments.
Program H-3.7.2
                                Consider Adoption of a Universal Design                 See above                            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Delete.
                                Ordinance. Develop a universal design ordinance                                              Use and Development Code. See
                                that sets types of units which will be covered and                                           above.
                                what features should be included in those units to
                                achieve accessibility for the disabled.
                                Policy H-3.8: Emergency and Transitional Housing:                                            Implemented. There have been no           Retain as two programs rather than
                                Continue to allow emergency shelters and                                                     new emergency or transitional             a policy. Program H-3.9.3 and
                                transitional shelter within the City as a permitted                                          housing in Fort Bragg. However our        Program H-3.9.4
                                use in the General Commercial (CG) zoning                                                    homeless services organization is
                                district.                                                                                    looking at a number of properties to
                                                                                                                             establish transitional housing and this
                                                                                                                             policy will help with that.
Program H-3.8.1
                                Ongoing Estimates of the Demand for Emergency           Policy H-3.8: Emergency and Implemented and ongoing. This is                   Retain.
                                Housing: Continue to work with the Fort Bragg           Transitional Housing: Continue to completed every year.
                                Police Department and homeless service providers        allow emergency shelters and
                                in the community to maintain ongoing estimates of       transitional shelter within the City
                                the demand for emergency housing in Fort Bragg          as a permitted use in the General
                                and to develop strategies to meet that demand           Commercial (CG) zoning district.
             ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
             10 - Housing Element                         10-67                                      2014
             Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Program H-3.8.2 Program-3.9.1
                                                                                                                           See above                   Implemented. The City has a very                    Retain and include supportive
                                                                   Inter-Agency Cooperation: Continue to work with                                     successful CDBG funded program to                   services.
                                                                   private, non-profit, County, and State agencies to                                  provide supportive services to the
                                                                   provide emergency housing for the homeless.                                         homeless to help them get out of
                                                                                                                                                       shelters and into transitional housing
                                                                                                                                                       and be successful.
                                                                                                                       Policy H-3.9: First Time Home Implemented in the zoning ordinance.                  Retain and implement according to
                                                                   First Time Home Buyers: Continue to require Buyers: Encourage affordable Not implemented on the ground                                  market need.
                                                                   through the inclusionary housing ordinance, the housing for first time home buyers. because there were no market rate
                                                                   provision of housing units affordable to first time                                 for sale projects large enough to
                                                                   home buyers who qualify for affordable housing.                                     require inclusionary units.
Program 3.9.2:
                                                                   Funding Sources for First Time Home Buyers:             See above                             Implemented. This program was not         Retain.
                                                                   Consider applying for funding sources for first time                                          successful because their were no
                                                                   home buyers such as HCD’s HOME Program, and                                                   applicants that qualified for the loan.
                                                                   provide referrals to FHA programs offered by local
                                                                   lenders and sweat-equity programs operated by
                                                                   non-profit housing organizations.
                                                                   Housing Discrimination Complaints: Continue to
Program H-4.1.1
                                                                                                                           Policy H-4.1: Equal Housing Implemented.                                        Retain.
                                                                   facilitate equal housing opportunity by referring       Opportunity: Continue to facilitate
                                                                   housing discrimination complaints to the Fair           non-discrimination in housing in
                                                                   Housing Division of HUD. Continue to distribute         Fort Bragg.
                                                                   information regarding equal housing opportunity
                                                                   laws and the equal housing opportunities for Fair
                                                                   Housing at City Hall.
Program H-4.1.2 Program H-4.2.1 Program H-4.2.2
                                                                                                                           See above                             Implemented. However no housing       Retain.
                                                                   Non-discrimination     Clauses:    Provide    non-                                            has been constructed with direct City
                                                                   discrimination clauses in rental agreements and                                               financial assistance.
                                                                   deed restrictions for housing constructed with City
                                                                   assistance.
                                                                   Use Housing Funds: Consider using the City’s            Policy H-4.2: Improve Accessibility   Implemented. However with the             Retain with some clarifications to
                                                                   housing funds to subsidize the construction of          to Housing: Make it easier to         demise of Redevelopment, the City         the text.
                                                                   renovations and improvements that improve the           develop housing for seniors and       has relatively little funding in its
                                                                   accessibility to affordable housing for qualified       persons with disabilities.            Housing Fund.
                                                                   seniors and persons with disabilities.
                                                                   Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with               See above                             Implemented and on going. 28 units        Retain
                                                                   Disabilities: Review the City’s land use and                                                  with universal design have been
                                                                   building regulations to identify constraints that may                                         developed in the housing element
                                                                   exist for the provision of housing for persons with                                           period.
                                                                   disabilities, and adopt measures to facilitate
                                                                   reasonable accommodations for persons with
                                                                   disabilities. Publicize revisions to land use
                                                                   regulations       providing       for     reasonable
                                                                   accommodation for persons with disabilities.
Program H-4.2.3 Program H-4.2.4 Program H-5.1.1 Program H-5.1.2
                                                                   Reasonable Accommodation: Ensure all new,               See above                             Implemented and on going. 28 units        Retain.
                                                                   multifamily construction meets the accessibility                                              with universal design have been
                                                                   requirements of the federal and State fair housing                                            developed in the housing element
                                                                   acts through local permitting and approval                                                    period.
                                                                   processes.
                                                                                                                           See above                             Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain. With some changes to the
                                                                   Revise Zoning Ordinance to permit supportive and
                                                                                                                                                                 Use and Development Code. No new language as program H-3.9.4
                                                                   transitional housing as a residential use and only
                                                                                                                                                                 applications for transitional housing
                                                                   subject to those restrictions that apply to other
                                                                                                                                                                 have been submitted since the LUDC
                                                                   residential dwellings of the same type in the same
                                                                                                                                                                 update.
                                                                   zone.
                                                                                                                   Goal H-5: Increase housing       Implemented in 2014 update of Land Delete.
                                                                   Revise Zoning Ordinance to Address Lot Coverage opportunities and improve needed Use and Development Code.
                                                                   Ratio: Revise the zoning ordinance so that the services to expand housing
                                                                   maximum Lot Coverage Ratio is 75% for the High development opportunities.
                                                                   Density Residential zone.
                                                                                                                           See above                             Implemented. The City has               Retain.
                                                                   Continue to Pursue Strategies to Address Water                                                completed a comprehensive leak
                                                                   Storage, Pressure, and Supply Issues: Continue to                                             detection program, replaced water
                                                                   pursue strategies to: 1) add additional water                                                 mains that had leaks, completed the
                                                                   storage capacity to the City’s water supply system;                                           design and environmental review for
                                                                   2) identify and fix water leaks in the water supply                                           a new water storage reservoir, and
                                                                   system; 3) address water pressure issues that                                                 applied for a point of use water rights
                                                                   impact development potentials; and/or 4) seek new                                             change petition in order to secure the
                                                                   water supply as opportunities arise.                                                          City's water access, storage and
                                                                                                                                                                 distribution future.
Program H-6.1.1
                                                                                                                        Policy H-6.1: Public Participation: Implemented.                                   Retain.
                                                                   Workshops: Continue to hold workshops and public Continue to encourage and
                                                                   hearings to discuss proposed revisions to the City’s facilitate public participation in the
                                                                   Housing Element.                                     formulation and review of the
                                                                                                                        City's housing and development
                                                                                                                        policies.
                                                                  ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                  10 - Housing Element                         10-68                                       2014
                                                                  Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                  Annual Report: Prepare an annual report that
Program H-6.2.1
                                                                        Policy H-6.2: Annual Review of Implemented each year.   Retain.
                  describes the amount and type of housing              Housing Element Implementation:
                  constructed, the stock of affordable housing units,   Carry out an annual progress
                  demolition permits, and conversion of residential     report on implementation of the
                  units to other uses, and other housing-related        Housing Element.
                  activities for review by the EDAC, Planning
                  Commission, and City Council.
                  Comments
                  The new Housing Elements goals, policies and programs will be effective. The revised element builds on the past Housing Element's
                  success. Since the economic recession has perfectly aligned with the prior housing element's period, it is too early to know what exactly
                  can be learned from that implementation process and carried forward. However the successes identified above certainly should and
                  have been carried forward. Residential development in Fort Bragg is slow, due to our rural isolated location and relatively slow rate of
                  economic and population growth. However a number of the program from the last element have improved the housing stock and the
                  feasibility of developing new market rate and affordable housing for a wide range of residents, some with special needs. Over the long
                  term the majority of additional units will occur at multi-family densities on the 325 acre former Mill Site, once that property is rezoned.
                  Until then, new affordable units will be built in collaboration with non-profit partners and old units will be rehabbed through private and
                  public investments.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________
10 - Housing Element                         10-69                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
APPENDIX B: PARCEL SPECIFIC INVENTORY OF VACANT AND
UNDERUTILIZED LANDS
EXHIBIT B: PARCEL-SPECIFIC INVENTORY OF VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED LANDS
                                                                                   Maximum Units
                                                                                                                  Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                                  Existing Use
                                         General               Max                                 Likely Units
                                          Plan                Density                                (Given
                                                     Zoning                Acres                                  Access        Access
                                         Design-              (Units/                              Development
APN              Address                  ation                Acre)                               Constraints)                                                  Potential Developm ent Constraints
Vacant Parcels
                                                                                                                                                                 This parcel is relatively unconstrained other than requirements
                                                                                                                                                                 that development not negatively impact the isolated Todd Point
                                                                                                                                                                 Aquifer from w hich parcels in the County rely for potable
018-450-41       1250   DEL MAR DR       RH/CH     RH/CH        15      18.87      283                 198        Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 w ater. The section adjacent to Hare Creek has steep slopes
                                                                                                                                                                 that constitute a small percentage of the over all parcel. The
                                                                                                                                                                 CH designation allow s 24 units per acre.
008-056-11       441 NO FRANKLIN ST       CBD       CBD         40       0.22       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-162-06       126 NO MAIN ST           CBD       CBD         40       0.16       7                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-164-36       105 NO MCPHERSON ST      CBD       CBD         40       0.16       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-092-05       416 NO FRANKLIN ST       CBD       CBD         40       0.16       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-164-38       144 NO FRANKLIN ST       CBD       CBD         40       0.16       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-162-07       120 NO MAIN ST           CBD       CBD         40       0.10       4                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-181-08       309    REDWOOD AVE       CBD       CBD         40       0.02       1                   1         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                               Parking
                                                                                                                                                Lot,             Parcels consists of RR sidings and a portion of the Skunk Train
008-151-23       100 WE LAUREL ST         CBD       CBD         40       0.99      40                  16         Yes           Yes
                                                                                                                                               Round             roundhouse. Pollution may be present.
                                                                                                                                               House
                                                                                                                                               Parking Parcel largely built out w ith Campbell Timberland Mgmt HQ and
008-151-22       90 WE REDWOOD AVE        CBD       CBD         40       2.47      99                  10         Yes           Yes           Lot, Office Skunk Train ow ned parking lot behind Figuieredo's Company
                                                                                                                                               Building Store. Vacant areas may have pollution issues.
008-154-23       231    REDWOOD AVE       CBD       CBD         40       0.11       4                   4         Yes           Yes            Parking           No know n constraints
008-056-23       412 NO MAIN ST           CBD       CBD         40       0.09       4                   3         Yes           Yes            Parking           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 Approx. 0.3 acres is a pond. Area undergoing environmental
008-161-08       90 WE REDWOOD AVE       CBD/IH    CBD/IH       40       3.83      153                 92         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 remediation. Property ow ner is interested in selling parcel.
008-172-09       251 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       1.06      25                  23         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-54       790 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.37       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-35       191    SOUTH ST           CG       CG          24       0.35       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-210-33       830 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.34       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-350-22       211 WE ELM ST             CG       CG          24       0.34       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-162-21       127 NO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.30       7                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-29       731 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.28       7                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-163-10       102 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.23       6                   5         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-28       721 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.22       5                   5         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-27       711 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.20       5                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-030-22       620 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.19       5                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-210-34       840 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.17       4                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-210-50       810 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.16       4                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-48       No Street Address         CG       CG          24       0.15       3                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-51       701 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.07       2                   2         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-30       720 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.07       2                   1         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-173-13       350 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.33       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Parking           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 No know n development constraints other than utility
018-440-58       1151 SO MAIN ST           CH       CH          24       2.73      66                  52         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 infrastructure upgrade needs
018-150-61       1190 SO MAIN ST           CH       CH          24       1.95      47                  42         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 Approx. 1.5 acres subject to Haul Road setback req't and
069-241-27       1201 NO MAIN ST           CH       CH          24       2.26      54                  22          No            No            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 w etland constraints
008-044-12       705 NO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.53      13                  11         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-120-47       851 SO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.39       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-034-07       801 NO MAIN ST            CH       CH          24       0.39       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-120-48       845 SO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.34       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-120-46       150    SOUTH ST           CH       CH          24       0.33       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-047-11       657 NO MAIN ST            CH       CH          24       0.16       4                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-055-20       100 EA FIR ST             CH       CH          24       0.08       2                   2         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                Ware-
008-033-02       925 NO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.68      16                  15         Yes           Yes                              No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                house
008-055-16       500 NO MAIN ST            CH       CH          24       0.20       5                   4         Yes           Yes           Car Wash Underutilized car w ash in relatively poor condition in CBD.
                                                                                                                                                                 Approximately half of the parcel may be constrained by
018-090-02       700    RIVER DR           CO       CO          24       2.45      59                  29         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 w etland habitat/vegetation/intermittent stream
                                                                                                                                                                 Approx. 0.6 acre is roadw ay/sidew alk associated w ith
018-090-16       700    RIVER DR           CO       CO          24       2.77      67                  27         Yes           Yes            Vacant            healthcare facility. Approx 1.25 acres unencumbered,
                                                                                                                                                                 remainder w ith possible w etland/riparian constraints.
018-230-12       537    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH           24       0.48      11                  10         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-230-11       557    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH           24       0.26       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel is very constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-31       1020   GLASS BEACH DR     RH       RH          15       2.94      44                  10         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 required geological setback from the river bluff edge
                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel is very level and exhibits w et areas during the rainy
018-113-03       970    CHESTNUT ST        RH       RH          15       2.05      31                  12         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 season
018-113-22       105    MINNESOTA AVE      RH       RH          15       0.47       7                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
 10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                                   2014
                                                                                                                                                                 Partially developed, approx 2.5 acres appear constrained by
018-230-32
 Fort Bragg 425 NO HARBOR DR
             Inland           RH/OS
                      General Plan                 RH/OS        15       4.37      66               10-70
                                                                                                     13           Yes           Yes            Vacant            riparian habitat and steep slopes and of that 1.3 acres is Open
                                                                                                                                                                 Space designation
                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-33       1080   GLASS BEACH DR     RL       RL          6        4.46      27                   2         Yes           Yes            Vacant            required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                                 Development is severly constrained.
008-290-73       1329   CEDAR ST           RL       RL          6        2.40      14                  13         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
020-490-38       1411   OAK ST             RL       RL          6        1.03       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-100-42       485 SO LINCOLN ST         RL       RL          6        0.92       6                   5         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-302-28       1328   CEDAR ST           RL       RL          6        0.57       3                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-290-34       1325   CEDAR ST           RL       RL          6        0.57       3                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                            Maximum Units
                                                                                                           Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                         Existing Use
                                     General              Max                               Likely Units
                                      Plan               Density                              (Given
                                                Zoning              Acres                                  Access        Access
                                     Design-             (Units/                            Development
APN          Address                  ation               Acre)                             Constraints)                                                Potential Developm ent Constraints
                                                                                                                                                        Approx. 0.6 acre is roadw ay/sidew alk associated w ith
018-090-16   700    RIVER DR           CO       CO         24      2.77     67                  27         Yes           Yes           Vacant           healthcare facility. Approx 1.25 acres unencumbered,
                                                                                                                                                        remainder w ith possible w etland/riparian constraints.
018-230-12   537    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.48     11                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-230-11   557    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.26      6                   6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                        Parcel is very constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-31   1020   GLASS BEACH DR     RH       RH         15      2.94     44                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                        required geological setback from the river bluff edge
                                                                                                                                                        Parcel is very level and exhibits w et areas during the rainy
018-113-03   970    CHESTNUT ST        RH       RH         15      2.05     31                  12         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                        season
018-113-22   105    MINNESOTA AVE      RH       RH         15      0.47      7                   6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                        Partially developed, approx 2.5 acres appear constrained by
018-230-32   425 NO HARBOR DR        RH/OS     RH/OS       15      4.37     66                  13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           riparian habitat and steep slopes and of that 1.3 acres is Open
                                                                                                                                                        Space designation
                                                                                                                                                        Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-33   1080   GLASS BEACH DR     RL       RL         6       4.46     27                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                        Development is severly constrained.
008-290-73   1329   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       2.40     14                  13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-490-38   1411   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       1.03      6                   6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-42   485 SO LINCOLN ST         RL       RL         6       0.92      6                   5         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-28   1328   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-34   1325   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-83   251    RASMUSSEN DR       RL       RL         6       0.55      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-282-30   530 SO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.49      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-072-10   194    GROVE ST           RL       RL         6       0.42      3                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-112-24   189    OLSEN LN           RL       RL         6       0.37      2                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-510-62   20    SWING TREE LN       RL       RL         6       0.35      2                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-02   745    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.35      2                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-24   1348   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.26      2                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-33   937    CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-05   850    LAUREL ST          RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-130-50   440 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-60   430 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-37   1013   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-29   1342   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-41   1331 EA OAK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-086-14   634 NO HARRISON ST        RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-233-33   136    PARK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-38   126 NO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-65   445 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-210-22   830    WOODWARD ST        RL       RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-13   471 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-33   407 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-042-01   260 WE SPRUCE ST          RL       RL         6       0.15      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-01   749    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.15      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-120-40   320 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.14      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-350-08   978    STEWART ST         RL       RL         6       0.12      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-053-26   451    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.11      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-083-17   305 EA BUSH ST            RL       RL         6       0.10      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                        This site has no know n constraints to additional development.
018-210-29   860    HAZELWOOD ST       RL       RL         6       2.98     18                  16         Yes           Yes           1 SFH
                                                                                                                                                        The SFH is in good condition.
                                                                                                                                                        Virtually entire parcel is w ooded. Possible pygmy/high w ater
020-520-22   1600   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       4.91     29                  15         Yes           Yes           2 SFH            table thought entire parcel. Tw o existing SFHs are in good
                                                                                                                                                        condition and occupy about 30 % of site.
008-047-17   627 NO MAIN ST            RL       RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           SFH              No know n constraints
018-440-50   200 WE OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      1.01     12                  11         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-59   400    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.95     11                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-38   350    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.93     11                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                            10-71
                                                                                                     Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                   Existing Use
                                     General              Max                         Likely Units
                                      Plan               Density            Maximum     (Given
                                                Zoning              Acres                            Access        Access
                                     Design-             (Units/                      Development
APN          Address                  ation               Acre)             Units     Constraints)                                                Potential Developm ent Constraints
                                                                                                                                                  Approx. 0.6 acre is roadw ay/sidew alk associated w ith
018-090-16   700    RIVER DR           CO       CO         24      2.77      67           27         Yes           Yes           Vacant           healthcare facility. Approx 1.25 acres unencumbered,
                                                                                                                                                  remainder w ith possible w etland/riparian constraints.
018-230-12   537    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.48      11           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-230-11   557    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.26       6            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is very constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-31   1020   GLASS BEACH DR     RH       RH         15      2.94      44           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                  required geological setback from the river bluff edge
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is very level and exhibits w et areas during the rainy
018-113-03   970    CHESTNUT ST        RH       RH         15      2.05      31           12         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                  season
018-113-22   105    MINNESOTA AVE      RH       RH         15      0.47       7            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  Partially developed, approx 2.5 acres appear constrained by
018-230-32   425 NO HARBOR DR        RH/OS     RH/OS       15      4.37      66           13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           riparian habitat and steep slopes and of that 1.3 acres is Open
                                                                                                                                                  Space designation
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-33   1080   GLASS BEACH DR     RL       RL         6       4.46      27            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                  Development is severly constrained.
008-290-73   1329   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       2.40      14           13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-490-38   1411   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       1.03       6            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-42   485 SO LINCOLN ST         RL       RL         6       0.92       6            5         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-28   1328   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-34   1325   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-83   251    RASMUSSEN DR       RL       RL         6       0.55       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-282-30   530 SO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.49       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-072-10   194    GROVE ST           RL       RL         6       0.42       3            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-112-24   189    OLSEN LN           RL       RL         6       0.37       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-510-62   20    SWING TREE LN       RL       RL         6       0.35       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-02   745    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.35       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-24   1348   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.26       2            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-33   937    CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-05   850    LAUREL ST          RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-130-50   440 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-60   430 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-37   1013   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-29   1342   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-41   1331 EA OAK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-086-14   634 NO HARRISON ST        RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-233-33   136    PARK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-38   126 NO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-65   445 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-210-22   830    WOODWARD ST        RL       RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-13   471 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-33   407 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-042-01   260 WE SPRUCE ST          RL       RL         6       0.15       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-01   749    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.15       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-120-40   320 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.14       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-350-08   978    STEWART ST         RL       RL         6       0.12       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-053-26   451    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.11       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-083-17   305 EA BUSH ST            RL       RL         6       0.10       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  This site has no know n constraints to additional development.
018-210-29   860    HAZELWOOD ST       RL       RL         6       2.98      18           16         Yes           Yes           1 SFH
                                                                                                                                                  The SFH is in good condition.
                                                                                                                                                  Virtually entire parcel is w ooded. Possible pygmy/high w ater
020-520-22   1600   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       4.91      29           15         Yes           Yes           2 SFH            table thought entire parcel. Tw o existing SFHs are in good
                                                                                                                                                  condition and occupy about 30 % of site.
008-047-17   627 NO MAIN ST            RL       RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           SFH              No know n constraints
018-440-50   200 WE OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      1.01      12           11         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-59   400    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.95      11           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-38   350    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.93      11           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-150-55   100 EA OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.88      11            9         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-49   250 WE OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.74       9            8         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-080-31   630    DUBOIS LN          RM       RM         12      0.58       7            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-080-13   630    DUBOIS LN          RM       RM         12      0.46       6            5         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-31   430 SO HARRISON ST        RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-30   430 SO HARRISON ST        RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-194-07   150 SO HARRISON ST        RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-186-10   211 NO CORRY ST           RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  No know n development constraints other than need to
018-340-04   441    SOUTH ST          RVH      RVH         24      7.99     192           150        Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                  upgrade utility infrastructure for w ater and sew er
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-350-59   900    JOHN CIMOLINO WAYRVH       RVH         24      2.47      59           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                  Development w ill be unlikley
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                                      10-72
                                                                                                                   Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                                 Existing Use
                                              General                 Max                           Likely Units
                                               Plan                  Density              Maximum     (Given
                                                            Zoning                Acres                            Access        Access
                                              Design-                (Units/                        Development
APN                Address                     ation                  Acre)               Units     Constraints)                                                Potential Developm ent Constraints
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel may be constrained by rare plant communities and has
008-350-60         920   STEWART ST             RVH       RVH          24       3.59       86           43         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                a required geological setback from the river bluff edge
018-150-58         No Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       1.32       32           29         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-130-13         440   ALGER ST               RVH       RVH          24       0.50       12           11         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel drops off steeply tow ard river and after front yard set
018-150-56         No Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       0.75       18            4         Yes           Yes           Vacant           backs and geologic setback is determined has very small area
                                                                                                                                                                for development - less than 20%
008-191-27         142 NO MCPHERSON ST          RVH       RVH          24       0.14        3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel drops off steeply tow ard river and after front yard set
018-150-57         N0 Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       0.41       10            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           backs and geologic setback is determined has very small area
                                                                                                                                                                for development - less than 20%
008-192-24         301   MADRONE ST             RVH       RVH          24       0.07        2            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-230-23         550   CASA DEL NOYO DR RVH             RVH          24       0.07        2            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-082-23         619 NO MCPHERSON ST          RVH       RVH          24       0.06        1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                               Mobile           Parcel has mobile home park occupying 1.6 acres of land and
                                                                                                                                               Home             a large level area of 1.46 vacant acres fronts Boatyard drive
018-150-59         No Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       6.95      167           33         Yes           Yes
                                                                                                                                               Park &           and appears unconstrained. Steep slopes occupy balance
                                                                                                                                               Vacant           (3.95 acres). Parcel is currently for sale.
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel is very level and exhibits numerous persistent w et
018-113-01         552 SO LINCOLN ST            RVH       RVH          24       3.20       77           23         Yes           Yes           2 SFH            areas during the rainy season. The existing 2 SHF are in good
                                                                                                                                                                shape, the remainder of the site is undeveloped.
                                                                                                                                                                About 2/3 of the parcel is dedicated as open space w ith steep
018-340-03         601   CYPRESS ST           RVH/OS RVH/OS            24       9.08      218           131        Yes           Yes           1 SFH            slopes, riparian and w etland vegetation leaving about 33% of
                                                                                                                                                                the site is available for additional development
                                                                                                                                                                About half of the parcel is zoned open space w ith slopes that
                                                                                                                                                                exceed 75%, leaving about 30% of the site possible for
018-220-02         440   SOUTH ST             RVH/OS RVH/OS            24      11.05      265           80         Yes           Yes           1 SFH            development. The Property ow ner has completed a minor
                                                                                                                                                                subdivision creating four parcels and hopes to develop 3 SFH
                                                                                                                                                                and the remainder of the parcel w ith multi-family.
Subtotal Vacant Sites                                                          148        2,396          1,276
Underutilized, Non-Vacant Parcels
Subtotal Non-Vacant Underutilized Sites                                        181        ####           1,595
Total  All data
Note: The  Sitesin this Appendix are different than the residential buildout figures
                                                                               184 3,262           1,605
                                                                                     contained in the Background Reports and in references to residential buildout in other Elements of the
General Plan since it uses more conservative assumptions for calculating buildout (i.e., it reduces the development potential of multi-family properties by about 75 percent); it includes
Note: The data in this Appendix are different than the residential build out figures contained in the Background
Reports and in references to residential build out in other Elements of the General Plan since it uses more
conservative assumptions for calculating build out (i.e., it reduces the development potential of multi-family properties
by about 75 percent); it includes underutilized parcels; and it includes the residential component of mixed use
development. The unit development potential for underdeveloped sites was further reduced on a case-by-case basis
taking into account the existing development on the site and other constraints.
No Zoning Ordinance or General Plan amendments would be needed to achieve the densities noted above.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                                          10-73
      APPENDIX C: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
TABLE C-1: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
Development                              Location                     Year                                 Income
                                                                     Built      Units          Status     Category
Cottages at Cypress Street (Danco)       Cypress Street               2014        28         Protected       Low/Very
                                                                                                               Low
Inclusionary Housing Unit                Whipple                      2007         1         Protected         Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Dana Street                  2004         1         Protected         Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Dick Williams Way          2004 &         6         Protected         Low
                                                                     2005
Habitat for Humanity                     Hocher Lane                  2003         8         Protected         Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Oak Street                   2003         2         Protected       Very Low
Rural Communities Housing                Stewart Street               2000        10         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Rural Communities Housing                Stewart Circle               2000         6         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Community Development Commission         John Cimolino Way            2000        14         Protected       Very Low
Rural Communities Housing                Holmes Lane                  1999         7         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Maple Street                 1998         2         Protected       Very Low
Community Development Commission         South Sanderson              1997         9         Protected       Very Low
                                        Way
Habitat for Humanity                     South Corry Street           1996         2         Protected       Very Low
Rural Communities Housing                Howland Court                1995        10         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Oak Street                   1994         2         Protected       Very Low
Community Development Commission         Cypress Street               1993        19         Protected         Very
                                                                                                             Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                     South Harold Street          1991         1         Protected       Very Low
Moura Construction                       South Street                 1990        38           At Risk      Senior Very
                                                                                                             Low/Low
Private/Federal Home Mortgage            Walnut Street                1986        56           At Risk       Very Low
Association
Rural Communities Housing                Cypress Street               1980        43         Protected       Very Low
Development Corporation
River Gardens                            South Street                 1979        48           Pending       Very Low
Total Affordable Housing Units                                                   285
      Protected means rental or resale controls are in effect for at least the next ten years.
      10 - Housing Element                                                                             2014
      Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                       10-74
APPENDIX D: COMMUNITY INPUT & REVIEW
The following community members provided comments and requested changes to the 2014
Housing Element update:
City Council
      Mayor Dave Turner
      Vice Mayor Meg Courtney
      Councilmember Heidi Kraut
      Councilmember Doug Hammerstrom
      Councilmember Scott Deitz
Planning Commission
      Derek Hoyle, Chair
      Teresa Rodriguez, Vice Chair
      Mark Hannon, Commissioner
      Sage Statham, Commissioner
      Stan Miklose, Commissioner
General Public
      Chuck Greenberg, Habitat for Humanity
      Paul Clark, Century 21 Fort Bragg Realty
      Amy Wynn, Permit Agent and Land Use Consultant
      George Reinhardt, NHUDG
10 - Housing Element                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                          10-75

APPENDIX E: PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING REQUESTS FOR
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
        PROCEDURE FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION IN THE CITY’S LAND
          USE AND ZONING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS PURSUANT TO FAIR
                                               HOUSING LAWS.
Sec. 1. Purpose.
It is the policy of the City of Fort Bragg, pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and
the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (hereafter “fair housing laws”), to provide individuals with
disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access
to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This ordinance
establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and
building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with the intent and
purpose of fair housing laws.
Sec. 2. Findings.
The City of Fort Bragg City Council finds:
The federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act
impose an affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodation in their land use and
zoning regulations and practices when such accommodation may be necessary to afford individuals with
disabilities an equal opportunity to housing;
          A.        The Housing Element of the jurisdiction must identify and develop a plan for removing
          governmental constraints to housing for individuals with disabilities including local land use and
          zoning constraints or providing reasonable accommodation;
          B.        The Attorney General of the State of California has recommended that cities and
          counties implement fair housing reasonable accommodation procedures for making land use
          and zoning determinations concerning individuals with disabilities to further the development of
          housing for individuals with disabilities;
          C.        A fair housing reasonable accommodation procedure for individuals with disabilities
          and developers of housing for individuals with disabilities to seek relief in the application of
          land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures will further the
          jurisdiction’s compliance with federal and state fair housing laws and provide greater
          opportunities for the development of critically needed housing for individuals with disabilities.
Sec. 3. Applicability.
Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with
disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and
10 - Housing Element                                                                                  2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-76

zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements,
when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.
An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or
more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of
such impairment.
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her
representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of
a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing
opportunities.
Sec. 4. Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process.
Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at public
information counters in the planning, zoning and building departments, advising the public of the
availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation
shall be available to the public in the Planning and Building and Safety departments.
Sec. 5. Requesting Reasonable Accommodation.
     A. In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability, any eligible person as defined in
          Sec. 3 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations,
          policies, practices and procedures.
     B. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide the following information:
                   (1)      Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation;
                   (2)      Name and address of the property owner(s);
                   (3)      Address of the property for which accommodation is requested;
                   (4)      Description of the requested accommodation and the regulation(s), policy or
                   procedure for which accommodation is sought; and
                   (5)      Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s)
                   with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling.
     C. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to
          respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.
     D. A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be
          filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A
          reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual’s obligations to comply with other
          applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.
10 - Housing Element                                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-77

     E. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the
         jurisdiction will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible.
Sec. 6. Reviewing Authority.
         A.        Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the “reviewing
         authority,” using the criteria set forth in Sec. 7.
         B.        The reviewing authority shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable
         accommodation within thirty (30) days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant
         with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the
         required findings set forth in Sec. 7.
         C.        If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the
         reviewing authority may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing
         laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional
         information is made, the thirty (30) day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant
         responds to the request.
Sec. 7. Required Findings.
The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation
shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following factors:
          (1) Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable
          accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing
          laws;
          (2) Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an
          individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws;
          (3) Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative
          burden on the jurisdiction and;
          (4) Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the
          nature of the jurisdiction’s land use and zoning or building program.
Sec. 8. Written Decision on the Request for Reasonable Accommodation.
          A.       The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail
          the basis of the decision, including the reviewing authority’s findings on the criteria set forth in
          Sec. 7. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant’s right to appeal and to request
          reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The notice of decision shall
          be sent to the applicant by certified mail.
          B.       The written decision of the reviewing authority shall be final unless an applicant
          appeals it to the jurisdiction’s planning commission.
10 - Housing Element                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                      10-78

         C.       If the reviewing authority fails to render a written decision on the request for reasonable
         accommodation within the thirty (30) day time period allotted by Sec. 6, the request shall be
         deemed granted.
         D.       While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations
         otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force
         and effect.
 Sec. 9. Appeals.
          A. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the reviewing authority’s written decision, an applicant
          may appeal an adverse decision. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing.
          B. If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the jurisdiction will
          provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible.
          C. All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. Any information identified
          by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of
          the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.
          D. Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other
          state or federal remedy available.
10 - Housing Element                                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-79

APPENDIX F: CITY OF FORT BRAGG DEVELOPMENT FEES.
CITY OF FORT BRAGG: Planning & Development Fees
                                         Category                                     Fee
 General Information & Letters
          Address Listing                                                              $20
          Research Fee                                                                 $60
          GIS Site Map                                                                 $20
          Zoning Letter                                                               $105
 Sign Permit
          Permanent signs                                                              $50
          Temporary signs                                                              $50
 Building Permits
                                                                              1% of valuation of
          Building Permit Surcharge on Construction Permits [1]
                                                                                building permit
          General Plan Maintenance Fees [1]:
                                                                                 1.5% of total
                Construction permits
                                                                               permit valuation
                                                                                1.5% of assigned
                                                                               valuation based on
                Residential mobile homes                                       gross floor area of
                                                                               mobile home times
                                                                                   $51 per sf
 Construction & Demolition Waste Recycling Deposit
             New construction                                                       $.37/sf
             Remodel or renovation                                                  $.47/sf
             Demolition                                                             $.52/sf
             Road, sidewalk or driveway                                             $.26/sf
             Waste Management Checklist Processing Fee                                 $25
 Planning Permits
                                                                                minimum $750
          Pre-application Analysis
                                                                                    deposit
          Administrative Permits:
                Administrative Coastal Development Permit                             $575
[1] Fee waived for utility permits, demolition permits with no valuation, re-roof permits, foundation
permits under existing structures, and re-siding.
10 - Housing Element                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-80

                Administrative Design Review                                                  $575
                Administrative Variance                                                       $575
                Amendment to Administrative Permit                                            $500
                Certificate of Appropriateness                                                $575
                                           Category                                           Fee
                Certificate of Compliance                                                     $900
                Emergency Permit                                                              $525
                Floodplain Development Permit                                                 $575
                Lot Line Adjustment                                                           $775
                Medical Marijuana Cultivation Minor Use Permit                                $445
                Minor Use Permit [2]                                                          $575
                Planning permit extension of time (non-subdivision, public hearing not
                                                                                              $180
          required)
                Planning permit extension of time (non-subdivision, public hearing
          before Director
                required)                                                                     $295
                Public Hearing for Administrative Permit                                     $1,050
          Permits Requiring Planning Commission Review Hearing. For each
          permit requiring Planning Commission review, applicant shall pay $1,100            $1,100
          for the hearing plus the fees identified below for the specific permit type(s):
                Adult-Oriented Business Permit                                               $1,300
                Certificate of Appropriateness                                                $500
                Coastal Development Permit                                                    $850
                Coastal Development Permit – Second Unit                                      $850
                Design Review                                                                 $300
                Use Permit                                                                    $700
                Variance                                                                      $400
                Amendments to Design Review, Coastal Development Permit, Use
                                                                                              $500
          Permit [3]
          Planning permit extension of time (non-subdivision, public hearing before
                                                                                             $1,440
          Planning Commission required)
          Appeal to City Council or Planning Commission                                      $1,000
 Developer Deposit Account - Planning Permits & Amendments
          Annexation                                                                      costs incurred
          Development Agreement                                                           costs incurred
          Environmental Review, Negative Declaration, Environmental Impact
                                                                                          costs incurred
          Report
             Mitigation Monitoring                                                        costs incurred
          General Plan Amendment                                                          costs incurred
          Local Coastal Plan Amendment                                                    costs incurred
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-81

                                                                                 Determined at time
          Inclusionary Housing Fees [4]
                                                                                   of application
          Planned Development                                                      costs incurred
          Rezoning                                                                 costs incurred
          Specific Plan                                                            costs incurred
                                          Category                                     Fee
          Subdivision
                Extension of Time                                                      $225
                Final Map                                                        $690 + $20/parcel
                Improvement Plan, Plan Check & Construction Inspections            costs incurred
                Minor Subdivision (less than 5 parcels)                            costs incurred
                Major Subdivision (5 parcels or more)                              costs incurred
                Parcel Merger                                                      costs incurred
                Parcel Map                                                       $690 + $20/parcel
                Reversion to Acreage                                               costs incurred
  Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)
          TAC Review – Minor                                                           $695
          TAC Review – Major [5]                                                   costs incurred
          Limited Term Permit Not Requiring Technical Advisory Committee
                                                                                       $150
          Review
  Parking In-Lieu Fees
             Existing Commercial Building                                            No fee [6]
             New Commercial Building                                                 No fee [6]
  Code Enforcement:
          Type 1 Code Enforcement Activity: Sign permit, fence & retaining wall
          issues, expired permit, overgrown vegetation, lawn parking, inoperable       $290
          vehicle, broken windows, and other similar code enforcement activities
[2] Does not include Medical Marijuana Cultivation MUPs.
[3] No environmental and no public hearing required.
[4] Fee based on current home price sales and income levels.
[5] Major events would require a developer deposit account. Fee waived for non-commercial events.
[6] Temporary moratorium.
10 - Housing Element                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-82

          Type 2 Code Enforcement Activity: Building maintenance, unsafe
          dangerous building, nuisance conditions, condition of approval violation,
                                                                                                  $440
          illegal home occupation, blight, and other similar code enforcement
          activities
          Type 3 Code Enforcement Activity: Illegal second unit, construction
          without permits, change of use without permit, establishment of an                      $600
          unpermitted use, and other similar code enforcement activities
          Type 4 Code Enforcement Activity: Illegal marijuana cultivation, nuisance
          conditions such as abandoned buildings that provide setting for illegal                 $820
          activities
          Double Fee for Non-compliance with Request to Stop Violation                           double
          for code violations not abated within 45 days of the code violation letter               fee
          Violations (Penalty Fee)
          Penalty fee shall be equal to fee for required application(s), or where there
                                                                                          Required app fee or
          is not
                                                                                                 $1,000
          a set fee, $1,000
At the discretion of the Director, a deposit account may be required in lieu of a flat fee for any planning
permit(s) deemed likely to substantially exceed the City’s typical costs in processing the permit.
10 - Housing Element                                                                            2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-83

2.       LAND USE ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Land Use Element is the heart of the Inland General Plan since it has the broadest scope
of the required elements and provides an overview of the long-term development and
conservation goals and policies of the City. Map LU-1: Land Use Designations describes the
desired types and intensity of land use for the City’s Inland Area and its relevant portion of the
Sphere of Influence. The goals, policies, and programs in this element should be considered in
relation to this map.
This Element covers the following policy areas:
•        Sphere of Influence and Annexation
•        Redevelopment
•        Land Use Designations
•        Residential Land Uses
•        Commercial Land Uses
•        Industrial Land Uses
The Land Use Element establishes policies and programs to maintain the existing pattern of
land uses within the City’s Inland Area while anticipating and providing for future growth and
development. It is expected that growth will continue to occur at a slow but regular pace (i.e.,
less than 0.5 percent per year) as experienced in the last decade.
Commercial land uses in the City’s Inland Area are located along the Highway One and Franklin
Street corridors. The Central Business District, located between Oak and Pine Streets, is the
historic, civic and cultural core of the community. Industrial lands are located on North Franklin
Street immediately north of the Central Business District, and on Highway One north of Pudding
Creek. Residential neighborhoods are located east of the commercial core.
Land Use Element policies support a concentrated development pattern by encouraging infill
development on vacant and underutilized sites throughout the Inland Area. The Inland General
Plan identifies potential lands east of the City which may be suitable for annexation. These
lands in the City’s Sphere of Influence are designated for residential development. The Inland
General Plan establishes annexation policies to ensure that the expansion of the City occurs in
an orderly fashion and that clear public benefits are achieved by expanding the municipal
boundaries.
B.       The Sphere of Influence and Annexation
The Inland General Plan applies to both publicly and privately owned land within the City’s
Inland Area boundaries and its broader Planning Area. State law permits the City to plan for
areas outside of its boundaries if the City determines those areas have a relationship to the
City’s planning needs. The Planning Area is defined in this Plan as lands within the City and the
City’s designated Sphere of Influence (as approved by the Mendocino County Local Agency
Formation Commission or LAFCO) which represents areas that may be annexed to the City and
for which urban services may be provided. The purpose of a Sphere of Influence is twofold: to
2 – Land Use Element                         2-1                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

ensure that urban development takes place in an orderly manner, and to allow for the land use
and development policies of a city to be recognized in areas that will eventually be part of the
City. The Inland General Plan establishes policies for the Sphere of Influence which ensure that
development requiring annexation can be adequately served by infrastructure and that the costs
associated with annexations are fairly allocated. It provides for the orderly development and
extension of City services within the Sphere of Influence. Map LU-2 indicates the boundaries of
the City and its Sphere of Influence. Map LU-3 indicates the Annexation Areas within the
Sphere of Influence, as defined by the City Council.
Areas within the Sphere of Influence are currently under County jurisdiction and are regulated
by the Mendocino County General Plan and Zoning Ordinance. Although the County is not
bound by Fort Bragg’s Inland General Plan, the City will work with the County to assure that
County land use decisions in Fort Bragg’s Sphere of Influence are compatible with this Inland
General Plan. Furthermore, if and when lands within the City’s designated Sphere of Influence
are annexed to the City, the land use designations assigned by the City’s Inland General Plan
provide guidance for future development densities, and the policies and land use designations
established by the Inland General Plan become effective upon annexation to the City.
C.       Redevelopment
The status of California Community Redevelopment Law is uncertain at the time of the adoption
of this Inland General Plan. The successor agency to the Redevelopment Agency has some
remaining abilities to eliminate blighted areas and to improve the local economy. The future of
the Successor Agency to the Redevelopment Agency is unclear at this time; various bills are
wending their way through the political process which may revise some portion of
redevelopment agency powers and abilities.
D.       Land Use Designations
The Inland General Plan establishes land use designations shown on Map LU-1: Land Use
Designations. Each land use designation is described relative to the development density or
intensity, and the types of activities, or land uses permitted. Residential density is defined by
dwelling units per net acre.
E.       Applying Land Use Designations to Specific Properties
The Land Use Element provides the primary basis for City decisions on development
applications. Privately and publicly-sponsored projects must be consistent with all parts of the
Inland General Plan, but the Land Use Element is the first place to find out what type of
development would be appropriate in a specific location, or what location would be suitable for a
particular development type.
Densities described under the applicable land use designations are maximums; maximum
densities can only be achieved after meeting all of the other policies and implementation
programs of the Inland General Plan. The City does not guarantee that an individual project will
attain the maximum density indicated by the land use designations. The Inland General Plan
includes maps identifying hazards and constraints, floodplains, street systems, parkland, and
2 – Land Use Element                           2-2                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

trails which are an integral part of the Inland General Plan and which must be consulted in order
to obtain a complete interpretation of Inland General Plan policies and implementation programs
applicable in a given area or parcel of land. Other elements of the Inland General Plan contain
specific policies to preserve Fort Bragg's character and appearance, and to protect sensitive
environmental resources.
F.       Residential Land Use Designations
Large Lot Rural Residential (RR5)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings in the more rural areas located on the
northern fringes of the City and is assigned to areas within the Sphere of Influence which are
similarly designated by the County’s Land Use Map. The large lots are intended to preserve the
low density, rural character of lands on the edge of the City and to be compatible with adjacent
development patterns within the unincorporated areas of Mendocino County. The maximum
allowable density is 1 unit per 5 acres.
Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings on the northern fringe of the City where
the existing development pattern is comprised of one- to two-acre parcels and where
infrastructure is inadequate to support higher development densities. The maximum allowable
density is 1 unit per 2 acres.
Rural Residential (RR1)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings in a semi-rural environment. The RR1
designation is located primarily on the eastern edge of the City, where larger lots serve as a
transition between the RL neighborhoods of the City and the rural lands in the unincorporated
areas. The maximum allowable density is 1 unit per acre.
Suburban Residential (RS)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings and is assigned to areas where
infrastructure limitations and/or environmental constraints inhibit the establishment of urban
development densities. The allowable density range is 1 to 3 units per acre.
Low Density Residential (RL)
This designation is intended for single-family residences on standard City lots in residential
neighborhoods surrounding the more densely developed core of the City. With issuance of a
conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as
convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small
clusters of retail establishments. The allowable density range is 3 to 6 units per acre.
2 – Land Use Element                           2-3                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Medium Density Residential (RM)
This designation is intended for a variety of housing types, including single family homes,
duplexes, triplexes, townhouses, and apartment units located in proximity to parks, schools, and
public services. With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving
commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located
primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments. The allowable
density range is 6 to 12 units per acre.
High Density Residential (RH)
This designation is intended to allow a variety of higher density housing types, including
townhouses, apartments, and mobile home parks on sites that are large and provide important
open space or large properties where the City wishes to see creative planning and design. It is
assigned primarily to larger parcels where innovative site design can provide for a mix of
housing types, aesthetic and functional open space areas, and other features that enhance the
development and the neighborhood. With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited
neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés and
restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments.
The allowable density range is 10 to 15 units per acre. Residential densities above 6 units per
acre may only be permitted for projects which include open space, provide affordable housing,
clustered housing, energy conservation, and/or aesthetically pleasing design features.
Very High Density Residential (RVH)
This designation is intended to allow high density multi-family housing on sites that are close to
commercial areas and public services. Apartments, mobile home parks, and similar types of
residential uses are allowed in this designation. With issuance of a conditional use permit,
limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores,
cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail
establishments. The allowable density range is 12 to 24 units per acre.
G.       Commercial and Industrial Land Use Designations
Central Business District (CBD)
This designation applies to the core of the downtown which is the civic, cultural, and commercial
center of the community. Uses and site development patterns in the Central Business District
are typically pedestrian-oriented. This designation is intended to accommodate government
and professional offices, retail stores, theaters, and other similar uses. Residential uses on
upper floors or on the ground floor at the rear of buildings are encouraged at a density of up to
40 units per net acre.
Neighborhood Commercial (CN)
This designation provides small-scale, convenience shopping and services for surrounding
residential neighborhoods. Retail and service businesses such as grocery stores, laundromats,
restaurants, beauty salons, and similar types of uses are allowed in this designation.
General Commercial (CG)
2 – Land Use Element                         2-4                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

The General Commercial designation is intended for a less compact and intensive type of
development than found in the Central Business District. Typical land uses in this designation
depend more on vehicular than pedestrian access and include automotive and service-related
outlets, retail sales, hardware, paint or carpeting sales, offices, apparel stores, and food stores.
Shopping centers are allowed with approval of a conditional use permit. Residential uses are
permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear of buildings at a maximum
density of up to 24 units per acre.
Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)
This land use designation applies to land uses serving residents and visitors on sites which are
located along Highway One and arterials at the entry points to the community. Typical uses
allowed in this designation include motels and other lodging enterprises, restaurants, and retail
outlets. Residential uses are permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear
of buildings at a maximum density of up to 24 units per acre.
Office Commercial (CO)
This designation is intended to serve the office and institutional needs of the community and
permits such uses as professional offices, hospitals, medical clinics, and banks. Commercial
uses supportive of the office and institutional uses, such as blueprint and copy shops, cafés and
restaurants, pharmacies, and similar retail establishments are permitted. Residential uses are
permitted at a maximum density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Heavy Industrial (IH)
This designation is intended for a range of heavy industrial uses including manufacturing,
assembly and processing, and the storage and distribution of raw materials, aggregate plants,
and related heavy industrial uses which are generally incompatible with and require locations
removed from residential and visitor serving uses.
Light Industrial (IL)
This designation is intended for a variety of commercial, manufacturing, wholesale and
distribution, and industrial uses which do not generate a significant amount of on-site customer
traffic or high levels of noise, dust, odors, or other potential off-site nuisance characteristics.
Manufacturing uses are permitted provided they occur within an enclosed structure. Other uses
permitted in this designation include offices ancillary to permitted uses, agricultural product
sales and services, construction yards, and automobile repair shops.
H.       Other Land Uses
Parks and Recreation (PR)
This land use designation is intended for public parks and recreational facilities. Typical uses
include passive and active recreational facilities, including trails, playgrounds, parking lots,
interpretive facilities, rest rooms, storage sheds, and other structures needed to accommodate
public use or provide for maintenance of the land and recreational facilities.
2 – Land Use Element                           2-5                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Agriculture (A)
This land use designation is assigned to land in the Sphere of Influence which is similarly
designated by the Mendocino County General Plan. The lands which are designated
Agriculture are within the floodplain of the Noyo River and are well-suited and appropriately
retained for the production of crops or livestock grazing. The allowable density is one unit per
40 acres.
Open Space (OS)
This land use designation is intended for areas of land which are largely unimproved and used
for the preservation of natural resources and habitats, passive outdoor recreation, scenic
resources, or for the protection of public health and safety (e.g., preservation of floodplains).
Allowable uses include rest rooms, storage sheds, and other structures required to provide for
maintenance of land and/or in support of recreational uses.
Public Facilities and Services (PF)
This land use designation is intended for existing and proposed public buildings, utility facilities,
water and wastewater treatment plants, and related easements.
I.       Population Density and Building Intensity
State law mandates that general plans include standards of population density and building
intensity for all of the territory covered by the plan. To satisfy this requirement, the Inland
General Plan includes building intensity for each of the land use designations, expressed in
units per acre for residential uses.
Population densities for residential land use designations are based on an average household
size of 2.5 persons, except for Very High Density Residential which is based on an average of
2.1 persons per household. If there is a discrepancy between dwelling units per acre and
persons per acre, the dwelling units per acre measure (e.g., building intensity) shall govern.
The population densities are:
     x Large Lot Rural Residential (RR5)                    up to 0.5 persons per acre
     x Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)                   up to 1.25 persons per acre
     x Rural Residential (RR1)                              up to 2.5 persons per acre
     x Suburban Residential (RS)                            up to 7.5 persons per acre
     x Low Density Residential (RL)                         up to 15 persons per acre
     x Medium Density Residential (RM)                      up to 30 persons per acre
     x High Density Residential (RH)                        up to 37.5 persons per acre
     x Very High Density Residential (RVH)                  up to 50 persons per acre
     x General Commercial (CG) Mixed Use                    up to 50 persons per acre
     x Highway Visitor Commercial (CH) Mixed Use            up to 50 persons per acre
     x Office Commercial (CO) Mixed Use                     up to 50 persons per acre
     x Central Business District (CBD) Mixed Use            up to 50 persons per acre
J.       2022 Buildout Projections
2 – Land Use Element                          2-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The following properties are owned by the City of Fort Bragg
                                                                               HW
                                                                                 Y1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and are not contiguous to the City limits. They have been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     annexed to the City and are assigned the General Plan land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     use classification of Public Facilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      APN                                     PURPOSE
                                                                                                                                              AIRPORT                                         ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    018-391-07                                                Hwy 20 Water Tank (fire station)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    019-070-01                                                Newman Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    019-460-21                                                Waterfall Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    019-470-08
  N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 020-270-48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    020-480-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Madsen Hole
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Water Treatment Plant/Corp. Yard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    020-500-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Revision date: July 2012
                                                        Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr                   ee
                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                         EL
                                                         ELM
                                                          LM ST
                                                          LM ST.
                                                                                                                                                             PERKINS
                                                         SP
                                                          PRRUCE
                                                            RU
                                                             U E S
                                                             UCE STT.                                                                                                                                                                                         PUDDING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UDDING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DN                     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CREEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          REEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             K                        RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                    BRANDON
                                                                                                                                             BUSH
                                                                                                                                             BU SH
                                                                                                                                                 H ST.
                                                                                                                                                  FIR
                                                                                                                                                  FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                                      STREET
                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                  PINE
                                                                                                                                                  PI NE
                                                                                                                                                      E STREET
                                                                                                                                                        STREET
                                                                                 STREET                                                STR
                                                                                                                                       STREET
                                                                                                                                          EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P E T E R S O N L N.
                                                                                               McPHERSON
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                          TREET
                                                                                                                                                  LAUR
                                                                                                                                                  L AUREL
                                                                                                                                                      REL STR
                                                                                                                                                      RE  STREE
                                                                                                                                                            REE
                                                                                                                                                              ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D E N N IS O N L A N E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MA L L L A N E
                                                                      STRE
                                                                      STREET
                                                                         EET
                                                                                                                                            REDW
                                                                                                                                            RE
                                                                                                                                            R EDW
                                                                                                                                                WOOD
                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                WOO
                                                                                                                                                  OD AVEN
                                                                                                                                                      V NU
                                                                                                                                                        NUE
Oce                                                                              FRANKLIN
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                                              HARRISON
                                                                                                                                       HARR SON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                  ALDE
                                                                                                                                                  ALDER
                                                                                                                                                     E  STREET
                                                                                                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO N S O N W A Y
    an
                                                                      MAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CT.
                                                                                                                                                  M RO
                                                                                                                                                  MAD
                                                                                                                                                  MADRONE
                                                                                                                                                      ONE
                                                                                                                                                      ONE                                          ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WILLOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WILLOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W SSTT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HAROLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HARO
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AROLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                          OLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                            D STR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LINCOLN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LINCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OLN ST.
                                                                                            MA
                                                                                             AP
                                                                                              PLE
                                                                                                E STR
                                                                                                    REE
                                                                                                    REET
                                                                                                                                                      WHIPPLE
                                                                                                                                                      WHIPPL
                                                                                                                                                           LE ST.
                                                                                                                                                                       CORR
                                                                                                                                                                       COR RY ST.                                                                                     WALL ST.
                                                                                            HA
                                                                                             AZZE
                                                                                                EL ST.
                                                                                STREE
                                                                                STREET
                                                                                    ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VE
                                                                                            CHESTN
                                                                                            CH  TNU
                                                                                                TNUT ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YO
                                                                                                                                                                       GROVE
                                                                                FRANKLIIN
                                                                                        N
                                                                                             WALN
                                                                                                NUT
                                                                                                NU                                                    ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                  MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P.                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LR                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D                                     UL                                                                                           VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HA                                                                         NO Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Map LU-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DO L P
                                                                                              TLE
                                                                                             MYR                                                                                                                                                                                                 LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                                                                                                                    Industrial Land Use Designations
                                                                                                                                                                                              VE
                                                                                                                                                                                       RI
                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR5                         Large Lot Rural Residential                                                                                                 IL                   Light Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (1 unit per 5 acres)
                                                                                                                                                     Y       O
                                                     HWY 1                                                                                        NO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Medium Lot Rural Residential                                                                                                                     Heavy Industrial
                           HARB
                             RB
                              BOR
                               OOR
                                 RAAV
                                    VENU
                                       UE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR2                         (1 unit per 2 acres)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR1                         Rural Residential                                                                                                           IT                   Timber Resources Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (1 unit per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Suburban Residential
            OCE
            O EAN
              E N VIEW
                     W   DRIV
                            VE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SR                          (1-3 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Other Designations
                                                                                                                  SOU
                                                                                                                  S U
                                                                                                                    UTH
                                                                                                                    UT  HARBOR DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RL                          (3-6 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HD                   Harbor District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RM                          (6-12 units per acre)
                                                     HWY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          High Density Residential                                                                                                    PR                   Parks and Recreation
                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                  LLITS                         R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RH                          (6-15 units per acre)
                                                                                                                  OLD WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Very High Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V                                                                                                                           PF                   Public Facilities and Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HW                                              RVH                         (6-24 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y.                                                                                                                                                                                                    OS                   Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commercial Land Use Designations                                                                                                                       A                    Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CBD                         Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CN                          Neighborhood Commercial
                                            HWY
                                            H
                                            HWWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CG                          General Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CH                          Highway Visitor Commercial                                                                                                                       Redevelopment Agency
                                                         SIMPSON
                                                         S MP N LA
                                                                 LANE
                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO                          Office
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f     Commercial                                                                                                                                Coastal Zone
          Assessor's                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                within City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The boundaries of the Land Use Designations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           g       are general
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       g       and schematic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  illustrating the policies of the General Plan. Refer to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Parcel Maps at the Community Development Department for updated parcel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  boundary maps.
                                                                                     Y1
                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                            ROAD
     N
                                                              Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                k
                                                               ELM ST.
                                                               SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK        RD.
                                                                                                                                BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                PINE STREET
                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LN.
                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                  McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                 LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                           STREET
  Oce
                                                                                                                            REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                    FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                ALDER STREET
      an
                                                                           MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K TERR                                                  SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CT.
                                                                                                                                MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                                     HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                    WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                  CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                HAZEL ST.
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                     FRANKLIN
                                                                                                 WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                        MAIN ST.
   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Map LU-2
                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                     YO                                                                                                                 CITY BOUNDARY
                                                           HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     & SPHERE of INFLUENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Boundary
                              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coastal Zone Boundary
                                                           HWY.
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                                                                       Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                          2   0
                                                   HWY 1
Source: City of Fort Bragg
        July, 2012
                                                               SIMPSON LANE
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
For Schematic purposes only
                                                                                     Y1
                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                            ROAD
     N
                                                              Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                k
                                                               ELM ST.
                                                               SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK      RD.
                                                                                                                                BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                PINE STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                                       2
                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LN.
                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                  McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                 LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                           STREET
  Oce
                                                                                                                            REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                    FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                ALDER STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3                                      3
      an
                                                                           MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K TERR                                                  SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CT.
                                                                                                                                MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                                     HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                    WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                  CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                HAZEL ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                     FRANKLIN
                                                                                                 WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                        MAIN ST.
   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                     YO
                                                           HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Map LU-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ANNEXATION AREA
                              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Inland General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Boundary
                                                           HWY.
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                                                                       Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                          2   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #    Annexation Areas
                                                   HWY 1
Source: City of Fort Bragg
        July, 2012
                                                               SIMPSON LANE
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
For Schematic purposes only
A background report was prepared in 2002 that estimates the amount of new development that
would occur through 2012 given the land use designations and other policies and programs
included in this Inland General Plan and past development trends. However this level of
development was not achieved by 2012. The methodology for calculating the 2022 buildout
projection for this Inland General Plan Update follows:
x    The existing number of residential units is from the 2010 census.
x    The existing (2012) square footage of commercial and office development were derived
     from adding the square footage of space developed during the past ten years (56,000 SF) to
     the 2002 General Plan estimate of 1.5 million square feet.
x    The existing-2010 SF of industrial space was derived from aerial photos, but excludes the
     structurally unsound vacant industrial buildings on the Mill Site.
x    In 2008 the City reduced its sphere of influence to coincide with the spatial extent of the
     City’s water and sewer service areas. All development numbers for the SOI reflect this.
x    2022 estimates for new development are based on applying past development trends on a
     rational basis to the Inland General Plan area based on vacant land opportunities in the
     inland area. These past trends and allocation include:
        Over the past ten years, on average 15 new single family and ten multi-family units are
           built in the City per year. Projecting these past trends through 2022, roughly 250 new
           residential units would be developed throughout the City. However, only about 25% of
           these would be developed in the Inland Area because much of the Inland Area is
           developed and it has limited multi-family zoning.
        The City adds about 14,300 SF of commercial space per year. Thus through 2022,
           about 143,000 SF of commercial/retail would be built in the City as a whole. About
           30% of this development would occur in the Inland Area because it has one third of the
           commercial/office zoned property in Fort Bragg.
        The City adds about 100 hotel rooms every ten years, however there are no areas
           zoned for hotel uses in the Inland Area.
        The city adds approximately 20,000 SF of Industrial every ten years and about half of
           the light and heavy industrial zoned property in the City is in the Inland Area, so the
           Inland Area should see about 10,000 SF of new industrial through 2022.
Table LU-1 show 2010 levels of development in the City and its Sphere of Influence, and the
2022 development potential in the City, the Inland Area, and the SOI.
2 – Land Use Element                            2-7                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

TableLU1:City,SOI,InlandGeneralPlanArea2022BuildOutPotential
                                                                                  2022 New Construction,             2022 New Constrcution,
                                                    Existing2010                       Entire City               Inland General Plan Area
                                                                                      New            New               New            New
                                            CityExisting     SOIExisting     Construction    Construction     Construction     Construction
Use                                       Development        Development           inCity          inSOI        inInlandArea       inSOI
Residential(units)                            3,313               200               250               15                63              15
   SingleFamily&SecondUnits                 2,078               200               150               14                38              14
   Multifamily                                  1,235                 0               100               0                 25               0
Commercial/Office(SquareFeet)*            1,556,000               0             143,000             0               42,900             0
Industrial(SquareFeet)**                    316,000                0              20,000             0               10,000             0
Lodging(Rooms)                                 959                 15               100               0                  0               0
Sources:Census,2010,CityofFortBragg,2012.2002FortBraggGeneralPlan,LandUseElementTablesLU1andLU2,2004
*2010estimateforcommercial/officeincludes2002GeneralPlanestimateplusnewdevelopmentoverthepasttenyears
**2010estimateexcludesindustrialbuildingsontheMillSite,whichisbeingdecomissionedandredevelopedintononindustrialuses
K.           Goals, Policies and Programs
Using the Land Use Designations and Map
Goal LU-1                 Promote development and conservation of land in Fort Bragg according to
                          the pattern shown on the Land Use Designations Map.
Policy LU-1.1 Implementation of the Land Use Designations Map: Implement the Land Use
Designations Map by approving development and conservation projects consistent with the land
use designations, and ensure consistency between the Inland General Plan and the Inland
Land Use and Development Code.
             Program LU-1.1.1: Request that the County of Mendocino maintain or, if warranted,
             revise its General Plan in accordance with the land use designations of the Fort Bragg
             Inland General Plan for the area within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
Sphere of Influence
Goal LU-2                 Establish and maintain clear boundaries and guidelines for the future
                          expansion of Fort Bragg.
Policy LU-2.1 Boundaries of the Sphere of Influence: Retain the existing Sphere of Influence
boundaries, as shown on Map LU-2.
Policy LU-2.2 Sewer and Water Connections outside of the Municipal Service District
Boundary: Out-of-area service agreements may be approved for new connections to the
sanitary sewer system for development proposals that are located outside of the Municipal
Service District Boundary and that comply with the policy of the Municipal Improvement District
2 – Land Use Element                                                       2-8                                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

regarding projects that provide affordable housing per Resolution No. ID 230-2003, adopted on
December 8, 2003.
Policy LU-2.3 County Referrals: Request referrals from the County for all development projects
in the City’s Sphere of Influence which are under the jurisdiction of Mendocino County.
         Program LU-2.3.1: Follow agreed to procedures between the City and Mendocino
         County for project review within the Fort Bragg Sphere of Influence.
Policy LU-2.4 Annexation Standards: Require annexations to the City to meet all of the
following standards:
•        Areas annexed must be able to be served by existing City facilities and by facilities
         provided by other agencies, or by environmentally and economically feasible
         improvements to these facilities. Prior to City approval of an annexation application,
         findings shall be made indicating that: necessary public and private infrastructure to
         support the development is available, or that a development plan for extending or
         upgrading the infrastructure has been adopted, and that the annexation would not result
         in a substantial reduction or deterioration of public services and facilities, including
         streets, water supply, wastewater treatment, storm drainage facilities, fire, police,
         schools, and other public services and facilities.
•        Proposed annexations must be contiguous to existing developed areas. Annexation
         proposals that “leapfrog” over vacant and undeveloped land shall not be approved.
•        Based on a cost-revenue analysis, annexations shall have a cumulative net positive
         fiscal effect on the City within fifteen years of approval.     The fiscal analysis must
         demonstrate that annexed properties would generate sufficient City revenues to pay for
         ongoing services to the annexed area and infrastructure cost benefiting annexed area
         borne by City – such as public safety, road maintenance, street lighting, etc. To achieve
         this, property owner(s) may be required to establish Mello-Roos districts and/or other
         forms of benefit assessment districts as a condition of, and at the time of, annexation to
         the City.
•        All annexation applications shall include an environmental review document which
         provides full disclosure of any potential adverse environmental impacts. To the
         maximum extent possible, annexations that would result in significant environmental
         impacts will not be approved.
•        A development plan, including maps and text, showing how existing and proposed future
         development within the annexation area contributes to the attainment of Inland General
         Plan goals and policies, shall be submitted with an annexation application.
•        All proposed future development within an annexation area shall be consistent with the
         land use designations shown on the Land Use Designations Map and all other
         requirements of the Inland General Plan and the Fort Bragg Municipal Code.
•        A cost-revenue analysis is not required for parcels that are annexed by the City of Fort
         Bragg for public purposes.
2 – Land Use Element                           2-9                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program LU-2.4.1: Require a fiscal impact analysis of proposed annexations, at the
         applicant’s cost, as deemed appropriate by the City. The fiscal impact analysis shall
         include, at a minimum, the cost of providing City services on a per capita basis for
         residential projects, or per square foot of building for commercial and industrial projects,
         the impact on existing and future property owners, and a comparison of the potential
         revenues anticipated from the proposed annexation versus the cost to the City of
         providing services for a period of at least five years from the date of project completion.
         Program LU-2.4.2: Consider annexation requests allowing higher densities than those
         indicated on the Land Use Designations Map in the east Fort Bragg area when
         accompanied by a master plan showing dedications of land and/or funding mechanisms
         for public access trails, greenbelts, parkland and/or a ballfield complex in this area.
         The "east Fort Bragg" area is defined as the area between Pudding Creek and the Noyo
         River and east of the existing City limits.
Policy LU-2.5 Discourage Piecemeal Annexations: Discourage annexations of small, individual
parcels of land in a piecemeal fashion.
         Program LU-2.5.1: Consider revising the Inland Land Use and Development Code to
         establish a minimum area for an annexation request or a process for pre-approval of the
         annexation area by the City Council prior to accepting an annexation application as
         complete.
         Program LU-2.5.2: Annexation applications should include, to the maximum feasible
         extent, the entire annexation area as shown in Map LU-3: Annexation Areas.
         Annexation applications for smaller subareas may be allowed for parcels that are
         annexed by the City of Fort Bragg for public purposes and for projects that provide
         affordable housing consistent with the criteria established in Resolution No. ID 230-
         2003, adopted on December 8, 2003.
Commercial Land
The goals and policies in this section ensure that the Central Business District remains the
historic, civic, cultural, and commercial core of the community. There are also policies
encouraging mixed use and infill development to strengthen the other commercial areas of the
City. The Circulation and the Community Design Elements provide goals and policies
addressing parking, alleyways, and the overall appearance of commercial development.
Goal LU-3          Ensure that the Central Business District remains the historic, civic,
                   cultural, and commercial core of the community.
Policy LU-3.1 Central Business District: Retain and enhance the small-scale, pedestrian-
friendly, and historic character of the Central Business District (CBD).
         Program LU-3.1.1: Utilize City-owned land at City Hall and Bainbridge Park for historic
         and cultural uses, public assembly, and entertainment.
         Program LU-3.1.2: Residential uses are permitted only above the ground floor or at the
         rear of buildings on the ground floor.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 10                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Policy LU-3.2 Mixed Uses: Support mixed use development (i.e., a combination of residential
and commercial uses) in the Central Business District that does not conflict with the primary
retail function of this area.
Policy LU-3.3 Historic Buildings and Mixed Uses: In the Central Business District and in other
commercial areas with historic residential structures, encourage residential uses, mixed
residential, and commercial uses, and the preservation of historic structures.
Policy LU-3.4 Encourage Infill Development: Encourage infill development of vacant and
underdeveloped land in the Central Business District and adjacent commercial areas before
amending the Inland General Plan and rezoning to obtain additional commercial land
elsewhere.
Policy LU-3.5 Encourage Smart Growth: Locate new residential, commercial, or industrial
development within, contiguous with, or in close proximity to, existing developed areas.
Policy LU-3.6 Re-Use of Existing Buildings: Encourage the adaptive re-use and more complete
utilization of buildings in the Central Business District and other commercial districts.
         Program LU-3.6.1: Consider establishing incentives such as low-interest loans for
         rehabilitation and installation of fire sprinklers in buildings to encourage the reuse of
         upper floors of existing buildings in the Central Business District for housing, offices, and
         other uses.
Goal LU-4          Promote the economic vitality of the City’s existing commercial areas.
Policy LU-4.1 Formula Businesses and Big Box Retail: The location, scale, and appearance of
formula businesses and big box retail shall not detract from the economic vitality of established
commercial businesses, and shall be consistent with the small town, rural character of Fort
Bragg.
Policy LU-4.2 Large-Scale Commercial Development: To maintain scenic views along Main
Street and to ensure that building sizes at the City’s gateways are in scale with the community,
no commercial building shall exceed the following limitations on the gross floor area:
       a) between the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges - maximum 50,000 square feet
       b) east of Highway One and north of Pudding Creek Bridge - maximum 30,000 square
           feet
Policy LU-4.3 Standards for Commercial Uses in Residential Areas: Commercial uses in and
adjacent to residential areas shall not adversely affect the primarily residential character of the
area.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 11                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Recreation and Visitor-Serving Facilities
Fort Bragg serves as the regional service center for the Mendocino coast and many support
services needed for recreation and tourist-oriented businesses on the coast are located here.
No shortage of visitor-serving land use exists in the City.
Industrial Land
The lumber and fishing industries have played an important role in the formation and growth of
Fort Bragg. Both of these industries are in transition, and the local economy is evolving from a
natural resource-based economy to a more service-oriented economy. Fort Bragg is the
commercial, educational, medical, and professional service center for a large portion of the
Mendocino coast. Future growth in the local economy is projected to occur in the retail, tourism,
and service sectors.
The Inland General Plan is intended to support the growth and vitality of existing industries
while ensuring that the community is prepared to actively participate in the decision-making
process as new industries develop in Fort Bragg and as current industrial lands transition to
other uses.
Goal LU-5          Support industrial development which is consistent with the protection,
                   enhancement, and restoration of natural and scenic resources.
Policy LU-5.1 Siting New Industrial Development: Site new industrial development so that it is
contiguous with, or in close proximity to, existing developed areas able to accommodate it, or
where such areas are not able to accommodate it, in other areas with adequate public services
and where it will not have significant adverse effects on natural and scenic resources, either
individually or cumulatively.
Policy LU-5.2 Industrial Land Use Standards: Require that industrial development avoid or
minimize creating substantial pollution, noise, glare, dust, odor, or other significant adverse
impacts.
         Program LU-5.2.1: Continue to enforce, and revise as needed, Inland Land Use and
         Development Code standards with regard to noise, glare, dust, odor, and other
         potentially adverse impacts of industrial activity.
Residential Land
The residential neighborhoods of Fort Bragg are one of its most precious assets. Due to the
layout of the City, most residential neighborhoods are relatively separated from commercial,
retail, and industrial developments. Homes are typically located on local and collector streets,
rather than on the busier arterial streets, thereby minimizing the number of residents exposed to
heavy traffic and noise.
Many of the residences in Fort Bragg were built more than forty years ago and ongoing repair
and renovation are required to maintain these older homes. It is a priority of this Inland General
Plan to promote the preservation and rehabilitation of these older neighborhoods. Other
priorities include maintaining the character of existing residential areas and providing additional
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 12                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

areas for affordable housing, particularly for senior citizens. More detailed policies and
programs regarding housing and enhancing the quality of the City’s residential neighborhoods
are contained in the Housing and the Community Design Elements.
Goal LU-6          Provide adequate land to accommodate the housing needs of all income
                   groups.
Policy LU-6.1 Preserve Neighborhoods: Preserve and enhance the character of the City’s
existing residential neighborhoods.
         Program LU-7.1.1: Use the minimum density indicated by the Land Use Designations
         Map as a starting point when determining specific density for a residential project.
         Densities above the minimum may be achieved only through a combination of the
         following: excellence of design, provision of affordable housing, effective mitigation of
         environmental constraints and impacts, demonstrated ability to provide services, and
         compatibility with adjacent development.
2 – Land Use Element                         2 - 13                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

3.       PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
This Element is intended to identify essential public facilities, buildings, and services and to describe
policies and programs that will ensure that the existing and future population of Fort Bragg is provided
the best feasible level of public services and infrastructure. Although not required as a separate
Inland General Plan element, this element compiles the public facilities planning requirements of the
circulation, conservation, and open space elements in Government Code Section 65302.
B.       Water Supply and Distribution
                                                 The City's current water supply system consists of the
                                                 Newman Reservoir, the Simpson (Waterfall Gulch)
                                                 diversion, and a direct diversion in the Noyo River
                                                 (which includes a wet well in the Noyo River, a pump
                                                 station at the Noyo River, and various conveyances to
                                                 the water treatment plant.
                                                 The City currently obtains about 50 percent of its
                                                 water from the Noyo River.           Under its existing
                                                 temporary license, the City is entitled to draw up to
                                                 1,500 acre feet of water per year from the Noyo River
                                                 so long as withdrawals do not exceed 3.0 cubic feet
                                                 per second and specified amounts are maintained in
                                                 the river to meet the needs of the fish population. The
City's Water Permit limits how much water can be pumped from the Noyo River during drought
conditions. These limits were established by the State Department of Health Services because it
concluded that the City must ensure sufficient flows within the river necessary to support the fish
population. To comply with these Permit conditions, the City requires that new development
implement measures that limit new water demand. Additionally, the City is developing new water
storage facilities to ensure adequate water during severe drought years and to meet the needs of
future development in both the Inland Area and the Coastal Zone.
In 2010, the City produced 223 million gallons (685 acre feet) of water from its three sources or about
610,000 gallons per day. Of this water, 129 million gallons were used for residential purposes and 53
million gallons for commercial/industrial use. On a daily basis the City currently produces about 50
gallons/resident and 78 gallons/1,000 SF of commercial/industrial space. Residential development
within the Inland Area through 2022 is anticipated to include 63 new residential units (156 new
residents) which would require 7,8000 additional gallons of water per day; and 52,000 SF of new
commercial/industrial development which will require 4,000 gallons of water per day. In total all new
development proposed for the inland area will result in 12,000 additional gallons of demand, a 1.9
percent increase in water demand. The City currently has sufficient water supply and storage to meet
an 8% increase in water demand, and so could accommodate the additional growth in the Inland Area
without developing additional water storage. If the City constructs new 45 acre foot water storage
3 – Public Facilities Element                 3-1                                           November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

facility, the City would be able to accommodate upwards of 20% growth in water demand. New
development in the City will be required to pay its fair share of new water system improvements.
C.       Sewer System
                                       Sewage treatment and disposal are provided by the Fort Bragg
                                       Municipal Improvement District No. 1. The District is larger
                                       than the City; it includes the City’s Sphere of Influence. The
                                       District accepts septage from residences and businesses
                                       outside the City boundaries but within the District boundaries.
                                       Currently, the District facility serves residences and businesses
                                       within the City plus 102 septic tanks spread throughout the
                                       District.
                                       The treatment and disposal facility currently disposes of about
                                       640,000 gallons of treated wastewater per day (Average Dry
Weather Flow - ADWF). The projected increase in residential population in the Inland Area of about
63 residences will increase wastewater flows to the plant by about 9,500 gallons per day. The plant
has a rated capacity of 1,000,000 gallons per day ADWF which is sufficient to meet the demand of
the projected population increase. However, due to spikes in the inflow to the facility during wet
weather (caused by infiltration and inflow into the collection lines), the plant's wet weather capacity is
sometimes exceeded. The City has installed a new secondary digester at the plant and has made
additional improvements to the collection system to address infiltration and inflow problems. In 2011
the City closed down the primary digester for cleaning and maintenance. Until the necessary
improvements to the plant are fully funded and constructed, wet weather capacity at the plant will
continue to be limited. The District is able to meet projected wastewater treatment and disposal
demands.
Future development will pay its fair share of any additional improvements that are needed.
D.       Storm Drain System
The City’s "Drainage Facility Improvements and Drainage Fees" chapter (Chapter 12.14) of the City's
Municipal Code allows the City to review new development proposals and condition those proposals
to ensure that adequate on-site and off-site drainage is included in the development.
The priority storm drain improvements in the 2004 Master Plan have been implemented; although
there are additional problems identified in that report that still need to be addressed. In addition,
much of the area north of Pudding Creek, and south of the Noyo River generally do not have
improved drainage systems in place. Drainage in these areas is generally provided by natural
channels. New development will be required to pay for improvements necessary to ensure adequate
capacity within the storm drain system.
3 – Public Facilities Element                  3-2                                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

E.       Schools
Education in the area is provided by the Fort Bragg Unified School District. Within the Fort Bragg
Planning Area, the District operates two elementary schools (Dana Gray Elementary School and
Redwood Elementary School), one middle school (Fort Bragg Middle School), one high school (Fort
Bragg High School), one continuation high school (Noyo High School), and one adult school (Coastal
Adult School). The student capacity of the District's schools is 2,460 students. The history of student
enrollment is shown in Table PF-1 below.
                                                  TABLE PF-1
            ENROLLMENT AT FORT BRAGG UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT FACILITIES, 2010
            Type of          2002   2003    2004     2005  2006     2007     2008  2009 2010
            School
            Elementary       899    909     871      889     871     895      908   867   855
            Schools
            Middle            513    494     456      419    444     413      426   437   441
            School
            High              672    672     648      643    619     618      573   582   589
            School
            TOTAL           2,084  2,075   1,975    1,951  1,934   1,926    1,907 1,886 1,885
 Source: California Department of Education Educational Demographics Unit, 2011
Development through 2022 from throughout the City would generate approximately 84 additional
students. Given declining enrollment, the District believes it will have capacity for these students
within existing school buildings. The 84 additional students would result in fewer students than
District schools housed in 1992. In addition, there is no guarantee that District enrollment would
actually increase by 562 students, as predicted in the 2002 General Plan EIR. Given recent declines
in enrollment, it is possible that the student enrollment from existing residences in the District would
continue to decline so that the student population in 2011 may be less than 84 new students. The
District currently receives developer mitigation fees of $2.24 per square foot for new residential
construction and $0.36 per square foot for new nonresidential construction. These fees are used to
develop additional classrooms and to repair or renovate existing schools.
F.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goal PF-1            Ensure that new development is served by adequate public services and
                     infrastructure.
Policy PF-1.1 Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for New Development: Review new
development proposals to ensure that the development can be served with adequate potable water;
wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical
response; police protection; transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal.
Policy PF-1.2: All new development proposals shall be reviewed and conditioned to ensure that
adequate public services and infrastructure can be provided to the development without substantially
reducing the services provided to existing residents and businesses.
3 – Public Facilities Element                        3-3                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program PF-1.2.1: New development shall be responsible for any improvements or
         extensions of infrastructure or the service capacity necessary to serve the development.
Policy PF-1.3 Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for Annexations: Review annexation
requests to ensure that the area can be served with adequate potable water; wastewater collection,
treatment, and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical response; police protection;
transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal. See also Policy LU-2.4 regarding
annexations.
Goal PF-2            Assure that the City's infrastructure is maintained and expanded to meet the
                     needs of the City's residents and growing population.
Policy PF-2.1 Development Pays its Share: Require that new development pay its share of capital
improvements and the cost of public services to maintain adequate levels of service.
         Program PF-2.1.1: Maintain development impact and mitigation fees at a level adequate to
         finance development’s proportional share of infrastructure costs. Periodically review the City’s
         Development Impact Fee structure to ensure that development pays its fair share of
         infrastructure and capital improvement costs.
         Program PF-2.1.2: Consider requiring property owners seeking annexation approval to enter
         into a pre-annexation agreement stating that they will not oppose assessment districts,
         including lighting and street maintenance districts.
Policy PF-2.2 Potable Water Capacity: Develop long-term solutions regarding the supply, storage,
and distribution of potable water and develop additional supplies.
         Program PF-2.2.1: Maintain and update a Water System Master Plan and identify capital
         improvements required to meet anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.2: Monitor, on an ongoing basis, the capacity of the potable water system in
         relation to the anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.3: Evaluate, and periodically adjust as appropriate, water capital
         improvement installation and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing water service and
         increasing capacity.
         Program PF-2.2.4: Pursue all available sources of revenue to fund the maintenance and
         expansion of the City’s water system.
         Program PF-2.2.5: Continue to encourage water conservation techniques and water
         conserving fixtures in all new development projects.
         Program PF-2.2.6: Develop a program to encourage and allow the safe use of graywater and
         rainwater capture and reuse.
         Program PF-2.2.7: Obtain a permanent license for the water rights initially permitted to the
         City by the State Division of Water Rights in 1956.
         Program PF-2.2.8: Improve the pressure in the water system lines to meet State standards.
3 – Public Facilities Element                   3-4                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Policy PF-2.3 Emergency Water Supply:            Develop an emergency water supply for disaster
preparedness.
         Program PF-2.3.1: Provide a means for obtaining and treating water from Pudding Creek or
         the Noyo River for emergency disaster situations only, if allowed by the State and if deemed
         feasible.
Policy PF-2.4: Potable Water Quality: Maintain the safety of the water supply.
         Program PF-2.4.1: Continue to maintain the water collection, treatment, and distribution
         system to ensure compliance with all State requirements for a public drinking water system.
         Program PF-2.4.2: Provide security and protection for the watersheds and water storage and
         treatment facilities with monitoring, appropriate notices, physical barriers, and protective
         devices as well as land use policies and controls.
         Program PF-2.4.3: Develop long range management and improvement programs for the
         watersheds. These plans should include management practices and methods of protecting
         the water source from degradation.
Policy PF-2.5 Wastewater: Review wastewater capacity and expansion plans as needed when
regulations change and as the treatment and disposal facility nears capacity.
         Program PF-2.5.1: Periodically update the City’s Wastewater System Master Plan.
         Program PF-2.5.2: Continue to improve the wastewater treatment and disposal facility to
         comply with changing State requirements.
         Program PF-2.5.3: Upgrade wastewater collector lines in areas where there is inadequate
         capacity or where lines are subject to substantial infiltration and inflow.
         Program PF-2.5.4: Evaluate and periodically adjust, as appropriate, wastewater capital
         improvement, installation, and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing wastewater
         collection, treatment, and disposal service and increasing capacity.
Policy PF-2.6 Storm Drainage: Annually review storm drain system capacity and expansion plans.
See Policies OS-6.1 through OS-6.5 for Low Impact Design requirements for new development.
         Program PF-2.6.1: Continue to implement, and update as needed, the Storm Drain Master
         Plan and the improvements itemized in the Capital Improvement Plan.
         Program PF-2.6.2:       Periodically adjust, as appropriate, drainage capital improvement
         installation fees to reflect the actual cost of providing drainage service and increasing
         capacity.
Policy PF-2.7 Public Buildings: Ensure that public buildings in the City are adequate to provide
services for the community.
3 – Public Facilities Element                  3-5                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program PF-2.7.1:      Provide for relocation or upgrading of essential public buildings as
         necessary.
Policy PF-2.8 Capital Improvement Plan: Continually update the Capital Improvement Plan to
ensure that it identifies capital projects necessary to maintain adequate levels of performance as well
as funding sources for all phases of intended projects.
Policy PF-2.9 Schools: Work with the Fort Bragg Unified School District to ensure that the District
has the means to provide a high quality education to City students.
         Program PF-2.9.1: Work with the School District to address anticipated deficits between the
         cost of constructing necessary new schools or renovating existing schools and the revenues
         generated by developer fees. Where a clear nexus can be shown between the impacts of a
         new development and the need for new school facilities, the City shall consider the need for
         additional project mitigation to be provided by project developers to the degree allowed by
         State law.
                                                 City Hall
3 – Public Facilities Element                  3-6                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

4.       CONSERVATION, OPEN SPACE, AND PARKS ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element of the Inland General Plan combines two
State-mandated elements, Conservation and Open Space. It also includes policies and
programs addressing water quality, public access, and recreation.
Open space is defined by Government Code Section 65561 as “any area of land or water which
is essentially unimproved and devoted to open space use and which is designated on local,
regional or a State open space plan for the preservation of natural resources, the managed
production of resources, outdoor recreation, or for public health and safety." Fort Bragg’s open
space includes lands which are publicly-owned and operated for active or passive recreational
use and land which is in private ownership but is either undeveloped or managed for the
protection and enhancement of natural resources. Open space in Fort Bragg provides for
recreational uses, scenic and aesthetic resources, and habitat preservation.
The City wishes to preserve as much open space as feasible to provide habitat for native species
of plants and wildlife, reduce sprawl, and maintain the aesthetic benefits of undeveloped land.
The City also wishes to conserve natural resources and provide its residents with a full range of
recreational opportunities. The goals, policies, and programs of this Element address these aims
by establishing the framework for the protection and enhancement of natural resources, the
environment, and open space and for the provision of recreational opportunities for Fort Bragg
residents and visitors.
The EIR for the General Plan contains a full description of the natural resources, parks, trails,
and recreational facilities existing within the Planning Area. The EIR also contains a full
description of natural resources occurring within the Planning Area. See Map OS-2 for a
depiction of rivers, creeks, riparian habitats and land which can contribute to groundwater
recharge and stormwater management. Map OS-2 is illustrative, as most areas of the City can
accommodate ground water recharge and assist in storm water management. Please see Map
OS-1 for a depiction of existing parks and recreational facilities.
B.       Goals, Policies and Programs
C.       Conservation & Natural Resources
Goal OS-1          Preserve areas with important biotic resources.
Policy OS-1.1 Special Review Areas: Areas in the City containing watercourses, wetlands,
sensitive plant and wildlife habitat, and forested land shall be designated as Special Review
Areas.
Sensitive plant and wildlife habitat include: all species that appear on Federal lists of
endangered, threatened, rare, and candidate species and plant and animal species designated
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element 4-1                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife as species of special concern or their current
equivalent (G1, G2, S1 and S2 listed plants).
Policy OS-1.2 Preserve Natural Resources: Require that sensitive natural resources in Special
Review Areas be preserved and protected to the maximum degree feasible.
         Program OS-1.2.1: Review projects requesting discretionary approvals to determine
         whether the project is located in an area with potentially sensitive natural resources.
Policy OS-1.3 Biological Report Required for Special Review Areas: Permit applications for
development within or adjacent to Special Review Areas which have the possibility of containing
sensitive habitat shall include a biological report prepared by a qualified biologist which identifies
the resources and provides recommended measures to ensure that the requirements of CEQA,
the Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the City of Fort Bragg’s Inland General Plan are fully
met. The required content of the biological report is specified in the Inland Land Use and
Development Code.
Policy OS-1.4 Maintain Open Space: Require site planning and construction to maintain
adequate open space to permit effective wildlife corridors for animal movement between open
spaces.
Goal OS-2:        Encourage Native Plants and Discourage Non-Native Invasive Plants &
Trees
Policy OS-2.1 Native Landscaping: All development shall be conditioned to require that 50% of
all plantings are native plants and shall prohibit the planting of any plant species that is (a) listed
as problematic and/or invasive by the California Invasive Plant Council, and/or by the State of
California, or (b) listed as a ‘noxious weed’ by the State of California or the U.S. Federal
Government.
                                              Native Landscaping
Policy OS-2.2 Prohibit Invasive Species: Condition development projects requiring discretionary
approval to prohibit the planting of any species of broom, pampas grass, gorse, or other species
of invasive non-native plants deemed undesirable by the City.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element  4-2                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Map OS-1
                                                                                     Y1
                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                            ROAD
     N
                                                              Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                k
                                                               ELM ST.
                                                               SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK          RD.
                                                                                                                                BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                PINE STREET
                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LN.
                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                  McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                 LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DENNISON LANE
                                                                           STREET
  Oce
                                                                                                                            REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                    FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                ALDER STREET
      an
                                                                           MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K TERR                                                    SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CT.
                                                                                                                                MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                                     HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                    WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                  CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                HAZEL ST.
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                     FRANKLIN
                                                                                                 WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                        MAIN ST.
   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Map OS-1
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                           HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                              EXISTING AND PROPOSED
                                                                                                                                                                                         PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                                                           HWY.
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Existing School Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                                                                       Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                          2   0                                                      Existing Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Parks Under Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proposed Parks (1)
                                                   HWY 1                                                                                                                                                            (1) identifies the general area where new parks
Source: City of Fort Bragg
        July, 2012                                                                                                                                                                                                  should be located.
                                                               SIMPSON LANE
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
For Schematic purposes only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Map OS -2
                                                                 Y1
                                                                HW
                                                                                                            AIRPORT                            ROAD
  N
                                          Pudding
                                                                                                 Cr   ee
                                                                                                            k
                                           ELM ST.
                                           SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK         RD.
                                                                                                            BUSH ST.
                                                                                                            FIR STREET
                                                                                                            PINE STREET
                                                                                                 STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LN.
                                                                STREET
                                                                              McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                             LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DENNISON LANE
                                                       STREET
Oce
                                                                                                        REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                            ALDER STREET
    an
                                                       MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            K TERR                                                   SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CT.
                                                                                                            MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                 HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                        WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                              LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                      MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                              CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                            HAZEL ST.
                                                                 STREET
                                                                            CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                 FRANKLIN
                                                                             WALNUT                             ST.
                                                    MAIN ST.
Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OS -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rivers, Streams, Flood Corridors,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Riparian Habitats, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 areas for Water Recharge
                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                            VE
                                                                                                                                          RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Boundary
                                                                                                                 YO
                                       HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coastal Zone Boundary
          OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Open Space
                                       HWY.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wetlands, Rivers Streams
                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Areas for Water Recharge
                                                                                                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                                                                   Y.
                                                                                                                                                                      2   0
                               HWY 1
                                           SIMPSON LANE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Source: City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             July, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
                                                                                                                                                                                                             For Schematic purposes only
         Program OS-2.2.1: Require that Caltrans, PG&E, the County of Mendocino, and private
         property owners remove pampas grass and broom from their properties and rights-of-
         way. The City shall strive to remove these plants from City-owned property and rights-of-
         way.
         Program OS-2.2.2: Encourage the removal of non-native invasive trees where feasible,
         such as Monterey Cypress, Monterey Pine and Eucalyptus, and prohibit planting of non-
         native invasive tree species in new development.
Policy OS-2.3 Preserve Native Vegetation and Trees: To the maximum extent feasible and
balanced with permitted use, require that site planning, construction, and maintenance of
development preserve existing healthy trees and native vegetation on the site.
Policy OS-2.4 Forested Areas: Maintain existing forested areas and reforest parks and
streetscapes with new trees as needed. Projects proposed in forested areas are required to
meet the requirements of the Special Review Areas.
         Program OS-2.4.1: Establish a tree planting and replacement program to assure
         continuing stands of trees throughout the City.
         Program OS-2.4.2: Consider adopting a street tree program.
Goal OS-3          Protect and preserve soil as a natural resource.
Policy OS-3.1 Soil Erosion: Minimize soil erosion to prevent loss of productive soils, prevent
flooding and landslides, and maintain infiltration capacity and soil structure.
Goal OS-4          Protect and Preserve Cultural Resources.
Policy OS-4.1 Preserve Archaeological Resources: New development shall be located and/or
designed to avoid archaeological and paleontological resources where feasible, and where new
development would adversely affect archaeological or paleontological resources, reasonable
mitigation measures shall be required.
D.       Water Quality
Goal OS-5          Protect, enhance, and restore riparian areas and wetlands.
Policy OS-5.1 Streams and Creeks: To the maximum extent feasible, preserve, protect, and
restore streams and creeks to their natural state.
         Program OS-5.1.1: Work with organizations and private property owners to enhance the
         City’s watercourses for habitat preservation and recreation.
         Program OS-5.1.2: Develop additional guidelines for the maintenance of watercourses to
         further assure that native vegetation is not unnecessarily removed and that maintenance
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element  4-3                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         minimizes disruption of wildlife breeding activities and wildlife movement. Incorporate
         these guidelines, where appropriate, into the City's maintenance procedures.
         Program OS-5.1.3: Seek Federal and State funding for the repair of streambank erosion,
         planting of riparian vegetation to stabilize creek banks, and removal of debris obstructing
         waterflow.
Policy OS-5.2 Riparian Habitat: Prevent development from destroying riparian habitat to the
maximum feasible extent. Preserve, enhance, and restore existing riparian habitat in new
development unless the preservation will prevent the establishment of all permitted uses on the
property.
Policy OS-5.3 No Net Loss of Wetlands: Ensure no net loss of wetlands, as defined by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
Policy OS-5.4 Protect Aquifers: Protect groundwater aquifers.
                                                                             Otis Johnson Park Creek
Goal OS-6          Improve water quality.
Policy OS-6.1 Pollution in Runoff: Ensure protection of water
resources from pollution and sedimentation.
Policy OS-6.2 Minimize Introduction of Pollutants: Development
shall be designed and managed to minimize the introduction of
pollutants into estuaries, wetlands, rivers and streams to the
extent feasible.
Policy OS-6.3 Minimize Increases in Stormwater Runoff:
Development shall be designed and managed to minimize post-
project increases in stormwater runoff volume and peak runoff
rate, to the extent feasible.
         Program OS-6.3.1: Develop and implement Low Impact
         Development requirements in the Inland Land Use and Development Code. Remove
         regulatory barriers to Low Impact Development from the Inland LUDC where feasible.
Policy OS-6.4 Maintain and Restore Biological Productivity and Water Quality: Development
shall maintain and, where feasible, restore the biological productivity and the quality of streams
and wetlands to maintain optimum populations of aquatic organisms and for the protection of
human health.
Policy OS-6.5 Municipal Activities to Protect and Restore Water Quality: The City shall promote
both the protection and restoration of water quality. Water quality degradation can result from a
variety of factors, including but not limited to the introduction of pollutants, increases in runoff
volume and rate, generation of non-stormwater runoff, and alteration of physical, chemical, or
biological features of the landscape.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4-4                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program OS-6.5.1: Water Quality Public Education and Outreach. The City shall
         continue to encourage public outreach and education about the water quality impacts of
         development.
         Program OS-6.5.2: BMPS for Municipal Maintenance Activities. The City shall ensure
         that municipal maintenance activities and other public projects integrate appropriate
         BMPs to protect water quality.
Goal OS-7          Improve air quality.
Policy OS-7.1 Participate in Regional Planning to Improve Air Quality: Continue to cooperate
with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District (MCAQMD) in implementing the
Regional Clean Air Plan.
         Program OS-7.1.1: Add a City representative to the Board of MCAQMD.
Policy OS-7.2 Air Quality Standards: Seek to comply with State and Federal standards for air
quality.
         Program OS-7.2.1: Review new project proposals for consistency with MCAQMD
         regulations and guidelines.
         Program OS-7.2.2: Work with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District to
         ensure that all new industrial projects include Best Available Control Technologies
         (BACTs) to control emissions of air pollutants to the maximum extent permitted by law.
         Program OS-7.2.3: Require that proposed new asphalt plants undergo an air quality
         analysis that includes analysis of emissions, dispersion modeling, risk analysis, and
         mitigation required to reduce pollution and risk.
         Program OS-7.2.4: Prohibit unpaved driveways of more than 50 feet and unpaved roads
         in all new development.
F.       Open Space
There are three categories of open space in the Fort Bragg Planning Area: 1) publicly-owned
land, such as Noyo Headlands Park, Pomo Bluffs Park, and MacKerricher State Park; 2)
dedicated land, which is privately-owned and maintained and has a recorded open space or
conservation easement; and 3) land which has a prescriptive easement permitting public use.
Goal OS-8          Conserve and enhance a variety of open space features including creeks,
                   wildlife habitats, scenic view corridors, and other amenities.
Policy OS-8.1 Open Space: Plan for and condition new development to implement the City’s
priorities for open space.
         Program OS-8.1.1: Use conservation easements wherever possible to protect
         environmentally sensitive open space areas.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4-5                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program OS-8.1.2: Continue to work with local and regional agencies and interest
         groups, in conjunction with the Mendocino Coast Recreation and Park District Master
         Plan, to develop an open space preservation strategy.
         Program OS-8.1.3:         Develop additional standards in the Inland Land Use and
         Development Code for public access to open space areas.
         Program OS-8.1.4: Revise the LUDC to make public open space and public access ways
         and trails to public parklands a permitted use in all land use and zoning designations.
         Program OS-8.1.5: Facilitate the acceptance of Offers to Dedicate (OTDs) as a means of
         obtaining additional public access.
         Program OS-8.1.6 City Circuit and Coastal Trails: Develop a continuous trail system
         throughout the City which connects to the California Coastal Trail system.
Policy OS-8.2 Protect and Restore Open Space: During the development review process, protect
and restore open space areas such as wildlife habitats, view corridors, and watercourses as
open and natural.
         Program OS-8.2.1: Require that projects on parcels five acres or larger requesting a
         rezoning to a higher density include dedications for open space or parkland.
         Program OS-8.2.2: Maintain an inventory of vacant parcels that could potentially be
         purchased and developed as public open space (parks, community gardens, trails, etc.)
Policy OS-8.3 Trails in Open Space: Wherever feasible, plan and construct trails through the
greenbelts and open space that connect to the City’s trail system with those of State Parks and
MCRPD.
                                              Pomo Bluffs Park
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element    4-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

G.       PARKS AND RECREATION
Goal OS- 9         Provide an attractive system of parks and recreation facilities throughout
                   the City to meet the needs of all age groups and capabilities.
Policy OS-9.1 Parkland Standard: Use the standard of three acres of parkland per 1,000
residents for the acquisition of additional parkland pursuant to the provisions of the Quimby Act
(Government Code Section 66477).
         Program OS-9.1.1: Establish and update periodically a Park and Open Space
         Development Impact Fee.
Policy OS-9.2 Neighborhood Parks: Acquire and develop new neighborhood parks, in concert
with other local recreation agencies, to meet the needs of the existing population and consistent
with growth of the City's population.
         Program OS-9.2.1: Acquire and develop additional neighborhood parks as shown on
         Map OS-1.
Policy OS-9.3 Recreational Facilities: Provide recreational facilities to meet the needs of all Fort
Bragg citizens, especially children and teenagers.
         Program OS-9.3.1: Consider teen recreation needs when planning new or redesigned
         parks.
         Program OS-9.3.2: Work with other agencies to develop an inventory of recreational
         facilities and programs available to young people. Seek to implement joint programs and
         identify additional facilities that are necessary to meet the recreational needs of youth.
Policy OS-9.4 Playground Facilities:             Add or upgrade playground facilities at existing
neighborhood parks.
         Program OS-9.4.1: Provide additional playground facilities and basketball courts at
         appropriate locations within neighborhoods.
Policy OS-9.5 Ballfields: Develop additional baseball, softball, and other ballfields.
         Program OS-9.5.1: Include in the proposed new east Fort Bragg neighborhood park
         shown on Map OS-1 baseball, softball, and possibly other ballfields, and consider
         building additional fields wherever feasible.
         Program OS-9.5.2: Work with the School District and other agencies to develop
         additional sports field facilities.
Policy OS-9.6 Prioritize Park Acquisitions: Use the following criteria to prioritize acquisition of
parkland and open space:
         a)       distribution of neighborhood parks/playground facilities and ballfields on a
                  neighborhood basis;
         b)       scenic beauty;
         c)       relationship to the existing and proposed trail systems and parks;
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element      4-7                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         d)       natural resource protection; and
         e)       appropriateness (physical characteristics) of the site to meet specific recreational
                  needs.
         Program OS-9.6.1: Consider the acquisition of strategically located vacant lots for the
         development of neighborhood parks using the criteria listed in Policy OS-9.6.
         Program OS-9.6.2: Adopt a management plan that analyzes geoseismic and other
         related potential hazards before City acceptance of dedications of land for park or open
         space. Identified hazards shall be fully repaired and/or financial protection provided to
         the City for liability before acceptance of land. The management plan shall also specify
         funding for ongoing maintenance.
Policy OS-9.7 Financing Parks: Consider methods of increasing revenues for the acquisition
and development of parkland and open space areas and supporting recreational facilities.
         Program OS-9.7.1: Consider the following potential funding sources for the acquisition of
         park and trails and development of recreation facilities:
         a)       Establish a Park Improvement Fee pursuant to Government Code Section 66000;
         b)       Place an advisory measure on the ballot for a tax proposal or assessment; and/or
         c)       Pursue available grants.
         Unlike the Quimby Act that is limited to subdivisions, the Park Improvement Fee could be
         applied to a larger variety of residential development applications.
         Program OS-9.7.2: Include in the Capital Improvement Program the schedule and costs
         of expanding and improving the City’s parks and recreation facilities as deemed
         appropriate by the City Council.
Goal OS-10         Develop park and recreation facilities with the coordination of other
                   agencies and the public.
Policy OS-10.1 Coordinate with Other Agencies: Coordinate with other governmental entities to
procure and develop additional park and recreational facilities.
         Program OS-10.1.1: Consider establishing joint powers agreements with the Mendocino
         Coast Recreation and Parks District (MCRPD), Fort Bragg Unified School District
         (FBUSD), and Mendocino County to coordinate planning and development of recreation
         facilities.
Policy OS-10.2 MacKerricher State Park: Continue to coordinate with State Department of Parks
and Recreation regarding development adjacent to MacKerricher State Park.
         Program OS-10.2.1: Require that new development east of the Old Haul Road minimizes
         access to the Old Haul Road, establishes a minimum 30-foot setback from the Old Haul
         Road, and, if approved by State Parks, closes any unofficial trails leading from the
         project's frontage across MacKerricher State Park.
         Program OS-10.2.2: In reviewing development applications adjacent to MacKerricher
         State Park, the City shall confer with the State Department of Parks and Recreation to
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element    4-8                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         determine if additional mitigation measures regarding access to the park, or protection of
         park resources, are warranted. If feasible, these additional measures will be required.
Policy OS-10.3 City/School/Recreation District Cooperation:                  Continue to encourage
City/School/Recreation District cooperation in developing and maintaining park and recreation
facilities.
         Program OS-10.3.1: Develop joint use agreements with the School District.
         Program OS-10.3.2: Continue to cooperate with the FBUSD, MCRPD, and Timberwolf
         Stadium to develop playfield improvements and maintenance programs.
Policy OS-10.4 Public Participation: Actively solicit public participation in the selection, design,
and facilities planning for existing and future park sites.
         Program OS-10.4.1: Utilize local volunteer efforts and fund-raising to cover the "match"
         costs needed to secure rehabilitation or purchase grants for public parks.
Goal OS-11         Provide a comprehensive trail system in Fort Bragg.
Policy OS-11.1 Multiple Use Trail System: Develop a multiple use trail system.
         Program OS-11.1.1: Identify potential additions to the trail system which increase access
         to rivers with cross linkages through to the eastern parts of Fort Bragg. Work with the
         MCRPD to seek funding and to acquire rights-of-way.
         Program OS-11.1.2: Establish an integrated trail system serving inland hiking and trail
         needs utilizing existing rights-of-way, City streets, and river front property.
         Program OS-11.1.3: Review development applications and require a trail easement
         dedication, where an appropriate nexus is established.
         Program OS-11.1.4: Require new development to provide direct pedestrian connections,
         such as sidewalks, trails, and other rights-of-way to the existing and planned network of
         parks and trails wherever feasible.
         Program OS-11.1.5: Review development applications to ensure that new development
         does not block proposed trail easements shown on Map OS-1.
         Program OS-11.1.6: Consider the access needs of a variety of users, including school-
         age children, the elderly, and those with handicaps or disabilities when developing trails
         and recreation facilities.
         Program OS-11.1.7: Pursue development of a trail through east Fort Bragg.
         Program OS-11.1.8: Consider completing a feasibility study for the development of a
         pedestrian bridge over Pudding Creek.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4-9                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                    Otis R. Johnson Wilderness Park
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4 - 10              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

5.       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
Government Code Section 65302[b] requires that every General Plan include a Circulation
Element which consists of "the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all
correlated with the Land Use Element of the Plan."
Government Code Section 65302[b] also requires all jurisdictions to plan for an integrated multi-
modal transportation network of complete streets in their General Plan. Complete streets are
designed for the needs of all users regardless of age or ability or whether they are driving,
walking, bicycling, or taking transit. Complete streets are designed and operated to enable safe
access for all users. Pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and transit riders of all ages and abilities
must be able to safely move along and across a complete street.
The Circulation Element discusses multi-modal transportation issues for the Fort Bragg
Planning Area; it briefly describes the existing multi-modal circulation system and travel
characteristics and projects future traffic and multi-modal transportation challenges based on
the land uses and growth projections described in the Land Use Element. Policies and
programs contained in this element provide a guide for decisions regarding multi-modal
transportation system improvements to accommodate Fort Bragg's anticipated growth. Detailed
description and analysis of Fort Bragg’s transportation system are contained in the Draft EIR.
The main objectives of the Circulation Element are to:
     •   Support the efficient and safe circulation of people, goods, energy, water, sewage, storm
         drainage and communications;
     •   Plan for the balanced multi-modal transportation network that meets the needs of all
         users of the circulation system, including: bicyclists, children, persons with disabilities,
         motorists, movers of commercial goods, pedestrians, public transit users, and seniors;
     •   Ensure that Fort Bragg’s circulation network accommodates anticipated development;
     •   Minimize the intrusion of through-traffic onto local streets; and
     •   Provide improvements to the transportation system which complement and support the
         other goals of this General Plan.
B.       Existing Conditions
1.       Roadway Classifications
The street system in Fort Bragg is laid out in a grid pattern with Main Street (Highway One)
functioning as the primary north-south roadway. Franklin Street is located one block east of
Main Street and provides access along the main commercial corridor. A number of streets,
including Cypress Street, Chestnut Street, Oak Street, Redwood Avenue, Pine Street, and Elm
Street provide east-west connections. Streets in Fort Bragg are classified according to their
function as defined and shown in Table C-1 and Map C-1: Existing Roadway System.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 -1                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                   The Roadway Classification System
Highway:               A high-speed, limited access roadway serving primarily regional and county-wide
                      travel. California State Department of Transportation (Caltrans) controls the design,
                      operation, and maintenance of highways. Fort Bragg does not have any limited
                      access roadways.
Arterial:              A medium-speed, medium capacity roadway that provides travel and access within
                      the City and access to highways. Main Street (Highway One) and Highway 20 are
                      considered arterial roadways.
Major Collector:      A relatively low-speed, street that provides access within and between
                      neighborhoods. Major Collectors usually serve short trips and are intended for
                      collecting trips from local streets and distributing them to Arterial streets.
Minor Collector:      A relatively low-speed street that provides a connection between Arterials and Major
                      Collectors and direct access to parcels. They handle a lower volume of traffic than
                      Major Collectors.
Local Street:          A low-speed, low-volume street that provides access to adjacent land. Local streets
                      are designed for trips within neighborhoods and to Collector and Arterial streets, and
                      not to serve through-traffic.
                                              Table C-1
                              Fort Bragg Roadway Classification
           Roadway Classification                             Location
           Arterials
           Main Street (Highway 1)                            Full Length
           Highway 20                                         Full Length
           Major Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Main Street to Franklin Street
           Franklin Street                                    Full Length
           Redwood Avenue                                     Main Street to Harold Street
           Oak Street                                         Alley West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Minor Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Franklin Street to Dana Street
           Maple Street                                       Main Street to Lincoln Street
           Alder Street                                       Main Street to Harold Street
           Laurel Street                                      Block West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Pine Street                                        Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Fir Street                                         Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Elm Street                                         Glass Beach Drive to Franklin Street
           McPherson Street                                   Chestnut Street to Bush Street
           Harrison Street                                    Walnut Street to Bush Street
           Harold Street                                      Maple Street to Fir Street
           Lincoln Street                                     Chestnut Street to Willow Street
           Sanderson Way                                      Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Dana Street                                        Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Cypress Street                                     Full Length
           South Harbor Drive                                 Full Length
           South Street                                       Main Street to River Drive
           Local Streets
           All remaining streets will be considered local streets.
5 – Circulation Element                              5 -2                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                             Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                 Neptun
                                                                                                                                                                   p e                 Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                          Ocean
                                                                                                                                             Pacific                                   Drive
                                        S
                                             r
                                          ho                                               Bayview Avenue
                                                                                                   Ave                                                                    View
                                              e lin
                                                      n.                                                                                                                          Monterey Av .
                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                   eL
                       Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                          Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                  Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                       Ro
                   Coas t          H ig h w                     ad
          O ld                                ay
                                                                                 Ha
                                                                                      re                                                                                          Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                                                                  Harbo                      Avenu
                                                                                                                                                                                                              venu
                                                                                                                                                                                                               e ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S t ew
                                       Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rn                                                                       Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ce               Elm St
Simpson                                                                                        Creekk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                       Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o   ad
                                                                                                                                             V ie w Boat Yard r .                 an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                              D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Myr                                                                                                                                St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tl e St            S ou                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .      th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in                                                               Airpor t
e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bush St                                                                              dd
             Hare Creek Terrac                 e                                                                                                                                                                                   Haz       dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d St                     S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                   Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t                                      C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cr
                                                                          Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                         re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                  Highway
                                                                                                                    g   y 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Highway   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            John
                       e
                       ek   C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hyman
                                                                                       Babcock Lan                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                          Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ota Avenu e                                                                                                                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Petaluma                                A             v                                            Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Johnson
                                                                         Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                   Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                    Cr
                                                                                                                      re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                 Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Johnson   Ln   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Map C-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lane
          Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stree t
                                                   Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Denniso n
          Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                        Benson
                                                                                                                                                        Benso                                                       W i n d in g
                                                                Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                              Camille
          Sears Lan     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                         Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                             W ay
                                                                                                                                                             Hanso n                                        Roa d
                                                                                                                                                       Lan
                                                                                                                                                        a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Puddin g
          A nd r e a               W ay
          Lahmon Lan           e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Monsen Wa y
          Tex-Mon t                                                                               Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                              Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d
                                                                           Benson                           Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EXISTING ROADWAY SYSTEM
                                                                Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Road
                                               S ummers
                                                                                                                               Ro
                                                                                                                                    ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Arterial                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Minor Collector   Major Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Coastal Zone Boundary
 2.        Roadway Level of Service Standards
 Level of Service (LOS) standards provide a qualitative indicator based on a quantitative analysis
 of the functional capacity of a roadway or intersection. LOS standards describe the relative
 ease or congestion of traffic movement on a roadway or at an intersection. LOS "A" represents
 free flow conditions and LOS "F" represents jammed conditions where traffic flow is at or over
 the capacity of the roadway and consequently moves very slowly. Table C-2 below explains in
 more detail the LOS concept. LOS is normally used to describe peak-hour conditions.
                                                  Table C-2
                                        Level of Service Definitions
 Level of Service         Description                                                            V/C Ratio*
 Free Flowing             Relatively free-flow. No restrictions to vehicle maneuverability or     0.00-0.60
 LOS A                    speed. Very slight delay.
 Minimal Delays           Stable Flow. Some slight reduction in maneuverability and speed.        0.61-0.70
 LOS B                    Vehicle platoons form. This is a suitable level of operation for rural
                          design. Slight delay
 Acceptable Delays        Stable flow operation. Higher volumes. More restrictions on             0.71-0.80
 LOS C                    maneuverability and speed. Acceptable delay.
 Tolerable Delays         Approaching unstable flow operation. Queues develop. Little freedom     0.81-0.90
 LOS D                    to maneuver. Tolerable delays for short periods.
 Significant Delays       Unstable flow or operation. Low operating speed; momentary              0.91-1.00
 LOS E                    stoppages.     This condition is not uncommon in peak hours.
                          Congestion and intolerable delays.
 Excessive Delays         Forced flow or operation. There are many stoppages. The highway           1.00+
 LOS F                    acts as a vehicle storage area. Jammed. Gridlock.
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, HRB Special Report 87.
 C.        Existing and Projected Traffic Patterns
 Fort Bragg is built along Highway One which is also called Main Street within the City. Highway
 One is the only continuous north-south road serving the north coast of Mendocino County,
 providing a local transportation corridor for many communities and the primary access route for
 visitors. Traffic volumes on this roadway have increased steadily over the years.
 Traffic into and out of Fort Bragg is constrained by the capacity of two bridges: Hare Creek and
 Pudding Creek, and by the two-lane (i.e., one through lane in each direction) roadway sections
 along Highway One. The Hare Creek and Pudding Creek bridges are limited to one lane of
 traffic in each direction.
 The most congested street in the City is Main Street between the northbound merge area
 located just south of Laurel Street through Elm Street. The northbound section of this road
 currently operates at LOS D to LOS E during peak hours.
 The Noyo River Bridge is a four lane bridge with a center lane for emergency vehicles and a
 sidewalk on both sides. The bridge provides access at the south end of the City and to
 Highway 20 and operates at LOS A.
 Although the volume of traffic on Main Street has increased over the past few years,
 intersections with traffic signals – Highway 20, Ocean View Drive, Cypress Street, Chestnut
 5 – Circulation Element                            5 -3                                      November 2012
 Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Street, Oak Street, Laurel Street, Elm Street, and Redwood Avenue - are operating at LOS B or
better. The side street stop sign controlled intersections with Main Street are also operating at
LOS B or better for traffic traveling on Main Street, although traffic turning onto Main Street from
some side streets can experience LOS D, E, or F during peak hours.
D.       Projected Traffic Volumes
Land use and transportation must be coordinated so that the capacity of the transportation
system will accommodate the traffic generated by the development of the community. To
understand the relationship between land use and transportation, the new traffic that would be
generated by the 10-year buildout projections (2022) listed in Table C-3 below and was added
to existing traffic volumes on major streets.
The traffic projections take into account the type and intensity of existing and future
development, areas of vacant developable land, and the policies established by the General
Plan. The traffic projections estimate how much traffic will be generated by new development,
what traffic problems will occur, and what roadway improvements would relieve traffic
congestion. This projected traffic increase would be generated by development within the City
and its Sphere of Influence, new development in the County, and tourist traffic which will
continue to increase in Fort Bragg and the coastal areas of Mendocino County.
The traffic projections include the existing roadway network as shown in Map C-1.
Tables C-4 summarizes the Levels of Service for roadway segments and intersections for a
summer Friday mid-day peak hour when traffic is generally the most congested. This table
shows the projected LOS with and without the development proposed through the Draft 2012
Mill Site Specific Plan.
E.       Roadway Deficiencies
Traffic projections in Tables C-4 a indicate that Levels of Service will remain virtually identical to
current Levels of Service taking into consideration anticipated development in the Inland
General Plan area. If all potential future development is taken into consideration throughout the
City, including anticipated development on the Mill Site all intersections and roadway segments
will conform with the standards established by the Inland General Plan.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 -4                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

In fact, all intersections are operating acceptably under Existing Conditions and are expected to
continue operating acceptably under Future conditions without or with projected ten year traffic
volumes from development on the Mill Site and the Coastal General Plan Area. Although the
approach Level of Service for the westbound Pine Street approach of SR1/Pine Street is
expected to operate at LOS E, it is considered acceptable as the intersection as a whole is
operating acceptably at LOS A and the Caltrans rural peak hour signal warrants are not met.
Westbound approach volumes at SR1/Pine Street are currently low at approximately 36
vehicles per hour. It should be noted that with the addition of project-related traffic volumes,
average delay at the SR1/Elm Street and SR1/Laurel Drive decreases during the p.m. peak
hour. While this is counter-intuitive, this condition occurs when traffic volumes increase on
movements that are currently underutilized or have delays that are below the intersection
average, resulting in a better balance between approaches and lower overall average delay.
Future traffic volume increases are expected predominantly on the through or right-turn
movements, which has an average delay that is lower than the average for the intersection as a
whole, resulting in a slight reduction in the overall average delay. The conclusion could
incorrectly be drawn that operation actually improves over time based on this data alone;
however, it is more appropriate to conclude that future traffic increases are expected to make
use of excess capacity, so drivers will experience little, if any, change in future conditions.
                                             Table C-4
5 – Circulation Element                        5 -5                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Notes & Assumptions:
     x   Existing conditions Level of Service calculations completed assuming current
         lane geometry.
     x   Existing counts are based on past counts from various studies conducted
         between July and August, 2008.
     x   Future conditions Level of Service calculations completed assuming lane
         geometry from the Main Street Merge Analysis.
     x   Future turning movement volumes were developed using list of approved
         projects as provided by the City. Refer to map provided for projected land use of
         approved projects.
     x   Mill Site consists of the four projects noted on the provided map that are west of
         State Route (SR) 1, south of Spruce Street, and north of South Street. They
         consist of 25 single family housing units, 10,000 square foot of industrial
         development, 55,000 square foot of commercial development, and a motel
         development with 70 lodging rooms.
     x   No growth rates were applied for SR1 through traffic past Pudding Creek Bridge
         due to low levels of traffic growth seen in historic observations.
     x   Synchro software was used to determine Level of Service on signalized
         intersections. Level of Service calculations for unsignalized, stop-sign controlled
         intersections were conducted using TRAFFIX software.
F. Existing Conditions Sidewalks & Bicycle Facilities
Fort Bragg sidewalk widths vary, primarily on the basis of the street type and sometimes based
on the width of the ROW. Some streets have discontinuous sidewalks, sidewalks on one side
of the street or substandard sidewalks. The City has Class I, II, and III bicycle facilities. The
City intends to further improve its bicycle, pedestrian, and transit facilities as follows:
•    Facilitate better public transit, transit stops, and transit convenience;
•    Increase number, extent and types of bicycle routes;
•    Provide safe and complete sidewalks throughout the City; and
•    Provide a mix of land use designations which reduce the need to drive from home to work,
     schools, and/or commercial outlets.
By improving and providing alternatives to the car, the City serves all residents by: 1) reducing
automobile traffic; 2) providing equitable transportation facilities for those without an automobile;
and 3) providing transportation alternatives that improve citizen health and enjoyment while
conserving energy and reducing air and noise pollution.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 -6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

G.       Goals, Policies and Programs
Goal C-1           Complete Street Planning.
Policy C-1.1: Balance the need of all users. The City shall balance the need to increase
motor vehicle capacity with the need for complete streets that provide facilities for
bicycle and pedestrian circulation and commercial viability.
Policy C-1.2: Walking and bicycling shall be considered an essential and integral part of
the city's circulation network.
Policy C-1.3 Complete Streets: New development, that includes new streets or street
segments, shall build multi-modal “complete streets” that are designed for the safety and
comfort of cyclists and pedestrians, including children, the elderly, and people with
disabilities, consistent with US Department of Transportation complete streets
guidelines.
         Program C.1.3.1: City street construction and re-construction projects shall
         provide facilities for all modes of transportation, where feasible.
         Program C1.3.2: Through the Capital Improvement Plan and related impact
         fees, the City shall ensure that adequate funds are provided to maintain the
         existing circulation network, and where feasible upgrade it to “complete street”
         design.
                             Complete streets in Central Business District
5 – Circulation Element                            5 -7                             November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

     1.       Automobile and Delivery Vehicle Planning
     Goal C-2            Coordinate land use and transportation planning.
Policy C-2.1 Level of Service Standards: Establish the following Level of Service (LOS) standards:
          Signalized and All-Way-Stop                     LOS D
          Intersections Along Highway One
          Side Street Stop Sign Controlled                LOS D, or LOS F if there are less than 15
          Intersections Along Highway One (Side           vehicles/hour left turns plus through
          Street Approach)                                movements from the side street and the
                                                          volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                          hour signal warrant criteria levels.
          Signalized and All-Way Stop                     LOS C
          Intersections
          Not Along Highway One
          Side Street Stop Sign Controlled                LOS C, or LOS E if there are less than 15
          Intersections Not Along Highway One             vehicles/hour left turns plus through
          (Side Street Approach)                          movements from the side street and the
                                                          volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                          hour signal warrant criteria levels.
              •         If volumes at an unsignalized intersection are increased to meet or exceed
                        Caltrans rural peak hour signal Warrant #11 criteria levels and the intersection is
                        operating at an unacceptable level of service, then signalization of the
                        intersection is warranted.
              •         LOS E for Main Street (Highway One) between the northbound lane merge area
                        and Manzanita Street.
              •         LOS D for Main Street south of the northbound merge lane and north of
                        Manzanita Street and other City-designated arterials and collectors.
              •         LOS C on all City-designated local streets.
              •         The maximum allowable LOS standards for Main Street apply to the p.m. peak
                        hour weekdays during the summer and to the p.m. peak hour on weekdays and
                        weekends during the remainder of the year. They do not apply to p.m. peak
                        hours on weekends and holidays during the summer. During the p.m. peak
                        hours on summer weekends and holidays, Main Street can operate at LOS F.
     Policy C-2.2 Coordinate Land Use and Transportation: Ensure that the amount and phasing
     of development can be adequately served by transportation facilities.
              Program C-2.2.1: Review development proposals for their direct and cumulative effects
              on roadway Level of Service standards. During the development review process, City
              staff will determine whether traffic studies need to be carried out and the scope of such
              studies.
     Policy C-2.3: Do not permit new development that would result in the exceedance of roadway
     and intersection Levels of Service standards unless one of the following conditions is met:
     5 – Circulation Element                         5 -8                                      November 2012
     Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         a)        Revisions are incorporated in the proposed development project which prevent
                   the Level of Service from deteriorating below the adopted Level of Service
                   standards; or
         b)        Funding of prorata share of the cost of circulation improvements and/or the
                   construction of roadway improvements needed to maintain the established Level
                   of Service is included as a condition or development standard of project
                   approval.
Policy C-2.4: Include specific time frames for the funding and completion of roadway
improvements for projects which cause adopted roadway and intersection Level of Service
standards to be exceeded. Require security, bonding or other means acceptable to the City to
ensure the timely implementation of roadway mitigations.
Policy C-2.5: When traffic impact fees are collected, establish a schedule from the date of
collection of said fee for the expenditure of funds to construct roadway improvements that meets
project needs. Where a project would cause a roadway or intersection to operate below the
adopted traffic Level of Service standards, the roadway or intersection improvements should be
completed in a timely manner but no later than five years after project completion.
2.       Recommended Roadway Improvements
Goal C-3            Develop and manage a roadway system that accommodates future growth
                    and maintains acceptable Levels of Service while considering the other
                    policies and programs of the General Plan.
Policy C-3.1 Roadway Improvements: In coordination with Caltrans and Mendocino County,
plan for and seek funding for on-going improvements to the local and regional road system to
ensure that the roadway system operates safely and efficiently. Project applicants are fiscally
responsible for their fair share of roadway improvements necessary to serve their projects.
         Program C-3.1.1: When a traffic analysis of levels of service and/or safety hazards
         indicates the need, construct the following roadway improvements:
                   a)     Signalize the Main Street/Pudding Creek Road intersection;
                   b)     Signalize the Franklin Street/Oak Street intersection;
                   c)     Widen the section of Main Street from the Pudding Creek Bridge to the
                          northern City Limits to three lanes, adding a center turn lane;
                   d)     Signalize the Main Street/Pine Street intersection; and
                   e)     Consider extending Harrison Street south from Walnut Street to Cypress
                          Street.
Policy C-3.2 Roadway Standards: Continue to provide consistent standards for the City's
street system.
         Program C-3.2.1: Establish standards for public streets, which allow for the following:
                   a)     Traffic "calming" measures;
5 – Circulation Element                          5 -9                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                    b)      Sidewalks with curbs, gutters, and a planting strip between the sidewalk
                            and the roadway;
                    c)      Rounded street corners with "bulb-outs" at key intersections;
                    d)      Continuation of the grid street system; and
                    e)      Standards for radius returns for local, collector, and arterial streets.
         Program C-3.2.2 Intersection Design: Intersections shall be designed at the tightest turn
         radii to accommodate the design vehicle, to slow turning vehicles as they cross the
         pedestrian realm. The “control vehicle” – larger vehicles such as delivery trucks and fire
         engines that only occasionally use the street – may cross the center line to make turns.
         Program C-3.2.3: Continue to prohibit the establishment of private roads.
         Program C-3.2.4: Adopt standards for alleyways which address parking restrictions,
         shared access, lighting, and maintenance.
Policy C-3.3 High Trip Generating Uses: Traffic studies shall be required for all major
development proposals that require a conditional approval, including but not limited to, drive-
through facilities, fast food outlets, convenience markets, major tourist accommodations,
shopping centers, commercial development, residential subdivisions, and other generators of
high traffic volumes that would affect a Level of Service. Traffic studies shall identify, at a
minimum:
                 a) The amount of traffic to be added to the street system by the proposed
                      development;
                 b) Other known and foreseeable projects and their effects on the street system;
                 c) The direct, indirect, and cumulative adverse impacts of project traffic on street
                      system operations, safety, and public access to the coast;
                 d) Mitigation measures necessary to provide for project traffic while maintaining
                      City Level of Service standards;
                 e) The responsibility of the developer to provide improvements; and
                 f)   The timing of all improvements.
         Program C-3.3.1: Adopt standards to consolidate commercial driveway accesses onto
         arterials and Main Street.
Policy C-3.4 Continuation and Connectivity of Streets: Require the continuation of streets,
bicycle and pedestrian paths through new developments wherever possible, and require
connectivity to the street grid at as many points as feasible.
         Program C-3.4.1: Review site plans for new development to facilitate the continuation of
         streets to improve local circulation. Where streets are not feasible, priority shall be given
         to providing pedestrian and bicycle trails that establish bicycle and pedestrian
         connections to streets wherever possible.
Policy C-3.5 Right-of-Way Acquisition: Require right-of-way dedications for new development to
meet the City’s roadway width standards.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 - 10                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                            Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                Neptun
                                                                                                                                                                  p e                 Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                         Ocean
                                                                                                                                            Pacific                                   Drive
                                        S
                                             r
                                          ho                                               Bay ew Av
                                                                                                  Avenue
                                                                                                  Ave                                                                    View
                                              e lin
                                                      n.                                                                                                                         Monterey Av .
                                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                   eL
                       Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                         Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                 Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                       Ro
                   Coas t          H ig h w                     ad
          O ld                                ay
                                                                                 Ha
                                                                                      re                                                                                         Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                                                                 Harbo                      Avenu
                                                                                                                                                                                                             venu
                                                                                                                                                                                                              e ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S t ew
                                       Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rn                                                                       Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ce               Elm St
Simpson                                                                                       Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                      Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o   ad
                                                                                                                                            V ie w Boat Yard r .                 an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                             D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Myr                                                                                                                                St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tl e St            S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Airpor t
e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bush St                                                                              dd
             Hare Creek Terrac                 e                                                                                                                                                                                  Haz       dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d St                     S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                                                          Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t                                      C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cr
                                                                          Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                                                                  Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                         re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                 Highway
                                                                                                                   g   y 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Highway   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           John
                       e
                       ek   C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hyman
                                                                                       Babcock Lan                                      e                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                                                                 Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ota Avenu e                                                                                                                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Petaluma                                A             v                                                                Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Map C-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Johnson
                                                                         Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                  Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                     re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ee
                                                                                                                               s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Johnson   Ln        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lane
          Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stree t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bicycle Paths
                                                   Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Denniso n
          Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                       Benso                                                       W i n d in g
                                                                Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                             Camille
          Sears Lan     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                         Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                            W ay
                                                                                                                                                            Hanso n                                        Roa d
                                                                                                                                                      Lan
                                                                                                                                                       a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Puddin g
          A nd r e a               W ay
          Lahmon Lan           e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Monsen Wa y
          Tex-Mon t                                                                              Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                             Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                           Benson                          Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Creek
                                                                Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Road
                                               S ummers
                                                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                   ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        = City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                = Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coastal Zone Boundary     = Existing Bicycle Paths   =Proposed Bicycle Paths
Policy C-3.6       Roadway Safety: Improve the safety of the roadway system.
         Program C-3.6.1: Periodically analyze the locations of traffic accidents to identify
         problems and use this information to set priorities for improvements as a part of the
         City's Capital Improvement Program.
Policy C-3.7 Integration of Low Impact Development (LID): Development projects shall
incorporate LID features, and subdivision or development projects that include street
improvements shall incorporate LID features into the public rights-of-way when feasible.
Policy C-3.8 Installation of Conduit in New Roads and Road Reconstruction Projects. Conduit
shall be installed in all new roads and road reconstruction projects and dedicated to the City of
Fort Bragg. Conduit shall be sized to accommodate fiber optic and other telecom technologies.
3.       Residential Areas
The City's residential neighborhoods need to be protected from excessive through-traffic. When
Main Street and other arterial streets become congested, drivers may seek alternate routes to
their destination, often taking local streets through residential areas. Excessive traffic on local
streets has an impact on the quality of life. Through-traffic can generate excessive noise and
present potential safety hazards to children. The goals, policies, and programs below are
intended to address this issue.
Goal C-4            Preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
Policy C-4.1 Reduce Through-Traffic on Local Streets: Reduce through-traffic on local streets
to preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
         Program C-4.1.1: Develop measures to limit through-traffic on residential streets when
         traffic studies indicate that traffic volumes on such streets exceed the adopted Levels of
         Service and/or safety concerns warrant such measures.
         Program C-4.1.2: Consider the following measures, as appropriate, to reduce through-
         traffic from using local streets in residential areas:
                   a)     Narrow and landscape the street entrances to residential areas that
                          experience heavy traffic;
                   b)     Restrict turning movements into residential areas; and
                   c)     Use traffic calming measures such as permitting wider sidewalks,
                          additional on-street parking, and landscape strips between the sidewalk
                          and the road.
Policy C-4.2 Additional Connector Streets:                Establish additional connectors between
residential streets to improve emergency access, particularly on dead-end streets south of
Chestnut Street.
4.       Main Street Corridor
Transportation improvements to Main Street and principal streets in the Central Business
District will enhance the character, sense of place and economic well-being of this area.
However, the need to accommodate traffic flow through the City should be considered in the
context of the community's desire to preserve and enhance the historic character of Fort Bragg's
Central Business District.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 - 11                              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                   South Main Street                          Central Business District
Goal C-5            Regard the quality of life in Fort Bragg and maintaining community identity
                    as more important than accommodating through-traffic.
Policy C-5.1 Community Priorities for Transportation Improvements: Place a higher priority on
maintaining a sense of place and enhancing the attractiveness of the Central Business District
than on efficient traffic flow and movement.
The adopted Level of Service Standards make an exception for Main Street between the
northbound lane merge area, currently located just south of Laurel Street, to Manzanita Streets,
to prevent street widening and/or elimination of on-street parking which would require
acquisition of the right-of-way, and consequently change the character of the City’s historic
downtown. Widening this segment of Main Street would require acquisition of right-of-way and
reduction in on-street parking, thereby changing the intimate, pedestrian-oriented downtown the
City wishes to preserve and enhance.
         Program C-5.1.1: Consider traffic safety, the ease and safety of pedestrian movement
         across Main Street, and adequacy of on-street parking as key factors in evaluation of
         proposed roadway improvements along Main Street.
         Program C-5.1.2: Ensure that property and business owners in the Central Business
         District are informed and actively involved in planning future improvements to Main
         Street and other nearby streets.
         Program C-5.1.3: Consider signalizing the intersection of Pine Street and Main Street to
         provide adequate pedestrian safety.
         Program C-5.1.4: Consider options for increasing the capacity of Main Street north of
         the northbound lane merge area south of Laurel Street that do not require elimination of
         parking.
Policy C-5.2 Franklin Street: Ensure that Franklin Street in the Central Business District is
maintained as a pedestrian-oriented corridor with safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic patterns.
         Program C-5.2.1: Continue to monitor traffic volumes and accidents on Franklin Street
         and Main Street and make necessary safety improvements as warranted.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 12                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

5.       Parking
Adequate off-street parking is essential for Central Business District businesses1. Fort Bragg
has implemented an in-lieu fee to build additional off-street parking facilities. Providing
additional off-street parking facilities in the Central Business District will have a community-wide
benefit.
Goal C-6            Provide additional parking in the Central Business District.
Policy C-6.1 Additional Off-Street Parking: Continue to construct additional off-street parking
spaces in the Central Business District.
         Program C-6.1.1: Continue, and update, as needed, the City's parking in-lieu fee
         program for the Central Business District.
         Program C-6.1.2: Define priorities for the acquisition of property and the construction of
         additional parking facilities.
         Program C-6.1.3: Encourage the use of reciprocal access agreements and
         interconnecting off-street parking and circulation between adjacent commercial uses.
         Program C-6.1.4: Develop a comprehensive signage program within the Central
         Business District to direct vehicles to off-street parking areas.
         Program C-6.1.5: Develop incentives for employers and employees to park off-street in
         the Central Business District.
         Program C-6.1.6: Continue enforcing parking restrictions in alleyways to ensure access
         for emergency and delivery vehicles.
Goal C-7            Improve the Design of Parking Lots in Accordance with Smart Growth
                    Principles.
Policy C-7.1: Improve and update parking regulations in accordance with best practices and
smart growth principles.
         Program C-7.1.1: Revise the Inland Land Use and Development Code to reduce parking
         requirements for: 1) affordable and senior housing developments; 2) commercial and
         mixed-use projects within a reasonable walking distance of downtown; and 3) small infill
         projects in areas with an abundance on on-street parking.
         Program C-7.1.2: Continue to encourage developers to locate parking facilities behind
         buildings and landscaped areas to reduce the visual impacts to the street and improve
         pedestrian access.
6.       Emergency Routes
The City needs to establish an emergency route to the east for emergency vehicles and for
evacuation in the event bridges are blocked or destroyed.
1
         Refer to the Downtown Parking Study, City of Fort Bragg, 1999.
5 – Circulation Element                              5 - 13                             November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal C-8           Improve emergency access to the City.
Policy C-8.1 Emergency Access: Establish an access route out of Fort Bragg that could be
used in the event of damage to the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges.
         Program C-8.1.1: Work with the property owners to obtain temporary use, in the event
         of an emergency, of the logging road that begins on Cypress Street and provides access
         to Highway 20 (aka the A&W Haul Road), east of Fort Bragg.
         Program C-8.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments and Mendocino
         County to upgrade Sherwood Road to Willits to provide a year-round emergency access
         route.
         Program C-8.1.3: Prepare an emergency evacuation route plan for the City.
7.       Improving East-West Access
As Fort Bragg continues to grow, additional vacant and underdeveloped land east and west of
Main Street will be developed. The City's annexation policies discussed in the Inland Land Use
Element establish priorities for expansion of City boundaries in an orderly and planned manner.
Annexation and development in these areas will require development of and/or improvement to
east-west access routes. In some areas new roads will be required, while in other areas
extensions to existing roads would be the best solution.
Goal C-9           Improve east-west access routes that are sensitive to the environment and
                   preserve Fort Bragg's unique identity and sense of place.
Policy C-9.1 Eastern Areas: Identify the location of extensions to City streets and new streets
in anticipation of future annexation and development east of City limits.
         Program C-9.1.1: Work with the County to review proposed development in the Sphere
         of Influence to ensure that connecting rights-of-way are identified and preserved.
         Program C-9.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments to identify needed
         east-west streets in the Regional Transportation Plan.
         Program C-9.1.3: Use traditional grid patterns for roadways where feasible.
         Program C-9.1.4: Request that the County maintain access and rights-of-way from Oak
         Street/Sherwood Road to Monson Way.
Policy C-9.2 Improve East-West Arterials:             Improve Oak Street, Chestnut Street, and
Redwood Avenue to provide safe and efficient circulation between Main Street and east Fort
Bragg.
         Program C-9.2.1: Maintain and improve Oak Street and Redwood Avenue to ensure
         sufficient lane width.
         Program C-9.2.2:       Consider improving pedestrian and bicycle facilities on Chestnut
         Street.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 14                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

8.       Public Transit
Fort Bragg is served by the Mendocino Transit Authority (MTA). MTA provides bus service
between Fort Bragg, Willits, Ukiah, and Santa Rosa. A separate bus route provides service
between Fort Bragg, Mendocino, and the Navarro River.
MTA has a fixed-route bus service in Fort Bragg with fixed stops that connect the College of the
Redwoods, shopping centers, the Central Business District, and the hospital. Local trips within
the Fort Bragg area are also provided by MTA's dial-a-ride service where riders can call to be
picked up and delivered to their destination Monday through Saturday. In addition, the
Redwood Senior Center provides transportation services for seniors in the community.
Goal C-10           Provide better public transportation.
Policy C-10.1 Encourage Transit Use:
         Program C-10.1.1: Continue to support the expansion of transit services provided by
         MTA and other public transit providers.
Policy C-10.2 Bus Shelters: Encourage attractive, well-lighted, and comfortable bus shelters
placed in convenient locations.
         Program C-10.2.1: Continue to require the provision of bus stops, bus shelters,
         benches, turnouts, and related facilities in all major new commercial, industrial,
         residential, and institutional developments, and identify, in collaboration with MTA,
         additional locations for bus stops and shelters.
9.       Pedestrian Facilities
Most areas of Fort Bragg have sidewalks for pedestrians. There are, however, a number of
residential streets which lack sidewalks, and substandard sidewalk facilities exist throughout the
City. Better pedestrian access across Fort Bragg's bridges and along Main Street from the
Noyo Bridge to the southern City limits and from Elm Street north is needed. New development
must be served by adequate pedestrian facilities. In addition to the policies and programs listed
below, see the Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element regarding policies and programs
recommended for increasing and improving the trail system within the Planning Area.
Goal C-11           Make it easier and safer for people to walk in Fort Bragg.
Policy C-11.1 Continuous Sidewalks: Require an uninterrupted pedestrian network of
sidewalks, with continuous sidewalks along both sides of streets. New development shall
provide sidewalks along project frontages to close gaps in the City's sidewalk network.
         Program C-11.1.1: Consider implementing the following funding sources for the purpose
         of installing sidewalks in existing developed areas of the City:
                   a)     special benefit assessment districts; and/or
                   b)     a low-interest revolving loan fund.
         Program C-11.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments and Caltrans to
         construct pedestrian walkways over the Hare Creek and Pudding Creek Bridges. These
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 15                               November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         facilities may qualify for Transportation Enhancement Activities (TEA) funding available
         through Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG).
Policy C-11.2: Where feasible, incorporate pedestrian and bicycle facilities into the design and
construction of all road improvements.
Policy C-11.3 Sidewalk Maintenance: Ensure that property owners maintain safe sidewalks.
         Program C-11.3.1: Continue to implement City regulations that require sidewalks to be
         maintained by property owners. Carry out regular inspections, notification, and
         enforcement of this requirement.
Policy C-11.4 Sidewalk Design: Sidewalks should be designed, constructed and re-
constructed to enhance the safety, comfort, aesthetic appeal, and interest of the pedestrian
environment. Sidewalks should conform with the following principles:
     x   Sidewalks shall have the appropriate width for their use, consistent with City standards.
     x   Where it is not possible to provide wide sidewalks continuously along a street,
         sidewalks shall be widened at their most congested locations such as crosswalks,
         building entrances and resting areas. Widening shall be achieved by using curb
         extensions or requiring development to set back building frontages.
     x   Ample crossing opportunities shall be provided. In addition to marked crosswalks at all
         intersections, mid-block crossings provide crossing opportunities where intersections are
         too widely spaced for reasonable pedestrian access. Mid-block crossings are particularly
         useful to connect pedestrian desire lines between generators separated by streets.
     x   Where roadways are reconstructed, efforts should be made to provide for wider
         sidewalks that conform with City standards, possibly by reducing the road width.
         Program C-11.4.1: Require applicants to implement the South Fort Bragg Pedestrian
         Access and Beautification Plan as feasible, in conjunction with new development
         projects.
         Program C-11.4.2: Seek available funding from grants and other funding sources for the
         construction of sidewalks in existing developed areas.
Policy C-11.5 Pedestrian Paths: Develop a series of continuous pedestrian and multi-use
walkways throughout the commercial districts and residential neighborhoods.
         Program C-11.5.1: Allow asphalt or other approved surface pedestrian/multi-use paths
         in single-family residential areas. Factors to consider in applying this measure include
         compatibility with the neighborhood, connection with the existing sidewalk system,
         safety, and aesthetics.
Policy C-11.6 Improve Pedestrian Safety:
         Program C-11.6.1: Continue to provide traffic controls and well-lit intersections in areas
         with a high volume of pedestrian movement.
         Program C-11.6.2: Upgrade and widen sidewalks on Chestnut Street.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 16                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

10.      Bikeways
With better facilities and trails, bicycling can become a more significant part of the transportation
system and an alternative to automobile use. Fort Bragg has few constraints to bicycling: most
of the City is flat, the weather is mild, and the City is compact with relatively short distances
between residential areas, schools, parks, and commercial centers.
The California Street and Highway Code has established three categories of bicycle trails based
on the physical conditions of the right-of-way.
     Class 1 Bikeway - Bike Path or Bike Trail: These facilities are constructed on a separate
     right-of-way, are completely separated from street traffic, and have minimal cross flows of
     automobile traffic. The State standard for minimum paved width of a two-way bike trail is
     eight feet.
     Class 2 Bikeway - Bike Lane: A restricted right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles with
     vehicle parking and cross flow by pedestrians and motorists permitted. Bike lanes are
     normally striped within paved areas of highways and are one-directional with a minimum
     standard width of five feet.
     Class 3 Bikeway - Bike Route: A route for bicyclists designated by signs or other markings
     and shared with pedestrians and motorists. Bike routes are typically designated to provide
     linkages to the bikeway system where Class 1 or 2 Bikeways cannot be provided.
     The City’s Bicycle Master Plan identifies high priority bicycle improvement projects within the
     City.
Goal C-12          Make it easier and safer for people to travel by bicycle.
Policy C-12.1 Comprehensive Bikeway System: Establish a comprehensive and safe system
of bikeways connecting all parts of Fort Bragg.
Policy C-12.2: Improve and expand bicycle facilities and infrastructure according to the City’s
Bicycle Master Plan and the Residential Streets Safety Plan recommendations.
         Program C-12.2.1: Implement the improvement projects enumerated in the City’s Bicycle
         Master Plan with school projects as the first priority.
         Program C-12.2.2: Implement the recommendations of the Residential Streets Safety
         Plan.
         Program C-12.2.3: Complete the bikeway system as indicated in Map C-2: Bicycle Paths
         with parking-in-lieu funds, dedications, grant funding, traffic impact fees, and other
         means, as appropriate.
         Program C-12.2.4: Work to achieve designation as a Bicycle Friendly Community from
         the League of American Bicyclists by 2015.
         Program C-12.2.5: Maintain and improve bicycle facilities to be free of debris and other
         obstacles.
         Program C-12.2.6: Improve the safety of bicyclists and promote bicycling skills through
         education, enforcement, encouragement, and community outreach.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 17                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-12.2.7: Promote and encourage bicycling as a method to reduce the City’s
         impact on climate change.
         Program C-12.2.8: Utilize dedications, grant funding, traffic impact fees, and other
         means, as appropriate, to acquire rights-of-way needed for a comprehensive bikeway
         system as described in the Bicycle Master Plan.
                                              Bicycle use at school
Policy C-12.3: Require new development to provide on-site connections to existing and
proposed bikeways, as appropriate.
Policy C-12.4: Require new development, redevelopment, and significant renovation projects to
provide superior bicycle/bicyclist support infrastructure.
         Program 12.4.1: Consider revising the Inland Land Use and Development Code to
         reduce parking requirements for projects that facilitate employee/customer bicycle use
         beyond current code requirements by providing: indoor or covered bike storage, lockers
         for personal belongings, changing rooms and showers, and/or bicycles for employee
         use.
         Program 12.4.2: Update the bicycle parking guidelines in the Citywide Design
         Guidelines. Consider requiring larger “vehicle prints” for bike parking and bikeways that
         accommodate bike trailers for carrying children, dogs, parcels, groceries, freight, etc.
Policy C-12.5: Bicycle Parking: Provide adequate and secure bicycle parking at bus stops,
schools, the library, parks, City offices, and commercial areas.
Policy C-12.6: Require that streets linking residential areas with school facilities be designed to
include bikeways.
Policy C-12.7: Consider bicycle operating characteristics in the design of intersections and
traffic control systems. Incorporate bicycle and pedestrian facilities into the design and
construction of all road improvements as feasible.
Policy C-12.8: Improve continuity and connections between the City’s bike facilities and those
of the County and State.
         Program C-12.8.1: Produce and distribute a map illustrating all local and regional
         bicycle routes, facilities, and important destinations.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 18                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-12.8.2: Continue working with County, regional, and State transportation
         agencies on development and implementation of regional bicycle plans and facilities.
         Work with Mendocino Transit Authority to accommodate more bicycles on transit buses.
         Continue to participate in MCOG's Regional Bikeway Plan to qualify for State Bicycle
         Lane Account funds.
12.      Access for the Mobility Impaired
Providing transportation facilities accessible to persons who are mobility-impaired is essential.
Approximately three percent of the population in Fort Bragg cannot use conventional public
transit due to a disability. The Federal Americans with Disabilities Act contains many
requirements regarding removal of barriers for persons with disabilities.
Goal C-13          Provide mobility-impaired persons with access to transportation.
Policy C-13.1 Regulations for Disabled Persons:          Enforce Federal and State regulations
regarding access for persons with disabilities.
Policy C-13.2 Conformance with State and Federal ADA regulations: Continue to review all
projects for handicapped access and require the installation of curb cuts, ramps, and other
improvements facilitating handicapped access.
Policy C-13.3 Support Improved Access: Support improved access to public transportation
and pedestrian facilities for people with disabilities.
         Program C-13.3.1: Continue to apply for grants for ADA-related projects from MCOG
         and other sources.
13.      Coordinate Regional Transportation Planning
Traffic congestion along Fort Bragg's Main Street is connected to development in
unincorporated areas to the north and south of the City. Fort Bragg’s Main Street is also
Highway One, the primary north-south route for all communities on the coast. Land use
decisions made by the County of Mendocino have a significant impact on transportation in the
Fort Bragg area. The City works closely with the regional agencies described below:
     x   County of Mendocino: maintains and plans the county road system.
     x   Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG): prepares and carries out a Regional
         Transportation Plan, establishes priorities for Federal and State funding, and funds
         studies of transportation corridors.
     x   Mendocino Transit Authority (MTA): operates several transit routes serving the City and
         the region. It is a county-wide authority created through a joint powers agreement
         among cities and the County.
     x   Caltrans: Maintains, plans and completes improvements on Hwy. 1 and Hwy 20.
Goal C-14          Coordinate regional traffic planning.
Policy C-14.1 Regional Transportation Efforts: Participate in regional transportation planning
efforts.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 19                              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-14.1.1: Continue to provide City Council and staff representation on regional
         transportation planning agencies.
         Program C-14.1.2: Work with the MCOG and Caltrans to coordinate transportation
         planning and to identify funding for necessary transportation improvements.
         Program C-14.1.3: Continue to ensure that MCOG's Regional Transportation Plan
         (RTP), the State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) and the State Highway
         Systems Operation and Protection Plan (SHOPP) include needed improvements to
         Highway One and Highway 20 in the Fort Bragg area.
14.      Funding Transportation Improvements
Funding transportation improvements is predominantly a Federal, State, and regional
responsibility. For many years the road system has received the largest proportion of public
expenditures for transportation.         Although increased funding for alternative modes of
transportation has significant environmental and social benefits, roadway funding will continue
to receive the highest priority. Fort Bragg remains a relatively isolated coastal community and
depends on the road system for the majority of its transportation needs.
A significant amount of the traffic in Fort Bragg is through-traffic (trips that originate or have
destinations outside of the City). The logging industry, tourist travel, and people coming to Fort
Bragg from around the region for shopping, educational, medical, and other services generate
much of the traffic.
It is necessary that funding mechanisms be expanded to ensure effective coordination among
different government jurisdictions. The goals, policies, and programs below complement those
in the Land Use and Public Facilities Elements requiring new development to pay for its fair
share of maintaining the City's infrastructure and service levels.
Goal C-15          Promote balanced funding for transportation.
Policy C-15.1 Development to Pay its Fair Share: Require new development to pay its fair
share of transportation improvements to maintain levels of service and traffic safety in the City.
         Program C-15.1.1: Develop a City-wide Traffic Mitigation Fee Program.
         Program C-15.1.2: Work with the County of Mendocino and MCOG to develop traffic
         mitigation fees for the Fort Bragg Sphere of Influence.            Consider adopting a
         memorandum of understanding between the City of Fort Bragg and the County
         regarding traffic mitigation fees.
         Program C-15.1.3: Work with MCOG to ensure that the standards and requirements
         contained in the joint City and County Traffic Mitigation Program between Fort Bragg
         and the County are incorporated into the Regional Transportation Plan.
         A substantial amount of the traffic passing through Fort Bragg originates in the County.
         New development in the County will increase traffic volumes and congestion of Highway
         One. Establishing County-wide traffic impact fees would provide a way to finance
         needed roadway improvements. Two areas where fair-share improvements or in-lieu
         impact fees are needed is from development that impacts Highway 20 as well as
         Highway One north and south of the City.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 20                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-15.1.4: Include in the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program mitigation fees for new
         development with primary access to Highway One and Highway 20. Utilize the funds
         collected as a local match to encourage Caltrans to raise the priority of Highway One
         and Highway 20 improvements.
         Program C-15.1.5: Ensure that the City's Pavement Management System obtains
         funding from the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program, as deemed appropriate by the traffic
         impact fee nexus study and applicable State law.
         Program C-15.1.6: Carry out an ongoing inventory of transportation system needs to be
         included in the City's Capital Improvement Plan.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 21                              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                               Noyo River Bridge
5 – Circulation Element            5 - 22        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

6.       COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Community Design Element establishes goals, policies, and programs to preserve and
enhance Fort Bragg’s authentic, small town character. The community is defined in part by its
isolated location on the magnificent coastline of Mendocino County. Its sense of place derives
from its heritage as a regional center for the timber and fishing industries. As the economy
evolves to a more tourism and service-based economy, the community has acknowledged the
importance of maintaining the historic identify of downtown and the integrity of the residential
neighborhoods, while enhancing views and access to the coastline and planning for continued
growth and development.
The Community Design Element is concerned primarily with the visual quality of the City, or
what residents and visitors see. The City’s appearance is essential to the quality of life in Fort
Bragg. Visual quality and amenities go hand-in-hand with long-term economic development
strategies, and strengthen the stability and desirability of the community. To be attractive to
residents, visitors, and businesses, the City must be concerned about its appearance, physical
character, and livability. Existing residential real estate values and the desirability of businesses
that depend on tourism are closely tied to the visual character of the community.
This element contains sections addressing Design Review, the Central Business District,
historic preservation, and public art and spaces.
B.       Citywide Design Guidelines
Most new development in the City is subject to a design review process which is intended to
ensure that it preserves and enhances the aesthetic character of its setting. Compliance with
the Citywide Design Guidelines is the basis for Design Review approval. While the Guidelines
are flexible in order to encourage innovative and creative designs, they do include many
requirements that are qualitative statements rather than quantitative standards. There are many
acceptable ways to meet each of the Guidelines.
C.       Historic Preservation
Much of Fort Bragg was built during the first half of the twentieth century, and the built
environment in the Central Business District and many of the neighborhoods reflects the
architectural heritage of the community. Fort Bragg’s architecturally significant buildings and
structures convey a sense of the community’s history, providing a link to the past and
strengthening the City’s identity. From the Sherwood Pomo who lived in the area for over 5,000
years to the more recent European settlers seeking lumber, fish, and fur, the landscape has
seen remarkable transformations.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-1                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

The City has a Historic Building Inventory that identifies buildings, sites, structures, and objects
of cultural and historical importance. The purpose of the Inventory is to preserve the
community’s heritage by facilitating use of the State of California’s Historic Building Code. To
be included in the Historic Building Inventory, a structure must be at least 40 years old and meet
other criteria related to its design and history. The Inventory is not a comprehensive description
of all historically or culturally significant buildings or sites in the community, and a property is
listed at the owner’s request.
D.       The Central Business District
The Central Business District (CBD) is the heart of the community’s commercial, civic, historic,
and cultural life. It is the area with the largest concentration of historic buildings such as the
Skunk Train Depot, the Guest House Museum, the Old Fort Building, Town Hall, City Hall, and
numerous commercial and residential structures. The combined efforts of government and
property owners will ensure that the attractiveness of the downtown will be preserved and
enhanced. Increasing pedestrian activity, improving street lighting, parking, and amenities, and
ensuring that renovations and new construction maintain the historic scale and character of this
area will foster the continued vitality of the CBD.
                             Old Fort Building, 430 North Franklin Street
E.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goal CD-1          Ensure that new development demonstrates excellence of design and
                   sensitivity to the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Policy CD-1.1 Citywide Design Guidelines: Ensure that new development and remodels are
constructed in a manner consistent with the Citywide Design Guidelines.
6 – Community Design Element                       6-2                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program CD-1.1.1: Periodically update the Citywide Design Guidelines.
         Program CD-1.1.2 Commercial and Multi-Family Development: Continue to complete
         Design Review of commercial and multi-family development to ensure that they fit
         harmoniously with the scale and design of existing buildings and streetscape of the City.
Policy CD-1.2 Discourage Sameness and Repetitive Residential Designs.
Policy CD-1.3 Scenic Views and Resource Areas: Ensure that development does not
adversely impact scenic views and resources as seen from public rights-of-way.
Policy CD-1.4 Property Maintenance and Nuisances: Ensure that properties are well
maintained and nuisances are abated.
         Program CD-1.4.1: Continue to implement and enforce the City’s nuisance abatement
         ordinance, and update it, as necessary, to ensure that property values are maintained
         throughout the City.
         Program CD-1.4.2: Provide Code enforcement for immediate health and safety
         violations in conjunction with the building inspection process.
Policy CD-1.5 Strip Development: Discourage strip development along Main Street.
Strip development is typically characterized by street frontage parking lots serving individual or
strips of stores or restaurants. It differs from central business districts and shopping centers in
that typically there are no provisions for pedestrian access between individual uses, the uses
are only one-store deep, the buildings are arranged linearly rather than clustered, and there is
no design integration among individual uses.
Goal CD-2          Preserve the Central Business District as the commercial, civic, historic,
                   and cultural center of the community.
Policy CD-2.1 Adaptive Reuse: Facilitate the adaptive reuse of existing older buildings in the
Central Business District.
         Program CD-2.1.1: Consider establishing a low-interest revolving loan fund for the
         renovation and upgrading of older buildings in the Central Business District, with
         incentives for the reuse of vacant or underutilized upper floors for housing.
Policy CD-2.2 Pedestrian Activity: Encourage increased pedestrian movement and activity in
the Central Business District.
         Program CD-2.2.1: Continue to support the operation of a Farmer’s Market and a
         multitude of street fairs and promotional activities in the Central Business District.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-3                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                              New Streetscape in Downtown Fort Bragg
Policy CD-2.3 Economic Vitality:        Continue to support the economic diversity and vitality of
downtown businesses.
         Program CD-2.3.1: Consider establishing a Business Improvement District (BID) to
         stimulate increased business activity and revenues by helping to fund public
         improvements and loans and/or grants for private improvements in the Central Business
         District.
         Program CD-2.3.2: Continue to periodically update the City’s Economic Development
         Strategy.
Policy CD-2.4 Parking: Improve the availability of public parking facilities in the Central
Business District and other commercial areas.
         Program CD-2.4.1: Implement shared parking agreements wherever feasible. Utilize,
         as appropriate, development agreements, conditions of approval, easements, and other
         means to assure shared parking arrangements.
         Program CD-2.4.2: Consider establishing a parking assessment district for the Central
         Business District to help finance the acquisition of property for additional off-street
         parking lots.
         Program CD-2.4.3: Periodically update the Central Business District parking in-lieu fee
         program to ensure that it presents a fair and equitable alternative to the provision of on-
         site parking.
Policy CD-2.5 Strengthen the Distinctive Identity of the Central Business District: Strengthen
the distinctive identity and unique sense of place of the Central Business District.
         Program CD-2.5.1: Consider establishing a sign program for the Central Business
         District, with distinctive signs at the entryways to and within the Central Business District.
6 – Community Design Element                      6-4                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program CD-2.5.2: Locate an area where a pocket park or a small plaza could be
         established for public gatherings, street fairs, concerts, and similar outdoor public
         events.
Goal CD-3          Create attractive entryways to the City.
Policy CD-3.1 Entryways: Clearly define the points of entry to the City through the use of
distinctive signs, lighting, and landscaping.
         Program CD-3.1.1: Maintain distinctive signs placed in a landscaped area at the south
         entryway at Highway 20/Highway One and at the north entryway on Highway One at the
         City Limits.
Policy CD-3.2 Gateway Development: Encourage a higher quality of development at the City’s
gateways.
         Program CD-3.2.1: Consider adopting the                following   standards  for  Gateway
         Developments in the Citywide Design Standards:
              •   Define gateway development as development located South of the Noyo Harbor
                  Bridge or North of the Pudding Creek Bridge.
              •   Gateway development should not detract from views to the ocean.
              •   Signage should be modest in scale and should not block the viewshed.
              •   Significant landscaping shall be installed to reinforce the transition from a
                  wilderness environment to an urban environment in gateway development.
                  Landscaping should include trees and drought tolerant plants. Lawns are
                  discouraged.
              •   Site design should include open space around the periphery of the gateway
                  development to reinforce the transitional quality of the area.
              •   Site design should include installation of bike lanes and sidewalks.
              •   Gateway development should model Green Building techniques and materials.
                                   Fort Bragg Gateway Welcome Sign
6 – Community Design Element                    6-5                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal CD-4          Improve the appearance and effectiveness of parking facilities.
Policy CD-4.1 Parking Location: Wherever feasible, locate parking facilities to the rear of the
development so that the building facade is contiguous with the street frontage, and parking
areas are hidden from the street.
Goal CD-5          Use lighting to create a sense of security and to provide cohesion to the
                   physical structure of the community.
Policy CD-5.1 Security: Establish standards to ensure that on-site lighting is adequate to
provide security while not producing excessive glare.
Policy CD-5.2 Lighting Design Review Guidelines: Apply lighting design guidelines in the
Citywide Design Guidelines and the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
Policy CD-5.3: Exterior lighting (except traffic lights, navigational lights, and other similar safety
lighting) shall be minimized, restricted to low intensity fixtures, and shielded so that no light
shines beyond the boundary of the property.
Goal CD-6          Preserve cultural and historic resources.
Policy CD-6.1 Protect and Preserve Buildings and Sites with Historic and Cultural Significance
to the Community:
                 124 Laurel Street: A historically significant structure in the Central Business District
         Program CD-6.1.1:       Encourage property owners to list their buildings in the Historic
         Building Inventory.
         Program CD-6.1.2: Approve building permits using the State Historic Building Code, as
         appropriate.
6 – Community Design Element                        6-6                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program CD-6.1.3: Establish incentives for the preservation and restoration of historic
         buildings and sites.       Consider the following incentives: low interest loans for
         rehabilitation consistent with the original character of historic buildings, tax incentives for
         the preservation of historic structures, including the use of Mills Act preservation
         contracts, and awards or grants for the preservation and protection of historic buildings
         and those with cultural significance.
         Program CD-6.1.4: Consider adopting an “Affirmative Maintenance” ordinance for
         buildings in commercial land use designations.
         Program CD-6.1.5: Establish a procedure whereby property owners may initiate a
         program for preservation of historic structures within their neighborhood.
Policy CD-6.2 Discourage Demolitions: Discourage the demolition of historic buildings.
         Program CD-6.2.1: Require archival research to determine the cultural and historic
         significance of buildings proposed for demolition, paid for by the project proponent.
Policy CD-6.3 Public Awareness: Increase public awareness and appreciation of the City’s
cultural and historic resources.
         Program CD-6.3.1: Work with the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical Society to
         increase public awareness concerning the importance of historic preservation and the
         location of significant and protected structures in the City.
         Program CD-6.3.2: Prepare a public information package describing available programs
         for property owners to restore and rehabilitate historic structures, including information
         on tax incentives.
         Program CD-6.3.3: Support the activities of the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical
         Society.
                                  Guest House Museum, Main Street
6 – Community Design Element                     6-7                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal CD-7          Support Public Art and Open Space.
Policy CD-7.1 Public Art: Encourage the provision of murals, fountains, sculptures, and other
forms of public art in public spaces and parks.
         Program CD-7.1.1: Consider adopting a One-Percent for Art Program which would
         require one percent of the cost of construction of new public buildings and facilities to be
         allocated for public art.
         Program CD-7.1.2: Consider implementing an ongoing outdoor sculpture exhibit
         adjacent to City Hall and/or in other locations, with an emphasis on supporting and
         showcasing local artists and reflecting the cultural life of the community.
                                           Mural at Company Store
Policy CD-7.2 Provide Public Open Spaces: Encourage the development of public open
spaces for gatherings and fairs in commercial areas of the City.
         Program CD-7.2.1: Consider the purchase of appropriate locations for public open
         space and the enhancement of existing public spaces to accommodate community
         gatherings.
         Program CD-7.2.2: Encourage the inclusion of public open spaces in new commercial
         development that is sufficiently large to accommodate such uses.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-8                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

7.       SAFETY ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Safety Element, pursuant to Government Code Section 65302(g), deals with the protection
of the community from unreasonable risks associated with the effects of earthquakes,
landslides, slope instability, subsidence, other geologic hazards, flood, and fire. Maps
identifying earthquake hazards, unstable soil hazards, landslide hazards, and flood zones are
included in this element.
The geology, topography, soils, hydrology, and fire risk of Fort Bragg pose numerous
constraints on future development. This element guides land use planning and policy decisions
in order to achieve an acceptable level of public protection.
B.       Seismic Safety and Geologic Hazards
There are no active earthquake faults in the City. However, the San Andreas fault is located
approximately 9 miles to the west, and the Mayacama fault is 22 miles to the east. Major
earthquakes can occur on these faults. Seismic activities can cause major disruptions of the
City's transportation and emergency services network. Should the Pudding Creek, Noyo River,
and/or Hare Creek Bridges become unusable following a seismic event, people may not be able
to evacuate, and emergency access would be blocked. Potential hazards associated with
earthquakes include: rupture of the ground surface by displacement along faults, shaking of the
ground caused by the passage of seismic waves through the earth, ground failure induced by
shaking, such as landslides, liquefaction and subsidence of unstable ground, and tsunamis.
Non-seismic geologic hazards include the presence of unstable soils on steep slopes and
expansive soils which, in the presence of moisture, will swell and shrink when returning to a dry
condition. Map SF-1: Geologic Hazards identifies areas of potential landslides.
C.       Flooding
Portions of the City have areas subject to potential flooding during severe storms. Because of
the generally flat terrain in the Fort Bragg area, a 100-year storm could exceed the ability of the
City's infrastructure to move runoff water from the City to outfalls into natural drainages and the
ocean. This drainage overload may result in standing water in low areas. High tides and
severe storms may also cause flooding in low-lying areas near creeks and drainages.
Map SF-2: Flood Hazards shows areas within the 100-year floodplain. Within floodplains
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), property owners may be
required to obtain flood insurance as a condition of mortgage approval. The areas subject to
flooding are shown on maps called the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) that are prepared by
FEMA. The City participates in the FEMA flood insurance program, which allows property
owners to obtain subsidized insurance rates.
7 – Safety Element                             7-1                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

FEMA also requires the City to establish development standards for construction in the 100-year
floodplain. Typically the standards developed by a city or county can range from limits on the
intensity of development to requirements to raise the "habitable floor" of the structure to at least
one foot above the 100-year flood peak elevation. Most of the City, over 99% of the land area,
is situated above both the 100-year and the 500-year floodplains. The only areas in the Inland
Area located within the 100 year flood plain are along the Noyo River and Pudding Creek. The
presence of riparian habitat and excessive slopes in this area prohibits development within the
100 year flood plain.
D.       Fire Protection
                                                In 1991, the City of Fort Bragg and the Fort Bragg
                                                Rural Fire District entered into an agreement creating
                                                the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority.         The
                                                Authority has primary fire protection responsibility
                                                within the City limits and/or developed lands within
                                                the District (the District includes all of the City's
                                                Sphere of Influence). In addition to normal fire calls,
                                                the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority has
                                                increasingly been called to assist with accidents,
                                                hazardous material spills, medical calls, and to
                                                provide personnel and equipment for large wildfires
                                                outside of the area. The California Department of
                                                Forestry and Fire Protection (CDFFP) has
                                                responsibility for wildland fires within the Planning
Area. The Draft EIR presents a complete description of staffing, response time, calls for
assistance, and other factors related to the Fire Protection Authority. The primary constraints or
issues involving the Fire Protection Authority concern adequate staffing, adequate equipment,
and adequate fireflow to structures.
E.       Police Protection
                           Within the City, the Fort Bragg Police Department has primary
                           responsibility for police response. The constraint to providing adequate
                           police response involves the need to ensure that the City hires sufficient
                           staff to meet the response needs of both the existing and future
                           population.
F.       Emergency Preparedness
California State Law requires that all cities and counties adopt an Emergency Plan. The
purpose of this plan is to outline policies and procedures with respect to significant events
occurring within or threatening the community which would require the deployment of
extraordinary resources for the protection of life and property.
7 – Safety Element                                 7-2                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                      Neptun
                                                                                                                                                                                        p e                 Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                               Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                  Pacific                                   Drive
                                                              S
                                                                   r
                                                                ho                                               Bay ew Av
                                                                                                                        Avenue
                                                                                                                        Ave                                                                    View
                                                                    e lin
                                                                            n.                                                                                                                         Monterey Av .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                         eL
                              Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                               Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                             Ro
                   Coas t                                H ig h w                     ad
          O ld                                                      ay
                                                                                                       Ha
                                                                                                            re                                                                                         Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Harbo                      Avenu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   venu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S t ew
                                                             Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rn                                                                       Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ce               Elm St
Simpson                                                                                                             Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o   ad
                                                                                                                                                                  V ie w Boat Yard r .                 an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                   D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Myr                                                                                                                                             St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tl e St                        S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airpor t
e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bush St                                                                              dd
             Hare Creek Terrac                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                  Haz       dwar                                                                                                                      Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d St                                  S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                                                                    Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                                                   C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                                Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                                                                 Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                               re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                                       Highway
                                                                                                                                         g   y 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Highway         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              John
                                e
                                ek       C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hyman
                                                                                                             Babcock Lan                                      e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                                                                           Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ota Avenu e                                                                                                                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Petaluma                                A             v                                                                   Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Map SF-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Johnson
                                                                                               Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                                        Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                           re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                                                                                     s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                      Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Johnson   Ln     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lane
          Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stree t
                                                                         Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Denniso n
                       For Schematic
                            ch       purposes
                                            s only
          Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                             Benson
                                                                                                                                                                             Benso                                                       W i n d in g
                                                                                      Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                             Camille
          Sears Lan                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                                               Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                            W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
                                                                                                                                                                                  Hanso n                                        Roa d
                                                                                                                                                                            Lan
                                                                                                                                                                             a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Puddin g
          A nd r e a                                     W ay
          Lahmon Lan                                 e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Monsen Wa y
          Tex-Mon t                                                                                                    Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                 Benson                          Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Creek
                                                                                      Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sourc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ce: Department of Conservation Division
                                                                     S ummers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        All ocean bluffs contain potentially
                                                                                                                                                    Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Slide   Fault
                                                                                                                                                         ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Slopes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of Mines & Geology Geologic & Geomorphic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Inner Gorge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Gradational Contact                                 Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Coastal Zone Boundary   unstable slopes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Features, Fort Bragg 7.5' Quadrangle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Scale 1Ó = 2300Õ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mendocino County, California, 1983

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Map SF-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Flood Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E R WA                        = Waterway
                                                                                                                                                                           Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ft Bragg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WAT       Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Special Flood Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Areas Inundated by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100-Year Flood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ZONE A                 = No base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rgi n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZONE AE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = Base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZONE V                 = Coastal flood with velocity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             hazard (wave action); no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr                              Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Coastal Zone Boundary
         OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Airpor t                                        Roa                     d
               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Airpor t                                 Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Johnson
                                                                                                                                                       a d
                                                                                                                                                                                              Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Johnson              Ln.
                                                                                                                                                      l Ro
                                                                                                                                               Hau
                                                                                                                                           Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Roa d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pu
  P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                         S t ew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                               ar                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                       t                                   Manzanita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                           k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ln.                                                                                                                                                                                              Creek                               Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Puddin g
                                                                                                                                                                            Elm St
                                                                                                                                                                            Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                ce                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ro          ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pu                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Countr y                    Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dd                                                                                                    Pudding                                                Creek                                     Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i                                                                                             Zone A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                      Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                          ilr o
                                                                                                                                                                                                ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fir St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           eek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Har old Street
                                                                                                                                                                                     rn
                                                                                                                                                                                te                 Pine                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                            es
                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Laurel                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nurnberger Lan                         Denniso n                                                                                                                                         Huckleberry Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mall Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Redwood                                       Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Monsen Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          McPherson S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Harrison S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Alder                           S           St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S                                                                                                                                                                                          Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Howlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Corry                     Ha r ol d                                                                           Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Terrace C t                                                                            Cour t
                                                                                                           Zone V                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oa k                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Florence St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                           MAIN STREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Acorn Dr .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jewet t                                                                                      Hocke r                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Park St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Stree t         Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Madr one                                    St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane          Stree t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Willow                        St                                                           Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyta Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ma ple                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S tr ee t                S tr ee t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dana St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S. Sanderson Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Hazel                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Susie Ct .                                                                                                                                         Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Stree t                               S tr ee t                                 S. Corr y                       Ha r ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut                                   St                                                                                                                                                                                                              Chestnut                                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Woodlan d
                   Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ebbin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S. Harriso n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ota Avenu e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S. Whippl e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Grove S t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Driv e          Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Walnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ois
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ri
                                Zone V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R iv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v ie w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          River D r
                                           Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C IR C L                                Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S o ut                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h                             S E QU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zone A
                                                                                                                                                      Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tl e St                   Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Haz
                                                                                                                                                       A                                                                                       Myr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        elwo        d St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             od St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                 Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oyo
                                                                                                                                                             Zone
                                                                                                                                                               n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W i n d in g                           W ay
                                                                                                                                           Avenu
                                                                                                                                            venu
                                                                                                                                             e ue
                                                                            Monterey Av .
                                                                            M                           Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                              AE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Roa d
Zone V             Cliff Wa y
                   Cliff
                                  Avenue           Drive
                                                                                                                                           Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                           Harbo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                          Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Camille
                                                                                                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                                                                                                        V ie w Boat Yard r .
                                           Ocean             View                           Drive
                                  Neptun
                                    p e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hanso n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Benso                                                                    Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a                             e
                                                   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s                                                                                                                                                                                                              e                                                                ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Babcock Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          g   y 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lan
                                            Bayview
                                                 ew Avenue
                                                    Ave                                                                                                                           Creekk
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                H ar e
                                                                                                                                           re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e                               e
                                                                                                                                          Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pine Tree Lan                   Gorstrom Lan                                                                                              Olsen Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                          Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     re
 Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S ummers
                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               ad
                                                                                   n.                                     Ro
                                                                                                                                                             Highway
                                                                                eL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway 20
                                                                    r   e lin                                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                             S   ho
                                                                                                                               H ig h w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hare Creek Terrac
                                                                                            Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                eek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                                                                                                 Source: FIRM, Flood Insurance Rate Map
                                                                                                                           Coas t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lahmon Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mendocino County, California.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Veronic a                                          Sears Lan                                        A nd r e a   Tex-Mon t
                                                                                                                                 O ld                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Panel 1015, 1005, 1010. Date: 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                Simpson                                            Lan                      e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scale 1Ó
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ó = 2300Õ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         For Sche
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ematic purposes only

The City has an adopted Emergency Operations Plan. The purpose of this plan is to ensure
that the City will be prepared to respond effectively in the event of emergencies to save lives,
restore and protect property, repair and restore essential public services, and provide for the
storage and distribution of medical, food, water, shelter sites, and other vital supplies to
maintain the continuity of government.
The Mendocino Emergency Services Authority (MESA), a joint powers organization that
includes the County of Mendocino and the incorporated cities within the county, serves as the
coordinating agency for mutual aid services provided by fire departments, law enforcement
agencies, and emergency medical service providers throughout the county. In addition, MESA
reviews and makes recommendations regarding emergency operation plans for public and
private institutions where pre-planning for emergency procedures is advisable. Coordination of
emergency services and planning guidelines is provided for situations including flood, wildland
fires, structure fires, explosions, hazardous material spills, severe weather, and earthquakes.
G.       Other Hazards
1.       Hazardous Materials
Various types of chemicals and other potentially hazardous materials are used by Fort Bragg
industries and businesses. Other hazardous substances are transported to and through Fort
Bragg. Finally, residents use various hazardous materials for landscaping, cleaning, and other
residential uses. Improper transport, storage, or use of these substances can result in releases
to the environment with consequent impacts on human health and the environment.
The Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority operates a hazmobile that serves the City.
The Fire Protection Authority maintains a hazardous materials unit behind the main fire station.
This unit is used to respond to hazardous waste spills.
2.       Electromagnetic Radiation
The potentially adverse health effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF) from electrical
transmission lines, substations, and appliances have been documented in many studies. It is
not known what levels of exposure to EMFs are safe, however most sources indicate that an
EMF exposure level of less than 1mG is preferred. The approach taken to this potential health
hazard is one of prudent avoidance – establishing reasonable regulation before electrical
transmission lines are built and discouraging sensitive development from encroaching in or near
electrical transmission line rights-of-way.
3.       Air Quality
Emissions of pollutants from motor vehicles, industrial uses, and other sources can be injurious
to people's health. Policies and programs to protect the City's air quality are included in the
Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element.
7 – Safety Element                            7-3                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

H.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goal SF-1          Reduce seismic and geologic-related hazards.
Policy SF-1.1 Minimize Hazards: New development shall: (a) Minimize risks to life and property
in areas of high geologic, flood, and fire hazard; and (b) Assure stability and structural integrity,
and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of
the site or surrounding area or in any way require the construction of protective devices that
would substantially alter natural landforms along bluffs and cliffs.
         Program SF-1.1.1: Continue to comply with the provisions of the State Alquist-Priolo
         Act.
         Program SF-1.1.2: Require professional inspection of foundations and excavations,
         earthwork, and other geotechnical aspects of site development during construction on
         those sites specified in soils, geologic, and geotechnical studies as being prone to
         moderate or high levels of seismic hazard.
         Program SF-1.1.3: Monitor and review existing critical, high priority buildings to ensure
         structural compliance with seismic safety standards.
         Program SF-1.1.4: Provide information to the public on ways to reinforce buildings to
         reduce damage from earthquakes and what to do in the event of an earthquake.
         Program SF-1.1.5: Provide information to educate the public about the availability and
         the benefits of obtaining earthquake insurance.
         Program SF-1.1.6: Encourage residents to consider earthquake insurance for their
         homes and businesses.
         Program SF-1.1.7: Continue to comply with State law regarding reinforcement of
         unreinforced masonry structures.
Policy SF-1.2 Geotechnical report required: Applications for development located in or near an
area subject to geologic hazards, including but not limited to areas of geologic hazard shown on
Map SF-1, shall be required to submit a geologic/soils/geotechnical study that identifies all
potential geologic hazards affecting the proposed project site, all necessary mitigation
measures, and demonstrates that the project site is suitable for the proposed development and
that the development will be safe from geologic hazard. Such study shall be conducted by a
licensed Certified Engineering Geologist (CEG) or Geotechnical Engineer (GE). Refer to Map
SF-1: Geologic Hazards. Refer to the General Plan Glossary for definitions of these terms.
Policy SF-1.3 Alterations to Landforms: Minimize, to the maximum feasible extent, alterations to
cliffs, bluff tops, faces or bases, and other natural land forms. Permit alteration in landforms
only if erosion/runoff is controlled and either there exists no other feasible environmentally
superior alternative or where such alterations re-establish natural landforms and drainage
patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
Policy SF-1.4 Identify Potential Hazards: Identify potential hazards relating to geologic and
soils conditions during review of development applications.
7 – Safety Element                             7-4                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program SF-1.4.1: Evaluate slopes over 15 percent, unstable land, and areas
         susceptible to liquefaction, settlement, and/or soil expansion for safety hazards prior to
         issuance of any discretionary approvals and require appropriate measures to reduce any
         identified hazards.
         Program SF-1.4.2: Require that development in areas with identified slope stability
         constraints as shown on Map SF-1 or other areas where City staff determines there is
         potential slope stability issues be supervised and certified by a geologist, geotechnical
         engineer, or engineering geologist.
         Program SF-1.4.3: Require repair, stabilization, or avoidance of active or potentially
         active landslides, areas of soil creep, or areas with possible debris flow as a condition of
         project approval.
Policy SF-1.5 Tsunami: Minimize development in areas subject to tsunami.
         Program SF-1.5.1: Utilize map SF-3 to identify areas within the City that are subject to
         tsunamis.
         Program SF-1.5.2: Review development proposals to ensure that new development is
         not in an area subject to tsunami damage or, if such development is allowed, that it is
         designed to withstand tsunami damage.
                                 Map SF-3 Tsunami Inundation Map
7 – Safety Element                              7-5                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-2          Reduce the risks from flooding.
Policy SF-2.1 Flood Hazards: Ensure adequate standards for development in the 100-year
floodplain.
         Program SF-2.1.1: Maintain and update as necessary the zoning and building code
         standards and restrictions for development in identified floodplains and areas subject to
         inundation by a 100-year flood. Use the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
         Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in the review of development proposals.
         Program SF-2.1.2: Ensure all development in flood prone areas meet Federal, State,
         and local requirements.
Policy SF-2.2 Storm Drainage: Continue to maintain effective flood drainage systems and
regulate construction to minimize flood hazards.
         Program SF-2.2.1: Continue to update the City’s Storm Drain Master Plan.
Policy SF-2.3: Require development to pay for the costs of drainage facilities needed to drain
project-generated runoff.
         Program SF-2.3.1 Update and utilize the City’s Drainage Development Impact Fees to
         ensure that development pays for its proportional share of drainage facilities.
Policy SF-2.4: Require, where necessary, the construction of siltation/detention basins to be
incorporated into the design of development projects.
Policy SF-2.5: Require, as determined by City staff, analysis of the cumulative effects of
development upon runoff, discharge into natural watercourses, and increased volumes and
velocities in watercourses and their impacts on downstream properties. Include clear and
comprehensive mitigation measures as part of project approvals to ensure that new
development does not cause downstream flooding of other properties.
Policy SF-2.6: Analyze the impacts of and potential flooding issues resulting from Climate
Change and rising sea levels on proposed projects located within the 100-year Sea-Level Rise
Inundation Area (see Map SF-4).
Goal SF-3          Ensure emergency preparedness.
Policy SF-3.1 Coordinate with County: Continue coordination with the Mendocino County
Emergency Services Authority.
Policy SF-3.2 Maintain an Updated Emergency Plan: Update the City’s Emergency Operations
Plan as needed to take into account the requirements of the California Emergency Management
Systems (SEMS).
         Program SF-3.2.1: Establish an emergency evacuation route system that includes
         standards for street identification, street widths, and grade standards for the evacuation
         route system.
7 – Safety Element                               7-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                     Map SF-4: 100-Year Sea Level Rise Inundation Area
7 – Safety Element                        7-7                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-4          Reduce fire hazards.
Policy SF-4.1 Minimize Fire Risk in New Development: Review all development proposals for
fire risk and require mitigation measures to reduce the probability of fire.
         Program SF-4.1.1: Continue to consult the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority in the
         review of development proposals to identify the projected demand for fire protection
         services and implement measures to maintain adequate fire protection services.
         Mitigation measures may include levying fire protection impact fees for capital facilities, if
         warranted.
Policy SF-4.2 Maintain a High Level of Fire Protection: Work with the Fire Protection Authority
to ensure a continued high level of fire protection.
         Program SF-4.2.1: Increase water main sizes or loop existing water mains where
         necessary to provide adequate flows for fire protection. The standard for water flow for
         fire protection purposes in commercial uses should be a minimum of 1,000 gallons per
         minute for 2 hours with 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.
         Program SF-4.2.2: Develop a plan to provide sprinklers for commercial structures in the
         Central Business District. The plan shall include consideration of City funding to
         construct risers for this area.
         Program SF-4.2.3: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to establish a
         regular schedule for periodic inspections of commercial and industrial premises by the
         Fire Prevention Officer.
Policy SF-4.3 Mutual Aid Agreements: Continue to maintain mutual aid agreements.
         Program SF-4.3.1: Coordinate equipment use and purchase and inter-agency
         communications.
         Program SF-4.3.2: Continue to coordinate with the Incident Command System (ICS) of
         Mendocino County.
Policy SF-4.4 Fire Protection Authority Needs: Anticipate the needs of the Fort Bragg Fire
Protection Authority.
         Program SF-4.4.1: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to review its long-
         term fire plan on an annual basis to identify needed capital equipment and staff.
Policy SF-4.5 Vegetation Management: Continue to implement an effective                           and
environmentally sound vegetation management and weed abatement program.
         Program SF-4.5.1: Require a landscaping zone system for defensible space around
         buildings in high fire risk areas.
         Program SF-4.5.2: Continue to require weed abatement to reduce the risk of fire. Use
         mechanical rather than chemical methods wherever possible.
7 – Safety Element                             7-8                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-5          Maintain effective police services.
Policy SF-5.1 Demand for Police Services: Review development proposals for their demand
for police services and implement measures to maintain adequate police services.
         Program SF-5.1.1: Consider the impacts on the level of police services of large
         development proposals in the environmental review and planning process.
         If warranted, mitigation measures may be required that may include the levying of police
         impact fees for capital facilities, purchasing equipment, and dedication of land for new
         facilities.
Policy SF-5.2 Shared Resources: Utilize shared resources to improve police response.
         Program SF-5.2.1: Periodically review shared use of resources such as communication
         facilities and joint use of personnel where feasible with the County Sheriff’s Department.
Goal SF-6          Maintain an effective medical emergency response system.
Policy SF-6.1 Emergency Medical Response: Ensure that the Fire Protection Authority and the
Mendocino Coast District Hospital continue to maintain a high level of emergency medical
response.
         Program SF-6.1.1: Periodically review the emergency medical response system.
Policy SF-6.2 Support Maintenance of Mendocino Coast District Hospital’s Emergency
Facilities: Continue to encourage the Mendocino Coast District Hospital to maintain its
emergency department and acute care facilities.
         Program SF-6.2.1: Maintain ongoing communication with Mendocino Coast District
         Hospital to identify actions the City can implement to support the Hospital’s Emergency
         Department.
Goal SF-7          Reduce hazards of transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous
                   materials and wastes.
Policy SF-7.1 Protection from Hazardous Waste and Materials: Provide measures to protect
the public health from the hazards associated with the transportation, storage, and disposal of
hazardous wastes (TSD Facilities).
         Program SF-7.1.1: Continue to ensure that use, transportation, and disposal of
         hazardous materials are in accordance with the local, State, and Federal safety
         standards.
         Implementation of this program is the responsibility of the Fire Protection Authority.
         Program SF-7.1.2: Continue to support and participate in Mendocino County’s
         Hazardous Materials Business Plan which requires all businesses using hazardous
         materials to list the types, quantities, and locations of hazardous materials with the
         County’s Department of Environmental Health.
7 – Safety Element                              7-9                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code requires businesses with more
         than 50 gallons, 500 pounds or 200 cubic feet of hazardous materials to maintain a
         current Hazardous Materials Business Plan (HMBP). The law provides for the collection
         of fees to fund the program.
         Program SF-7.1.3: Require, as a condition of City approvals of non-residential projects,
         that the Fire Protection Authority be notified of all hazardous substances that are
         transported, stored, treated, or could be released accidentally into the environment.
         Program SF-7.1.4: Require that applications for discretionary development projects that
         will generate hazardous waste or utilize hazardous materials include detailed information
         on hazardous waste reduction, recycling, transportation, and storage, and prepare a
         plan for emergency response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material.
         Program SF-7.1.5: Revise the Zoning Ordinance to require secondary containment
         facilities and a buffer zone adequate to protect public health and safety on properties
         with hazardous materials storage and/or processing activities.
Policy SF-7.2 Support Environmental Review of Hazardous Waste Transportation, Storage and
Disposal Facilities: Support a thorough environmental review for Hazardous Waste
Transportation, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities, including waste to energy projects,
proposed in the Fort Bragg area.
         Program SF-7.2.1: Require that the environmental review of proposed Hazardous
         Waste TSD facilities shall, at a minimum, contain the following analysis and information:
                  a)      A worst-case generic description, estimating the number, type, scale,
                          scope, location, and operating characteristics of proposed TSD
                          Facility(ies) based on the projected volumes and types of hazardous
                          waste. Data from existing facilities regarding the probability of accidents,
                          spills, and explosions should be documented and included;
                  b)      An assessment of risk resulting from the accidental release, fire, and
                          explosion of hazardous waste. This assessment should take into account
                          all phases of operation including transport, storage, and treatment. The
                          assessment of risk should include the probability of occurrence and
                          magnitude of impact;
                  c)      Quantify estimates of air emissions, by applying emissions rates of
                          existing facilities to the future volumes of hazardous waste and identifying
                          emissions for incinerator facilities under worst case circumstances;
                  d)      An assessment of non-incineration alternatives for hazardous waste
                          treatment such as chemical dechlorination for the detoxification of PCBs,
                          dioxins, solvents, and pesticides; photolysis; and biological treatment;
                  e)      Review of the operating characteristics of proposed TSD facilities, taking
                          into account maintenance and operating procedures, emissions
                          monitoring, and safety devices to assure the ongoing enforceability of the
                          mitigating measures that are required.
7 – Safety Element                                  7 - 10                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-8          Minimize community exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs).
Policy SF-8.1 Consider EMFs in Land Use Decisions: Consider information regarding EMF
radiation from existing and new electrical transmission lines and substations in making land use
decisions.
         Program SF-8.1.1: Request that PG&E or other electrical energy distributors provide
         information on renovation to existing and proposed new electrical transmission lines and
         substations. Request that information on the EMF radiation levels for proposed new
         facilities be provided.
         Program SF-8.1.2: Request that PG&E or any other electrical energy distributor provide
         a full and public disclosure of existing electrical transmission lines and existing and
         proposed facilities with their anticipated EMF levels within the Fort Bragg Planning Area.
         Program SF-8.1.3: Require that all new electrical transmission projects and facilities
         have an EMF mitigation plan as part of the project’s environmental review.
Policy SF-8.2 Siting of Schools and Other Sensitive Uses: Minimize and reduce EMF radiation
levels near sensitive uses such as schools, hospitals, and playgrounds.
         Program SF-8.2.1: Work with the School District to continue enforcement of California
         State Board of Education regulations requiring that new schools be sited at least 100
         feet from the edge of the right-of-way of 100-110 kV lines; 150 feet from 220-230 kV
         lines; and 250 feet away from 345 kV lines.
7 – Safety Element                               7 - 11                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

7 – Safety Element             7 - 12 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

8.       NOISE ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The purpose of the Noise Element is to protect the health and welfare of the community by promoting
development which is compatible with established noise standards. This element has been prepared
in conformance with Government Code Section 65302(f) and the guidelines adopted by the State
Office of Noise Control, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 46050.1. Existing and future
noise problems in the Planning Area are identified. Policies and implementation programs are
provided to reduce the community's exposure to excessive noise levels. Accomplishing this task
requires an evaluation of the noise generation from sources such as roads, highways, and stationary
sources such as industrial facilities.
B.       Noise Characteristics
Noise is defined as unwanted sound. Airborne sound is a rapid fluctuation of air pressure above and
below atmospheric pressure. Sound levels are usually measured and expressed in decibels (dB) with
0 dB corresponding roughly to the threshold of hearing. Decibels and other technical terms are
defined in Table N-1.
Most of the sounds which we hear in the environment do not consist of a single frequency, but rather
a broad band of frequencies, with each frequency differing in sound level. The intensities of each
frequency add together to generate a sound. The method commonly used to quantify environmental
sounds consists of evaluating all of the frequencies of a sound in accordance with a weighting that
reflects the fact that human hearing is less sensitive at low frequencies and extreme high frequencies
than in the mid-range frequency. This method is called weighting, and the decibel level so measured
is called the A-weighted sound level (dBA). In practice, the level of a sound source is conveniently
measured using a sound level meter that includes an electrical filter corresponding to the A-weighting
curve.
Although the A-weighted noise level may adequately indicate the level of environmental noise at any
instant in time, community noise levels vary continuously. Most environmental noise includes a
conglomeration of noise from distant sources which create a relatively steady background noise,
often called ambient noise, in which no particular source is identifiable. To describe the time-varying
character of environmental noise, the statistical noise descriptors, L10, L50, and L90, are commonly
used. They are the A-weighted noise levels equaled or exceeded during 10 percent, 50 percent, and
90 percent of a stated time period. A single number descriptor called the Leq is now also widely used.
The Leq is the average A-weighted noise level during a stated period of time.
In determining the daily level of environmental noise, it is important to account for the difference in
response of people to daytime and nighttime noises. During the nighttime, exterior background
noises are generally lower than the daytime levels. However, most household noise also decreases
at night and exterior noise becomes very noticeable. Further, sensitivity to noise increases when
people sleep at night. To account for human sensitivity to nighttime noise levels, a descriptor, the Ldn
(day/night average sound level) was developed. The Ldn divides the 24-hour day into the daytime of
8 – Noise Element                                     8-1                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and the nighttime of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM. The nighttime noise level is
weighted 10 dB higher than the daytime noise level.
                                                  TABLE N-1
                                   DEFINITION OF ACOUSTICAL TERMS
Term                           Definition
Decibel (dB)                   A unit describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the
                               logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
                               measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
                               micronewtons per square meter).
Frequency (Hz)                 The number of complete pressure fluctuations per second above and
                               below the atmospheric pressure.
A-Weighed Sound Level          The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level
(dBA)                          meter using the A-weighting filter network. The A-weighting filter de-
                               emphasizes the very low and very high frequency components of the
                               sound in a manner similar to the frequency response of the human ear
                               and correlates well with subjective reactions to noise.
L01, L10, L50, L90             The A-weighted noise levels that are exceeded by 1%, 10%, 50% and
                               90% of the time during the measurement period.
Equivalent Noise Level         The average A-weighted noise level during the measurement period.
(Leq)
Ldn                            The average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained
                               after addition of 10 decibels to levels measured in the night between
                               10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Lmax, Lmin                     The maximum and minimum A-weighted noise level during the
                               measurement period.
Ambient Noise Level            The composite of noise from all sources near and far. The normal or
                               existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
Intrusive                      That noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at
                               a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon
                               its amplitude, duration, frequency, and time of occurrence and tonal or
                               informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
8 – Noise Element                                         8-2                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

C.       The Existing and Future Noise Environment
Fort Bragg experiences noise from autos and trucks on Highway One, Highway 20, local arterials, the
railroad, and several industrial uses, such as the Baxman aggregate processing facility. Year 2002
and 2022 traffic noise ( Ldn) contour distances from major thoroughfares are shown on Tables N-2
and N-3.
                                                   TABLE N-2
                                2002 TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                   Noise Level
                                                    50 ft. from         Contour Distances
                                                   Centerline        (in feet from Centerline)
Roadway                                               (Ldn)     70 Ldn          65 Ldn     60 Ldn
 Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                72         65             140        305
 Hwy One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)               73         75             165        350
 Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                70         50             110        240
 Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                    69         45             100        215
 Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                    69         45              95        205
 Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                 69         40              90        190
 Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                     68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                        68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)               68         35              75        160
 Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                  60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                61         ---             ---        55
 Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)             60         ---             ---        50
 Hwy. (at Hwy. One)                                    62         ---             40         70
 Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                   60         ---             ---        50
 Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                        59         ---             ---        45
 Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                    58         ---             ---        35
 Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                            61         ---        ---             60
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
8 – Noise Element                                           8-3                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                        TABLE N-3
                               2022 TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                          Noise Level
                                                           50 ft. from    Contour Distances
                                                          Centerline   (in feet from Centerline)
      Roadway                                                 (Ldn)     70 Ldn 65 Ldn 60 Ldn
       Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                   73       80        175     380
       Hwy. One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)                 74     100         205     450
       Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                   71       55        125     270
       Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                       70       50        115     245
       Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                       70       50        105     225
       Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                    69       45         90     205
       Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                        69       45         90     200
       Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                           69       45         95     195
       Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)                  69       45         95     195
       Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                     61       ---        ---      55
       Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                   62       ---        ---      60
       Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                   60       ---        ---      55
       Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                60       ---        ---      50
       Franklin St. (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                    61       ---        ---      55
       Hwy. 20 (at Hwy. One)                                    63       ---        40       85
       Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                      61       ---        ---      55
       Ocean View Drive (West of Hwy. One)                      61       ---        ---      55
       Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                           60       ---        ---      50
       Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                       61       ---        ---      60
       Oak St. (East of Hwy. One)                               61       ---        ---      60
       Oak St. (East of Franklin St.)                           60       ---        ---      50
       Redwood Ave. (West of Hwy. One)                          64       ---        45     100
       Laurel St. (West of Hwy. One)                            61       ---        ---      55
       Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                               64       ---        45       95
      Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
Noise from traffic on local roadways, distant industrial activities, and neighborhood activities are the
most significant sources of community noise in the majority of the City.
Noise from industrial uses was audible during the evening and nighttime hours at most noise sites
that were monitored. Background noise levels in the areas of Fort Bragg which generally contain
noise sensitive land uses would be considered to be moderately quiet and compatible with the City’s
noise exposure standards.
The principal areas that are affected by excessive noise are along both sides on Highway One
throughout the City (ranging from 160-350 feet on either side of the highway) and along Franklin
Street and several east-west arterials (ranging from 35-70 feet from the road edge). See the 2002
Draft EIR for a more detailed discussion of the existing and projected noise environment in the City.
8 – Noise Element                                             8-4                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

   D.         Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards
   The standards listed in Table N-4 shall be used to evaluate the compatibility between land uses and
   future noise in Fort Bragg.
                                                         TABLE N-4
                                  NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
                                                               Exterior Noise Exposure
                                                                         Ldn dB
 Land Use Category                                    55      60        65      70        75     80
 Residential, Hotels and Motels
 Outdoor Sports and Recreation,
 Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds
 "Noise Sensitive" - Schools, Libraries,
 Museums, Hospitals, Personal Care,
 Meeting Halls, Churches
 Office Buildings, Business
 Commercial and Professional
 Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
 Amphitheaters
             Normally Acceptable
             Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved
             are of normal, conventional construction, without any special insulation requirements.
             Conditionally Acceptable
             Specified land use may be permitted only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
             requirements and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
             Unacceptable
             New construction or development should generally not be undertaken because mitigation
             is usually not feasible to comply with noise element policies.
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., March, 2002
   8 – Noise Element                                            8-5                                    November 2012
   Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

E.       Explanation of Table N-4: Land Use Compatibility for Community
Noise
1.       Noise Source Characteristics
Table N-4 shows the ranges of exterior noise exposure which are considered acceptable,
conditionally acceptable, or unacceptable for the specified land use. Table N-4 is used to determine
whether the noise exposure requires mitigation in order to achieve a compatible noise environment.
Where the noise exposure is acceptable for the intended land use, new development may occur
without requiring an evaluation of the noise environment.
Where the noise exposure would be conditionally acceptable, a specified land use may be permitted
only after a detailed analysis is made of the noise impacts, and the needed noise insulation features
are included in the design to protect people from exposure to excessive noise. Such noise insulation
features may include measures to protect noise sensitive outdoor activity areas (e.g. at residences,
schools, or parks) or may include building sound insulation treatments such as sound-rated windows
to protect interior spaces in residences, schools, hospitals, or other buildings which are sensitive to
noise. Noise reduction measures should be focused on reducing noise where it would have an
adverse effect for the specified land use, outdoors and/or indoors depending upon the land use.
For areas where the existing noise environment is unacceptable, new development should generally
not be undertaken, because there may not be sufficient noise reduction measures to bring the
development into compliance with the noise policies of this Element.
Sensitive receptors are land uses which are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
homes, schools, and libraries.
2.       Acceptable Noise Environments
Another consideration, which in some communities is an overriding factor, is the desire for an
acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, more restrictive standards for land use
compatibility, typically below the maximum considered normally acceptable for that land use category,
may be appropriate.
The following are the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards for noise exposure:
1.       The standard for maximum outdoor noise level permitted in residential areas is an Ldn of 60
         dB. This standard is applied where outdoor use is a major consideration, such as backyards
         in single-family housing developments and recreation areas in multi-family developments.
         This standard should not be applied to outdoor areas such as small decks and balconies
         typically associated with multi-family residential developments, which can have a higher
         exposure of 65 dB Ldn.
2.       The maximum acceptable interior noise level in new multi-family residential development
         required by the State of California Noise Insulation Standards is an Ldn of 45 dB. This
         standard is also applied to single-family and all other residential development.
3.       For projects occurring within noise environments that are conditionally acceptable, studies
         must be conducted to show how noise levels will be reduced in the areas that people use
         (which is generally the interior of offices, stores, industrial buildings, auditoriums, etc.). For
8 – Noise Element                                       8-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Map N-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sensitive Noise Receptors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SENSITIVE NOISE RECEPTORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.. Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.  County Public Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.  Guest House Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4.  Town Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.  City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.  Cotton Auditorium & Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bragg Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7. Senior Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8. Mendocino County Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9. Veterans Building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10. Lions Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11. Eagles Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12. Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13. Convalescent Home
       OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14. Noyo High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Airpor t                                        Roa                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15. Redwood School
             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airpor t                                 Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16. Dana Gray School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17. Fort Bragg High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18. County Courthouse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19. Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20.College of the Redwoods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Johnson
                                                                                                                                                   a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Johnson              Ln.
                                                                                                                                                  l Ro
                                                                                                                                           Hau                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                       Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Roa d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coastal Zone Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pu
P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                     S t ew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                           ar                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                   t                                   Manzanita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                                                                       St                                                                                                                                                                           k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ln.                                                                                                                                                                                              Creek                              Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Puddin g
                                                                                                                                                                        Elm St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ro          ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Countr y                   Road
                                                                                                                                                                        Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                            ce                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pudding                                                Creek                                     Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a in         Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 un
                                                                                                                                                               2                  Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                      ilr o
                                                                                                                                                                                            ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fir St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Har old Street
                                                                                                                                                                                 rn
                                                                                                                                                                            te                 Pine                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7                                 Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                        es
                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                      4 59 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                               Laurel                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nurnberger Lan                                                                                                                                                                           Huckleberry Lan
                                                                                                                                                                   3                         Redwood                                       Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Denniso n                                           Mall Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                         10 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Monsen Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      McPherson S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Harrison S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                               Alder                           S           St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S                                                                                                                                                                                          Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Howlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                       T                                                                                                                                                                             Corry                     Ha r ol d                                                                           Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Terrace C t                                                                            Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                Oa k                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                       MAIN STREE
                                                                                                                                                                                               Madr one                                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                 Park St .                                Florence St .                                      Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stree t         Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Acorn Dr .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stree t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Willow                        St                                                           Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lyta Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma ple                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Alley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S tr ee t                S tr ee t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dana St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S. Sanderson Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                               Hazel                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                Chestnut                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stree t                               S tr ee t                                 S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ha r ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15                        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16 Woodlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lincoln St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ebbin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S. Harriso n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ota Avenu e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S. Whippl e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Grove S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Driv e          Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Walnut                                                                                        Street                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ois                                                                                                                                          R iv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v ie w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                      18                                                                                                                              River D r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C IR C L                                Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S o ut                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h                             S E QU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .                                                            Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tl e St                   Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Myr                   Haz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    elwo        d St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                            19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W i n d in g                           W ay
                                                                                                                                       Avenu
                                                                                                                                        venu
                                                                                                                                         e ue
                                                                        Monterey Av .
                                                                        M                           Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Roa d
                 Cliff Wa y
                              Avenue           Drive
                                                                                                                                       Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                       Harbo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                      Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Camille
                                                                                                                                                                                                    an
                                                                                                                                                                                                    V ie w Boat Yard r .
                                       Ocean             View                           Drive
                              Neptun
                                p e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hanso n
                                                                                        20                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Benso                                                                    Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a                             e
                                               Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s                                                                                                                                                                                                              e                                                              ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Babcock Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g   y 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lan
                                        Bayview Avenue
                                                Ave                                                                                                                           Creekk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lane
                                                                                                                                       re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e                               e
                                                                                                                                      Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pine Tree Lan                   Gorstrom Lan                                                                                             Olsen Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S ummers
                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                           ad
                                                                               n.                                     Ro
                                                                                                                                                         Highway
                                                                            eL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway 20
                                                                r   e lin                                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                             ho
                                                                                                                           H ig h w
                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hare Creek Terrac
                                                                                        Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                       Coas t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lahmon Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Veronic a                 Chinquapi n              Sears Lan                                        A nd r e a
                                                                                                                             O ld                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tex-Mon t
                                                                                                                                                                            Simpson                                            Lan                      e
         non-residential projects, no maximum outdoor standard is established other than the exterior
         environment cannot exceed the lower limit of the unacceptable range, since noise mitigation is
         not feasible at these noise exposure levels. Building construction will incorporate noise
         reduction measures recommended by an acoustic engineer to reduce interior noise levels to
         an acceptable level. For non-residential projects, the interior noise level is what is important.
         The conditionally acceptable noise levels indicate that interior noise levels can be reduced to
         an acceptable level given noise reduction implementation. Non-residential projects may be
         allowed even if the exterior noise environment is within the conditionally acceptable range. No
         standards are established for industrial uses since the exterior noise environment is not
         important for such uses.
4        Sensitive receptors are land uses that are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
         homes, schools, and libraries. Exterior noise levels for these types of uses where the uses
         include outdoor use locations (e.g., such as schools) should not exceed those allowed as
         normally acceptable in Table N-4. For those uses where the use areas are within buildings
         (e.g., hospitals, halls, and churches), interior noise levels should be reduced as described
         under No. 3 above, but projects can be permitted with exterior noise levels within the
         conditionally acceptable range. Map N-1: Noise Sensitive Receptors shows the location of
         some noise sensitive uses in the City.
5.       These standards are not intended to be applied reciprocally. In other words, if an area is
         currently below the desired noise standard, a project that causes an increase in noise up to
         the maximum should not necessarily be permitted. The impact of a proposed project on
         existing land use should be evaluated in terms of the potential for adverse community
         response, based on existing community noise levels, regardless of the compatibility
         standards.
6.       The Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards should be reviewed in relation to the
         specific source of noise. These standards are based on measurement systems which
         average noise over a 24-hour period and do not take into account single-event noise sources.
         Different noise sources yielding the same composite noise exposure do not necessarily create
         the same environment. Additional standards may be applied on a case-by-case basis where
         supported by acoustical analysis to assess the effects of single-event noise sources.
F.       Goals, Polices and Programs
Goal N-1           Protect City residents from harmful and annoying effects of exposure to
                   excessive noise.
Policy N-1.1 General Noise Levels: The maximum allowable noise levels are established in this
Element.
Policy N-1.2 Reduce Noise Impacts: Avoid or reduce noise impacts first through site planning and
project design. Barriers and structural changes may be used as mitigation techniques only when
planning and design prove insufficient.
         Program N-1.2.1: Adopt and use a Noise Ordinance in environmental review of all
         development proposals and incorporate project design measures to reduce noise to allowable
         limits. The Noise Ordinance should include the noise standards described in this Element as
         well as consider other noise concerns, including but not limited to, allowable hours for grading
         and construction, allowable noise levels for electronic sound devices (e.g., radios, stereos,
8 – Noise Element                                      8-7                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         etc.), time restrictions on the use of mechanical devices (e.g., leafblowers and other power
         equipment), and requirements for the placement of fixed equipment (e.g., air conditioners and
         condensers).
         Program N-1.2.2: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for projects
         that would cause a “substantial increase” in noise as defined by the following criteria or would
         generate unusual noise which could cause significant adverse community response:
                  a)      cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 3 dB or more;
                  b)      cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 2 dB or more if the
                          Ldn would exceed 70 dB; or
                  c)      cause the Ldn resulting exclusively from project-generated traffic to exceed an
                          Ldn of 60 dB at any existing residence.
         Program N-1.2.3: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for
         proposed projects that City staff finds may generate unusual noise that would cause
         significant adverse community response, such as, but not limited to, night-time, single-event
         noise or recurring impulse noise.
Policy N-1.3 Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards: Ensure that all new noise sensitive
development proposals be reviewed with respect to Table N-4: Noise and Land Use Compatibility
Standards. Noise exposure shall be determined through actual on-site noise measurements.
Policy N-1.4 Residential and Noise Sensitive Land Use Standards: Require a standard of 45 Ldn for
indoor noise level for all new residential development including hotels and motels, and a standard of
60 Ldn for outdoor noise at residences. These limits shall be reduced by 5 dB for senior housing and
residential care facilities.
         Program N-1.4.1: Use the standards in Policy N-1.2.2 to determine the need for noise studies
         and require new developments to provide noise attenuation features as a condition of
         approving new projects.
         Program N-1.4.2: Require an acoustical study for all new residential projects with a future Ldn
         noise exposure of 60 Ldn or greater. The study shall describe how the project will comply with
         the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards. The studies shall also satisfy the
         requirements set forth in Title 24, part 2 of the California Code of Regulations, Noise
         Insulation Standards, for multi-family attached dwellings, hotels, motels, etc. regulated by Title
         24.
Policy N-1.5 Non-Transportation Noise Generation: For new non-transportation noise generators,
Table N-5 describes the maximum noise level at the nearest residential property line:
8 – Noise Element                                        8-8                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                         TABLE N-5
   NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NEW PROJECTS AFFECTED BY OR INCLUDING
                                      NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                  Noise Level                         Daytime                             Nighttime
                   Descriptor                  (7 A.M. to 10 P.M.)                  (10 P.M. to 7 A.M.)
       Hourly Leq dB                                     55                                    45
       Maximum level, dB                                 75                                    65
       Note: These noise levels apply to the residential property line nearest the project. Each of the noise
              levels shall be lowered by five dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or
              music, or for recurring impulsive noises. These noise level standards do not apply to residential
              units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings).
Policy N-1.6 Mitigate Noise Impacts: Mitigate noise impacts to the maximum feasible extent.
         Program N-1.6.1: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures, when warranted,
         for new developments and roadway improvements which affect noise sensitive uses such as
         residences, schools, hospitals, libraries, and convalescent homes.
         Program N-1.6.2: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for any project
         that would potentially generate non-transportation noise levels in a residential area such that
         noise levels would exceed the planning standards set forth in Program N-1.2.2 and/or Table
         N-5.
         Program N-1.6.3: Work with Caltrans to ensure that adequate noise studies are prepared and
         alternative noise mitigation measures are considered when State and Federal funds are
         available.
         Program N-1.6.4: Consider and carefully evaluate the noise impacts of all street, highway, and
         other transportation projects.
         Program N-1.6.5: Recommend acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for all
         projects that would be exposed to noise levels in excess of those deemed normally
         acceptable, as defined in Table N-4.
         Program N-1.6.6: Consider developing an ordinance that regulates the allowable hours of
         construction activities.
         Program N-1.6.7: Consider requiring post-construction testing and sign-off by an acoustical
         engineer for residential projects exposed to an Ldn in excess of 65 dB to ensure compliance
         with applicable exterior and interior standards in the Noise and Land Use Compatibility
         Standards.
         Program N-1.6.8: Restrict truck traffic to designated routes.
8 – Noise Element                                                  8-9                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

9.       SUSTAINABILITY ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
This Sustainability Element’s goals, policies, and programs facilitate environmental, social, and
economic well-being for all Fort Bragg residents by encouraging green building, renewable
energy, energy conservation, water conservation, recycling and waste reduction in all new
construction and remodel projects. Element 4 Conservation and Open Space and Element 5
Circulation of this General Plan also address components of sustainability, including: stormwater
management, habitat protection, parks, and bicycle facilities.
Green Building. Green Building consists of utilizing building siting, design, construction
techniques, and building materials to reduce building operating costs and the negative impacts of
buildings on the environment and its occupants. Green building techniques are applied to the
treatment of the building site, to improve water and energy efficiency, in the selection of materials
and resources, and to improve indoor environmental quality. Construction practices, building
technologies, and best practices are likely to evolve, and new practices and technologies are
likely to be developed during the life of the General Plan. Consequently, the General Plan
focuses on performance-based requirements to achieve sustainability by using the US Green
Building Council’s LEED® (Leadership in Environment and Energy Design) rating system.
Energy Conservation. The City has adopted a green house gas (GHG) reduction goal of 20%
by 2020. The City has also prepared a Climate Action Plan to help the City realize this goal. As
nearly 40% percent of the nation's energy is consumed by homes and commercial buildings, the
policies in this General Plan are needed to reach the City’s GHG reduction goal. In addition, by
making buildings more energy efficient, building owners will save on long term operating costs.
Water Conservation. The City of Fort Bragg depends on surface water flows to serve the water
demands of city residents and businesses. Surface flows are highly dependent on annual
weather patterns, and weather patterns are likely to change due to Climate Change. Thus water
use minimization in all development is necessary to ensure that the City can continue to serve
existing and new development. The Sustainability Element uses a multi-pronged approach to
minimize consumption of potable water, including: minimization of water demand indoors and
out; use of potable water for potable purposes; and encouraging reuse of storm water and grey
water on-site for landscaping irrigation. Reducing water also saves energy, since water pumping
and wastewater treatment require significant amounts of energy.
Waste Reduction. Waste reduction is as important as recycling, in that it saves natural
resources, energy, disposal space and costs, and reduces pollution risks. Additionally, the
waste leaving the City of Fort Bragg is hauled long distances and contributes to the City’s GHG
production.
9 - Sustainability Element             9-1                                             November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

B.       Goals, Policies and Programs
Green Building
Goal S-1:           Maximize the use of green building practices and materials in new and
                    existing development.
Policy S-1.1 Building Reuse: Where existing buildings in the Plan Area are structurally sound and
reuse is economically feasible, reuse of buildings in whole or part is preferred.
Policy S-1.2 Encourage Green Techniques: All green building techniques are encouraged, with
preference given to techniques that address local issues, such as use of locally produced natural
materials, water and energy conservation measures, and techniques that respond appropriately
to Fort Bragg’s cool, rainy environment, such as passive solar design and low impact
development (LID) strategies.
         Program S-1.2.1: Require LEED Certification for large projects. Modify the Inland Land
         Use and Development Code to require LEED Certification or equivalent for all new
         development projects of more than 5,000 square feet and LEED-NC silver rating or
         equivalent for all projects of more than 10,000 square feet.
         Program S-1.2.2: Provide incentives for adherence to LEED for smaller residential and
         commercial projects. Review and revise the Inland Land Use and Development Code to
         incorporate planning incentives for development projects that adhere to the relevant
         USGBC LEED standards or Build It Green’s GreenPoint Rated standard for commercial
         and residential development respectively.
         Program S-1.2.3: Promote the use of building materials that maintain healthy indoor air
         quality in an effort to reduce irritation and exposure to toxins and allergens for building
         occupants. Promote the use of building materials, furniture and paint that maintain
         healthy indoor air quality, and discourage the use of materials that degrade indoor air
         quality.
         Program S-1.2.4: Revise the Citywide Design Guidelines to make green building
         practices an important criterion in the development review process.
         Program S-1.2.5: Train City staff with responsibilities in construction project management
         and development permit review, in green building techniques and materials.
         Program S-1.2.6: Foster awareness in Fort Bragg’s business and residential communities
         of the economic and environmental benefits of green building practices.
         Program S-1.2.7: Provide green building technical assistance and referrals as part of
         Planning Counter services.
Policy S-1.3 Municipal Green Building: All new construction of City-owned buildings shall
incorporate sufficient green building methods and techniques to qualify for the equivalent of
9 - Sustainability Element               9-2                                            November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

LEEDTM Certified rating. Renovation of City-owned buildings shall seek to incorporate LEEDTM
pre-requisites and credits, where feasible.
Energy
Goal S-2             Encourage development that minimizes the demand for non-renewable
                     energy and reduces Green House Gas (GHG) emissions.
Policy S-2.1 Passive Solar Design Strategies: All building and site design shall use passive solar
design strategies for space heating and lighting to reduce energy demand to the extent feasible.
Policy S-2.2 Alternative Energy: Encourage the development and use of alternative sources of
energy such as wind, solar, and biomass to meet Fort Bragg's energy needs.
       Program S-2.2.1: Revise the City’s Zoning Ordinance to allow small wind, solar and
       geothermal systems for on-site use as a permitted use in all zones within the City.
Policy S-2.3: Reduce Energy Demand with a goal of Net Zero Energy in New Construction. All
new construction shall minimize energy use. Net zero buildings and homes are encouraged.
These homes produce as much energy (through conservation, photovoltaic panels, solar hot
water, wind, and geothermal) as they consume and have a net zero impact on green house gas
production.
         Program S-2.3.1: Continue to adopt the California Green Building Code with a goal of
         achieving net zero energy performance in new residential buildings by 2020.
         Program S-2.3.2: Review the California Green Building Code in 2018 and if Council
         determines that the California Green Building Code will not achieve net zero energy
         performance in new residential construction by 2018, consider adopting net zero energy
         regulations for residential construction in Fort Bragg by 2020.
         Program S-2.3.3: Develop educational and financing programs that help businesses and
         homeowners improve the energy efficiency of existing and new buildings.
Policy S-2.4: Require passive solar design in new construction, where feasible, as part of
Design Review.
         Program S-2.4.1: Modify the Citywide Design Guidelines to include guidelines that require
         passive solar design for residential and commercial new construction projects.
Policy S-2.5 Use of Local and Renewable Energy: Buildings and infrastructure that create
and/or use locally and renewably generated energy are encouraged. Photovoltaic and wind
energy systems are encouraged. The installation of solar panels or other clean energy power
generation sources over parking areas is preferred.
Policy S-2.6 Climate Action Plan: Prepare and periodically update the City’s greenhouse gas
inventory and Climate Action Plan in order to achieve the City’s GHG emission reduction targets.
9 - Sustainability Element              9-3                                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Policy S-2.7 Energy Conservation Measures in existing Buildings: Encourage owners of existing
dwellings to retrofit with energy-saving features.
         Program S-2.7.1: Require retrofitting of energy-saving features in existing dwellings as a
         part of the City's Housing Rehabilitation Program by providing information, technical
         assistance, and requiring retrofits as part of any loan or grant program.
         Program S-2.7.2: Develop programs to assist residential and commercial building owners
         with energy efficiency retrofits and the installation of alternative energy.
Water
Goal S-3:           Minimize the use of potable water in new and existing development.
Policy S-3.1 Reduce Water Use: Minimize the use of potable water in new and existing
development.
         Program S-3.1.1: Modify the Inland Land Use and Development Code to require that new
         development achieves at least 60 percent of the possible credits in the Water Efficiency
         category of Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design for New Construction
         (LEED-NC) and LEED for Homes or equivalent.
Policy S-3.2 Rainwater Capture: The installation of cisterns is encouraged to capture rainwater
from roofs for all water needs and for flood control during heavy storms. Cisterns may be located
above or below ground.
Policy S-3.3 Water Conservation Education: Business/property owners shall incorporate
educational programs that promote water conservation habits and practices in all hotel,
restaurant, and multi-family residential development.
Policy S-3.4 Drought Tolerant Landscaping: New development shall include drought tolerant
landscaping for landscaped areas in commercial and multi-family residential uses.
         Program S-3.4.1: Require landscaping for all new commercial and industrial development
         to use drought tolerant plants and no vegetative turf unless recreation needs or other
         area functions specifically requires turf.
         Program S-3.4.2: Develop programs to educate single-family homeowners on water
         conserving landscaping methods and discourage the use of turf.
         Program S-3.4.3: Encourage green roofs, landscape-based treatment measures, and
         pervious materials for hardscape, and other stormwater management practices to reduce
         water pollution are encouraged.
Waste
9 - Sustainability Element               9-4                                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
Goal S-4             Reduce, recycle, and reuse solid waste generated in the City.
Policy S-4.1 Recycling: All commercial, office, and multi-family residential developments shall
provide a centralized drop-off location for recyclables and compostable materials.
Policy S-4.2 Recycling and Reuse of Solid Waste: Comply with State requirements to reduce the
volume of solid waste through recycling and reduction of solid waste.
         Program S-4.2.1: Continue to participate in the County’s Integrated Waste Management
         Plan operated by the Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority.
         Program S-4.2.2: Continue to implement the City’s Construction and Demolition Waste
         Recycling Ordinance. Periodically review the ordinance and consider increasing the
         target diversion amounts.
9 - Sustainability Element              9-5                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                    Raw Water Pond
                               Raw Water Pond with Hex Tiles
9 - Sustainability Element        9-6                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
  Fort Bragg
  Inland General Plan
  Housing Element
  2014
City of Fort Bragg
                   Prepared by: Marie R Jones
                   Community Development Director
Section I: Housing Element                                                4
      A.    Purpose                                                       4
      B.    Relationship of the Housing Element to the General Plan       4
      C.    Summary of Findings                                           5
      D.    Quantified Objectives                                         7
      E.    Goals, Policies and Programs                                  8
      F.    Previous Housing Element                                     17
      G.    Public Participation                                         17
Section II: Housing Needs Assessment                                     20
1. Population, Employment & Housing Characteristics                      21
      Population Growth & Projections                                    21
      Employment Trends                                                  22
      Household Growth & Characteristics                                 23
2. Overpayment and Overcrowding                                          26
      Overpaying                                                         26
      Overcrowding                                                       27
4. Housing Stock Characteristics                                         28
      Housing Conditions                                                 29
      Housing Costs and Affordability                                    30
      Housing Construction Prices and Trends                             31
      Housing Units by Type of Unit                                      31
      Pending Housing Developments                                       32
      Vacancy                                                            32
5. Analysis of Developments At Risk of Conversion                        33
      Inventory of At-Risk Units                                         33
      Conversion Risk, Cost to Preserve, Entity & Financing              33
6. Special Housing Needs                                                 36
      Persons with Disabilities                                          36
      The Elderly                                                        38
      Large and Female-Headed Households                                 41
      Farmworkers                                                        42
      Families and Persons In Need of Emergency Shelters                 42
Section III: Housing Constraints Analysis                                44
7. Residential Land Inventory                                            44
      Regional Housing Needs Assessment                                  44
      Inventory of Available Land                                        44
      Environmental Constraints to Development of Vacant Land            47
      Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types                              49
      Zoning and Vacant Land Available for Emergency Shelters            50
8. Analysis of Government Constraints on Housing Development             51
      1. Annexation Standards                                            51
      2. Land Use Controls                                               51
      3. Development Fees                                                58
      4. Building Codes & Code Enforcement                               58
      5. Processing Time                                                 59
      6. Infrastructure Constraints                                      60
10 - Housing Element                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-2
      7. Potential & Actual Non-Governmental Constraints                              60
      8. Cost and Availability of Financing                                           61
      9. Community Sentiment                                                          62
9. Opportunities for Energy Conservation                                              63
Appendix A: Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element - Progress in Implementation & Evaluation
                                                                                      64
Appendix B: Parcel Specific Inventory of Vacant and Underutilized Lands               70
APPENDIX C: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS                                                  74
Appendix D: Community Input & Review                                                  75
Appendix E: Procedure for Processing Requests for Reasonable Accommodation            76
Appendix F: City of Fort Bragg Development Fees.                                      80
10 - Housing Element                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-3
SECTION I: HOUSING ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Housing Element is a statement of Fort Bragg’s vision regarding existing and future housing
needs. The Housing Element was adopted by the City Council in 2002, updated in 2004 and
again in 2009. It is certified by the State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD). This 2014 update achieves the State’s requirement that each community’s Housing
Element be updated every five years (by 2014). It consists of three sections: Section I contains
the goals, policies and implementation programs; Section II contains an analysis of the housing
needs of all economic segments of the community; and Section III analyses potential constraints
to new housing development such as availability of land, zoning, fees, and permit processing
time to name just a few required items of analysis. The goals, policies and programs are based
on the needs identified in Section II, the constraints detailed in Section III and required
compliance with State Housing Law.
An essential goal of the Fort Bragg Housing Element is for the City to achieve an adequate
supply of safe, decent housing for all residents of Fort Bragg. In order to achieve this goal, the
policies and programs of the Housing Element set the framework to:
1. Provide additional affordable housing through the implementation of the Inclusionary
     Housing ordinance, pre-approved second unit program, density bonus law, and the
     development of affordable housing projects for a variety of special needs populations.
2. Maintain and preserve the existing housing stock and retain the character of Fort Bragg's
     residential neighborhoods;
3. Meet the City's regional housing needs allocations; and
4. Improve the energy efficiency and sustainability of new housing development and existing
     housing (this objective is fulfilled in the General Plan’s new Sustainability Element).
The City has a commitment to Fort Bragg residents to maintain the identity and quality of the
residential neighborhoods. At the same time, the City must work to meet its share of regional
housing needs. The Housing Element articulates Fort Bragg's housing goals and establishes
policies and programs to guide decision-makers to meet the community’s housing needs.
B.       Relationship of the Housing Element to the General Plan
Consistency of the Housing Element with the other elements of the City's General Plan is
essential to having a complete and legally adequate General Plan. The City’s General Plan was
updated in 2014. The update addressed all statutory changes in State Law such as new policies
and programs regarding fire hazards, flood control, disadvantaged communities, etc. The
Housing Element is one of eight General Plan elements and it complements, and is
complemented by, policies from the other Elements. For example:
           The Land Use Element establishes the zoning designations and maximum and
              minimum densities for residential development. It also establishes policies and
              programs regarding the preservation and enhancement of residential neighborhoods
              as well as where best to locate new development.
           The Public Facilities Element sets forth goals and policies to ensure that new
              residential development is served by public services and that new development pays
              its fair share of the cost of using these services.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-4

             The Conservation, Open Space, Energy, and Parks Element sets policies and
              goals for the protection of sensitive and natural resources, reducing energy use in
              buildings, encouraging alternative energy, improving water quality establishing, and
              preserving parks and open space.
             The Circulation Element identifies the City’s existing circulation system and level of
              service for roads and streets. It also establishes policies and programs for traffic in
              residential neighborhoods and improving public transit, pedestrian facilities, and
              bikeways.
             The Community Design Element establishes a number of policies and programs
              that impact housing development and design, including policies and programs
              related to design review, landscaping, siting, property maintenance, exterior lighting,
              and more.
             The Safety Element identifies areas of the community that are subject to safety
              concerns such as flooding, tsunami events, earthquakes, and slope erosion. It
              further establishes policies and programs to minimize these risks as well as reducing
              fire hazards.
             The Noise Element establishes noise standards for residential and mixed-use
              neighborhoods, as well as specific types of development such as multi-family and
              single family developments. It also sets requirements for mitigating noise impacts in
              new developments.
             The Sustainability Element includes policies and programs to reduce energy use,
              increase energy efficiency, reduce greenhouse gasses, and improve the
              sustainability of commercial and residential development through policies and
              programs that encourage green building design, materials, and techniques in new
              construction and remodels. This element also addresses steps to reduce waste
              production. The Sustainability Element complements the Housing Element in
              achieving a sustainable Fort Bragg.
No internal inconsistencies have been identified between the goals and policies of the Housing
Element and the other Elements of the 2014 Inland General Plan. In addition, constraints
identified in other elements such as limited water supply and natural resource concerns are
recognized in the Housing Element. In order to maintain compliance and consistency between
Elements, the City conducted a consistency analysis when changes were made to the Inland
General Plan and the Inland Land Use and Development Code in 2013 and 2014 respectively.
Relationship of the Housing Element to the City’s Certified Local Coastal Program. A
portion of the City of Fort Bragg is also located within the California Coastal Zone. The City
adopted a Coastal General Plan in 2008, which is part of the City’s certified Local Coastal
Program. The Housing Element within the LCP will be updated, and essentially identical to the
Inland General Plan Housing Element, except that caveats will be added to the Coastal Housing
Element to ensure that it complies with the Coastal Act. The data included in Section II and
Section III of this Housing Element applies to the entire geography of the City of Fort Bragg,
those areas in and outside of the Coastal Zone.
C.       Summary of Findings
Listed below are the key demographic, economic and regulatory findings from Section II:
Housing Needs Assessment.
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-5

Population and Job Growth
 The City’s population increased slightly since 2010 from 7,278 residents to 7,311 residents
     in 2013. This represents an annual growth rate of 0.1%.
 In Fort Bragg, future job growth is projected to be primarily in the lower-wage services and
     retail sectors with job declines projected in the relatively better paid resource extraction and
     manufacturing sectors.
Household Characteristics, Overpayment and Overcrowding
 More than half of Fort Bragg households (54%) are renters.
 15% of households are female headed.
 60% of households pay in excess of 30% of their income on housing. Renters are more likely
     to overpay (64%) than owners (55%).
 Only 6.3% of households are overcrowded.
 Home prices have dropped from a median of $400,000 in 2008 to a median of $275,000 in
     2013, making homeownership more affordable to a larger number of families in Fort Bragg.
 According to area property managers and real estate brokers, the average rents for new
     leases signed within the last six months in Fort Bragg are as follows: $815/month for a one-
     bedroom apartment, $1,200/month for a two-bedroom apartment, and $1,300/month for a
     three bedroom house (see page 29).
 The vacancy rate is relatively low in Fort Bragg at 4.8% for renters and 2.5% for owners.
Housing Conditions
 A 2009 Housing Conditions Survey found that housing in Fort Bragg is of sound condition.
     Only 9% of all units require repairs, and half of units requiring repairs only require minor
     repairs. However this survey did not include alley houses, which comprise an estimated 25%
     of the City’s single family housing stock. Many of these houses are in poor repair and a
     subsequent housing conditions survey slated for 2015 may find additional housing conditions
     issues.
The effect of land availability, financing availability and governmental regulations on the supply
of housing is analyzed in Section III: Housing Constraints Analysis and summarized below.
Affordable Housing Goals and Availability of Vacant Land to Achieve Those Goals
 The City of Fort Bragg’s housing allocation, prepared by the Mendocino Council of
     Governments (MCOG), indicates that Fort Bragg will need to accommodate 11 affordable
     housing units and 21 units overall over the five year period of this Housing Element (2015-
     2020).
 The City has sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land to meet its regional housing
     allocation of 11 affordable units and 21 units overall, since 1,331 units could be built on
     vacant parcels within City limits given current zoning and environmental constraints. The
     majority (522) of these units could be higher-density multi-family units in high density and
     mixed use zoning districts that could accommodate low and very low incomes households.
 The rate of new residential construction fluctuates significantly from year to year depending
     on market and economic conditions, but overall it averages about 21 units per year.
Governmental Regulations and Impact on Housing Market
 Residential land use is currently allowed within six residential zones, and as part of mixed-
     use projects or multi-family projects in four commercial zones.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-6

    The City provides for two story development in all zones, and three story residential
     development in the majority of zones. In addition, the City’s lot coverage ratios and FAR
     (Floor Area Ratio) requirements allow for compact higher density residential development.
     Setbacks are reasonable given adjacent uses and the character of the community. A Use
     Permit is required for projects on land zoned for higher densities, as is a Coastal
     Development Permit required for all residential projects that are located within the City’s
     Coastal Zone.
    Fees for planning permits (e.g. Design Review, Use Permit, Variance, Rezoning, and
     subdivision map approval) range from $575 to $1,950. The fees charged by the City to
     process and review development applications are lower than comparable market-rate fees
     for technical plan review tasks.
    Additional fees include school impact fees and charges levied for building, electrical,
     plumbing, and other permits, and City capacity fees (development impact fees). For a typical
     three-bedroom, two-bathroom single-family home, City planning fees, building fees, and
     water, sewer and drainage capacity fees total approximately $16,000.
    The time taken to process development applications affects housing costs, since interest on
     loans must continue to be paid, and the longer it takes for the development to be approved,
     the higher the costs will be. The time to process residential development applications does
     not constitute a constraint in Fort Bragg. Typical ministerial permits that do not require
     Planning Commission action take from a day to three weeks to process. Standard permits
     (Use Permit, Design Review, and Coastal Development Permit) that require Planning
     Commission action take from six to 12 weeks. Larger projects can take from four months to
     a year (projects which require a change of zoning, major subdivision approval, or preparation
     of an Environmental Impact Report).
    Despite the maximum development potential figures, the lack of sufficient water storage for
     drought conditions is a potential constraint to future housing development. However the City
     is currently in the planning and environmental review process to add 45 acre feet of new
     water storage.
D.        Quantified Objectives
The objectives in this update will be quantified to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(RHNA) for the City. The City of Fort Bragg has identified four broad housing priorities:
     1. Provide additional affordable housing through the implementation of the Inclusionary
          Housing ordinance, pre-approved second unit program, density bonus law, and the
          development of affordable housing projects for a variety of special needs populations;
     2. Maintain and preserve the existing housing stock and retain the character of Fort Bragg's
          residential neighborhoods; and
     3. Meet the City's regional housing needs allocations; and
     4. Improve the energy efficiency and sustainability of new housing development and
          existing housing (this last objective is addressed in the City’s new Sustainability
          Element).
Past trends will provide a good foundation on which to project future housing development in
Fort Bragg. A total of 402 dwelling units, of which 126 were affordable units, have been
constructed in Fort Bragg since the 1991 Housing Need Allocations (see Table 4.2 on page 10-
29).
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                             10-7

Based on the trends, goals, policies, and objectives outlined above, and known projects and
funding for affordable housing project which will be implemented in the next two years, the City
has established quantified objectives illustrated in Table D-1 below. Over the next planning
period, the City’s goal is to have 85 new units constructed, of which 40 will be designated for low
and very low-income households. In addition, through the City’s rehabilitation program, the City
anticipates assisting 22 low and very low income families with home repair and weatherization.
Given past trends, the City anticipates that an additional 40 units will be repaired and or
rehabilitated with private funds and 94 units will be preserved. In total 239 units will be built,
rehabilitated or conserved in the five-year period.
 Table D-1: Quantified Objectives, City of Fort Bragg, 2014-2019
                                        New                                 Conservation/
 Income Category                                         Rehabilitation
                                   Construction                              Preservation      Total
 Extremely Low Income                    10                     4                    0           14
 Very Low Income                         10                     8                   38           56
 Low Income                              20                     8                   56           84
 Moderate Income                         20                    20                    0           40
 Above Moderate                          25                    20                    0           45
 Total                                   85                    60                   94          239
 Source: City of Fort Bragg Community Development Department, 2014
 The Construction objective refers to the number of new units that potentially may be
 constructed using public and/or private sources over the planning period of the element
 given the locality’s land resources, constraints and proposed programs.
 The Rehabilitation objective refers to the number of existing units expected to be
 rehabilitated during the planning period.
 The Conservation/Preservation objective refers to the preservation of the existing affordable
 housing stock throughout the planning period.
E.        Goals, Policies and Programs
The format of the goals and policies of the Housing Element differs from the rest of the Inland
General Plan, in large measure to meet the requirements of State Housing Element Law
(Government Code §365580 et seq.). For every goal there are several policies, each with one
or more implementation programs that contain the following information:
           A concise statement of the specific City actions that will be taken to implement the
              program;
           The City department or other agency responsible for implementation; and
           Potential financing mechanisms and a schedule for completion.
Goal H-1             Conserve and improve the existing housing supply to provide adequate,
                     safe, and decent housing for all Fort Bragg residents.
Policy H-1.1 Housing Rehabilitation: Continue and expand the City’s housing rehabilitation
and preservation programs.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                      10-8

         Program H-1.1.1 Housing Rehabilitation Projects: Seek funding through the
         Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program and other State and/or Federal
         programs to assist in the rehabilitation and conservation of multi-family residential
         projects. Work with non-profit and for-profit affordable housing developers to achieve
         successful rehabilitation of multi-family housing. Utilize CDBG housing rehabilitation
         funds to add bedrooms to overcrowded units, as feasible.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City, CDBG, HOME
                    Scheduling:      Annually as an ongoing program
                    Quantification:  30 units
         Program H-1.1.2           Target Areas: Continue to identify target areas and specific
         properties where housing rehabilitation is most needed through a periodic update of the
         housing conditions survey which identifies the neighborhoods and areas requiring
         rehabilitation assistance.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City or CDBG
                    Scheduling:      Update in 2015
         Program H-1.1.3 Housing Rehabilitation/Preservation Program: Continue the City’s
         housing rehabilitation program which provides low interest loans for the rehabilitation of
         homes owned or occupied by very low to moderate income households. Continue to
         seek funding from CDBG, HOME and other sources for the housing rehabilitation loan
         program. Facilitate citizen awareness of the City’s rehabilitation loan program.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City, CDBG, HOME and other State and Federal funds
                    Scheduling:      In place and ongoing
                    Quantification:  30 units
         Program H-1.1.4 Capital Improvement Program: Consider capital improvement projects
         necessary to maintain the community’s older neighborhoods as part of the City Council’s
         annual review of the Capital Improvement Program.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development and Public Works Departments
                    Financing:       City, State and Federal funding sources
                    Scheduling:      Annually as an ongoing program
Policy H-1.2 Discourage Conversion of Residential Units: Discourage the conversion of
residential units to other uses.
         Program H-1.2.1 Single-Family Homes: Consider revising the zoning ordinance so that
         single-family residences, located in commercial zones, can be used as single-family
         residences, even if their legal non-conforming status has expired due to vacancy or
         interim commercial use.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City
                    Scheduling:      2014
         Program H-1.2.2 Housing Rehabilitation in Non-Residential Areas: Continue to permit
         substantial rehabilitation of, and additions to, existing housing located in zones where it
         is a legal nonconforming use.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-9

                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
         Program H-1.2.3 Regulate Conversion of Residential Space for the Cultivation of
         Medical Marijuana: Continue to implement the City’s medical marijuana cultivation
         ordinance to limit the area in a residential structure that can be used for cultivation of
         Medical Marijuana.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department, Police Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the municipal code have been completed.
                                    Implementation is ongoing.
Policy H-1.3 Energy Conservation & Green Building: Promote energy conservation
improvements and green building improvements for existing and proposed residential units.
         Program H-1.3.1 Energy Conservation Program: Continue to provide energy
         conservation and green building materials and techniques workshops, display board and
         brochures. Continue the City’s energy conservation program as funding allows.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department, REDI
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
         See Sustainability Element for Policies and Programs regarding Green Building, Energy
         Conservation, Water Conservation and Waste Reduction.
Policy H-1.4 Preserve At-Risk Units: Work with private and non-profit affordable housing
developers to preserve at-risk affordable housing projects.
         Program H-1.4.1 Develop At-Risk Units Program: Maintain an inventory of at-risk
         affordable housing units and work with property owners and non-profit affordable
         housing organizations to preserve these units by identifying and seeking funds from
         Federal, State and local agencies to preserve the units.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      HOME Program, Federal Tax Credits, Redevelopment Agency, etc.
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-1.4.2 Require At-Risk Education Program: Work with property owners and
         non-profit affordable housing organizations to ensure that tenants receive required
         education and notifications regarding at-risk units.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-2           Provide a range of housing, including single-family homes, townhouses,
                   apartments, and other housing types to meet the housing needs of all
                   economic segments of the community.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-10

Policy H-2.1 Regional Housing Needs: Ensure that adequate residentially-zoned land is
available to accommodate the City’s Regional Housing Needs Determination as described in
Section II.
         Program H-2.1.1 Inventory of Infill Sites: Maintain the inventory of vacant and
         underdeveloped residentially designated land in the City’s GIS system. Provide copies of
         the inventory for public distribution on the City website.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City
                    Scheduling:       Ongoing, as vacant sites are developed the GIS system is updated
                                      and a map and list of vacant sites is posted on the City’s website.
Policy H-2.2 Mixed-Use Development: Encourage the development of mixed-use projects that
include multi-family residential uses (upstairs and at the rear of properties) in conjunction with
commercial enterprises on the street frontage in commercial zones and use design review to
minimize conflicts between residential and commercial uses.
Policy H-2.3 Secondary Dwelling Units: Continue to facilitate the construction of secondary
dwelling units on residential properties.
         Program H-2.3.1 Secondary Dwelling Unit Design: Continue to implement the City’s
         free secondary unit program to provide affordable and aesthetically pleasing second unit
         designs for the development of secondary units in Fort Bragg.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City and Housing Developers
                    Scheduling:       Second unit designs have been prepared and implementation is
                                      ongoing
         Program H-2.3.2 Reduce Development Impact Fees for Secondary Units and Smaller
         Units: Consider establishing an updated Capacity Fee for small residential units that
         recognizes the reduced impacts on the City’s sewer, water, drainage, parks, and streets
         of smaller units of one bedroom or less.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City and Housing Developers
                    Scheduling:       2015
         Program H-2.3.3 Develop Amnesty/Legalization Program for Illegal Residential Units:
         Consider establishing an amnesty or legalization program for illegal residential units,
         especially second units, that includes payment of capacity and connection fees and
         required improvements to meet the health and safety code.
                    Responsibility:   Community Development Department
                    Financing:        City and property owners
                    Scheduling:       2015-2016
Policy H-2.4 Manufactured Housing: Continue to encourage manufactured homes through the
application of established design standards.
Policy H-2.5 Infill Housing: Encourage housing development on existing infill sites in order to
efficiently utilize existing infrastructure.
10 - Housing Element                                                                              2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-11

         Program H-2.5.1: Continue to update the vacant parcels map and provide information to
         potential developers about infill development opportunities in Fort Bragg.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City and Housing Developers
                     Scheduling:     Ongoing. As vacant sites are developed, the GIS system is updated
                                     and a map and list of vacant sites is posted on the City’s website.
Goal H-3           Expand affordable housing opportunities for persons with special
                   housing needs such as the elderly, the disabled, households with very low
                   to moderate incomes, and first time home buyers.
Policy H-3.1 Available Funding Sources: Utilize County, State and Federal programs and
other funding sources that provide housing opportunities for lower-income and special needs
households.
         Program H-3.1.1 Available Funding: Seek available State and Federal assistance to
         develop affordable housing for seniors, the disabled, persons with developmental
         disabilities, lower-income large households, and households with special housing needs.
         Work with the County Community Development Commission (CDC), Rural Community
         Housing Development Corporation (RCHDC), and other non-profit and for-profit
         affordable housing developers to apply for and implement HCD programs such as the
         HOME Program. Seek funding for affordable housing from other sources such as the
         United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Tax Credit financing, and CDBG.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      State and Federal sources
                     Scheduling:     Apply for funding as funding cycles occur, a minimum of one funding
                                     application per year.
Policy H-3.2 Encourage Senior Housing: Encourage affordable and market rate senior
housing projects to be developed with density bonuses and flexible parking standards where
consistent with maintaining the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
         Program H-3.2.1 Affordable Senior Housing: Maintain an inventory which identifies
         properties which are potentially well-suited for senior housing. Work with developers to
         facilitate funding and construction of senior housing.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
                     Financing:      City
                     Scheduling:     Update inventory of properties suitable for senior housing once a year.
Policy H-3.3 House Sharing: Encourage and facilitate house sharing programs for seniors
through the conversion of existing residences into shared housing for seniors.
Policy H-3.4 Encourage Co-Housing: Encourage the development of co-housing for all family
and household types, including seniors, families and the disabled.
Policy H-3.5 Increase Affordable Housing Development: Encourage the construction of
housing units which are affordable to households with very low to moderate incomes.
         Program H-3.5.1 Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Continue to implement the City’s
         Inclusionary Housing Ordinance.
                     Responsibility: Community Development Department
10 - Housing Element                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-12

                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: Five inclusionary units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.5.2 Support Self Help Housing: Continue to provide one or two planning
         incentives for self-help affordable housing.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City and developers
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: Six self-help units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.5.3 Support SRO Housing: Continue to encourage and facilitate Single-
         Room Occupancy Units by allowing rooming and boarding with a Minor Use Permit in
         the RM, RH, and RVH zones.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: Twenty SRO units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.5.4 Prioritize City Services for Lower Income Developments: Continue to
         implement procedures to grant priority service for sewer and water services to lower-
         income residential developments.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Policy H-3.6 Density Bonus Incentives: Continue to provide density bonuses to projects that
provide a required percentage of total units affordable to very low and low-income households
and for seniors as required by State Density Bonus law.
Policy H-3.7      Large Families: Encourage housing for large families.
         Program H-3.7.1 Seek Funding to Develop or Rehabilitate Housing for Large Low-
         Income Families: Continue to work with affordable housing developers to identify a
         potential new construction or rehabilitation project that will serve large lower-income
         families and obtain and administer an HCD HOME grant or CDBG grant specifically to
         accommodate large families.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, CBDG, HOME
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
                    Quantification: Five large family units for the Housing Element period.
Policy H-3.8 Housing for the Disabled and the Developmentally Disabled: Continue to facilitate
barrier-free housing in new development. Continue to require that 10% of all units in multi-family
projects be developed in conformance with Universal Design to achieve accessibility for the
disabled and the Developmentally Disabled.
         Program H-3.8.1 Continue to provide expedited permit processing and reasonable
         accommodation program to projects targeted for persons with disabilities, including
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-13
         those with developmental disabilities. Encourage developers of supportive housing, on
         an annual basis, to develop projects targeted for persons with disabilities, including
         those with developmental disabilities. Work with the Redwood Regional Center to
         implement an outreach program to families with disabilities regarding the City’s services
         for this population. Place info about this program on the City’s website.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Ongoing
                   Quantification:  Ten units of housing for persons with disabilities for the Housing
                                    Element period. Five of these units will be for people with
                                    Developmental Disabilities.
Policy H-3.9 Emergency and Transitional Housing: Continue to support emergency shelters,
transitional housing and supportive housing within the City.
         Program H-3.9.1 Ongoing Estimates of the Demand for Emergency Housing: Continue
         to work with the Fort Bragg Police Department and homeless service providers in the
         community to maintain ongoing estimates of the demand for emergency housing in Fort
         Bragg and to develop strategies to meet that demand
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City
                    Scheduling:      Annual update
          Program H-3.9.2 Inter-Agency Cooperation: Continue to work with private, non-profit,
          County, and State agencies to provide transitional housing, supportive services and
          emergency housing for the homeless.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City, CDBG
                   Scheduling:      Ongoing
                   Quantification:  20 transitional units for the Housing Element period.
          Program H-3.9.3 Transitional and Supportive Housing: Continue to regulate transitional
          and supportive housing as a residential use subject to the same restrictions that apply
          to other residential use types and dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
          Program H-3.9.4 Emergency Shelters: Continue to allow emergency shelters as a
          permitted use in the General Commercial (CG) zoning district.
                   Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                   Financing:       City
                   Scheduling:      Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
Policy H-3.10 First Time Home Buyers: Encourage affordable housing for first time home
buyers.
         Program H-3.10.1 First Time Home Buyers: Continue to require through the inclusionary
         housing ordinance, the provision of housing units affordable to first time home buyers
         who qualify for affordable housing.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-14

                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Changes to the zoning code have been completed. Implementation is
                                    ongoing.
                    Quantification: 10 inclusionary units for the Housing Element period.
         Program H-3.10.2: Funding Sources for First Time Home Buyers: Continue applying for
         funding sources for first time home buyers such as HCD’s HOME Program and CDBG,
         and provide referrals to FHA programs offered by local lenders and sweat-equity
         programs operated by non-profit housing organizations.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, HOME, CDBG
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
                    Quantification: 20 first time home loans for the Housing Element period.
Goal H-4           Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender,
                   age, sexual orientation, marital status, or national origin.
Policy H-4.1      Equal Housing Opportunity: Continue to facilitate non-discrimination in housing.
         Program H-4.1.1 Housing Discrimination Complaints: Continue to facilitate equal
         housing opportunity by referring housing discrimination complaints to the Fair Housing
         Division of HUD. Continue to distribute information regarding equal housing opportunity
         laws and the equal housing opportunities for Fair Housing at City Hall.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
         Program H-4.1.2 Non-discrimination Clauses: Include non-discrimination clauses in
         rental agreements and deed restrictions for housing constructed with City assistance.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Policy H-4.2 Improve Accessibility to Housing: Make it easier to develop housing for seniors
and persons with disabilities.
         Program H-4.2.1 Use Housing Funds: Use CDBG funds, and other funds as available,
         to support renovations and improvements to accessibility in affordable housing for
         qualified seniors, persons with disabilities and persons with developmental disabilities.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, CDBG, HOME
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
                    Quantification: Twenty units for seniors, persons with disabilities and persons with
                                    developmental disabilities in the Housing Element Period.
         Program H-4.2.2 Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities and
         Developmental Disabilities: Continue to review the City’s land use and building
         regulations to identify constraints that may exist for the provision of housing for persons
         with disabilities and developmental disabilities, and continue to implement the City’s
         policy and program to provide reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities
10 - Housing Element                                                                          2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-15

         and developmental disabilities. Publicize revisions to land use regulations and the City’s
         policy and programs for providing reasonable accommodation for persons with
         disabilities.
                    Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                    Financing:       City
                    Scheduling:      Implemented and ongoing
                    Quantification:  Ten reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities for the
                                     Housing Element period. Five reasonable accommodations will be for
                                     people with developmental disabilities.
         Program H-4.2.3 Reasonable Accommodation: Ensure all new, multi-family construction
         meets the accessibility requirements of the federal and State Fair Housing Acts through
         local permitting and approval processes.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-5           Increase housing opportunities and improve needed services to expand
                   housing development opportunities.
         Program H-5.1.1 Continue to Pursue Strategies to Address Water Storage, Pressure,
         and Supply Issues: Continue to pursue strategies to: 1) add additional water storage
         capacity to the City’s water supply system; 2) identify and fix water leaks in the water
         supply system; 3) address water pressure issues that impact development potentials;
         and/or 4) seek new water supply as opportunities arise.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City, Infrastructure Bank, Proposition 84, Development Impact Fees
                    Scheduling:     Ongoing
Goal H-6           Adopt and Implement a Housing Element that Complies with State Law.
Policy H-6.1 Public Participation: Continue to encourage and facilitate public participation in
the formulation and review of the City's housing and development policies.
         Program H-6.1.1 Workshops: Continue to hold workshops and public hearings to
         discuss proposed revisions to the City’s Housing Element.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Dept., Community Development Committee
                    Financing:      City
                    Scheduling:     Annually
Policy H-6.2 Annual Review of Housing Element Implementation: Carry out an annual
progress report on implementation of the Housing Element.
         Program H-6.2.1 Annual Report: Prepare an annual report that describes the amount
         and type of housing constructed, the stock of affordable housing units, demolition
         permits, and conversion of residential units to other uses, and other housing-related
         activities for review by the EDAC, Planning Commission, and City Council.
                    Responsibility: Community Development Department
                    Financing:      City
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-16

                   Scheduling:      Annually (include with the annual review of the Capital Improvement
                                    Program (CIP) by the Planning Commission)
F.       Previous Housing Element
The policies and implementing actions of the previous Housing Element adopted in 2009
concentrated on preserving and rehabilitation of existing housing stock, encouraging the
construction of secondary dwelling units, mixed-use residential developments, inclusionary
housing development, and multi-family and housing development for special populations
(seniors, large families, the disabled, first time buyers, etc.). Additional priorities of the 2009
Housing Element were to:
     1) Establish and incentivize green building and sustainable development;
     2) Work with housing developers and State and Federal funding sources to develop and
         rehabilitate additional low income housing;
     3) Encourage the development of affordable housing through the implementation of the
         inclusionary housing ordinance;
     4) Provide additional housing for seniors; and
     5) Provide programs to advertise, implement, and fund these activities.
The revised Element recognizes the need to provide stronger incentives for the construction of
additional affordable housing and sustainable housing. See Appendix A for an evaluation of the
programs in the previous Housing Element.
The City has successfully achieved most of the goals established by the 2009 Housing
Element.
     1) The City has adopted a Sustainability Element in its General Plan which puts forth
         significant new green building and energy conservation requirements for new
         development. Since 2009, 28 units of housing have been developed with net zero
         energy systems, and have achieved certification by USGBC as LEED Platinum.
     2) The City has met a reasonable portion of its overall regional housing need, given the
         real estate market crash during this period. Since 2009, 50 new housing units were
         developed in the City of Fort Bragg, and 27 of these are affordable for low and very low
         income households.
     3) In addition the City revised its Zoning Code in 2014 to address the previous legal deficits
         in the code. Specifically, the City now requires or allows: 1) higher density housing (24+
         units/acre) in three of its commercial zones; 2) emergency shelters in the General
         Commercial zone; 3) second units on all residentially zoned properties; 3) Single Room
         Occupancy housing with Minor Use Permit approval in the three higher density
         residential zones; 4) an inventory of all vacant land; and 5) inclusionary housing for for-
         sale units. In addition, on the programmatic side the City continues its: 1) free secondary
         unit design program; 2) housing rehab loan program; and 3) green building and
         sustainable infrastructure programs.
This 2014 Housing Element builds on the foundation established by the previous Element and
contains new policies and implementation programs.
G.       Public Participation
The community participation process for the 2014 Housing Element was incorporated into the
update process for the entire General Plan. The process for formulating and adopting the
Updated General Plan included numerous public meetings and hearings throughout 2012 and
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-17
2013. Many of the concepts in the revised Housing Element were originally brought forward as
part of this wider General Plan discussion.
Public participation specific to this Housing Element Update was undertaken through
workshops with the Planning Commission and City Council. The City Council workshop was
advertised in the local newspaper and notices sent to affordable housing providers and housing
advocates in Mendocino County. Members of the public, and for-profit and affordable housing
developers attended the workshop. In addition, one public hearing on the Housing Element was
conducted by the Planning Commission and one public hearing was conducted by the City
Council to solicit public input.
Comments and input were solicited from the following community members and partners:
     1. Affordable Housing Developers
          Habitat for Humanity
          Rural Community Housing Development Corporation
          Community Development Commission
     2. Low Income and Homeless Service Providers
          Love in Action
          Coast Community Center
          Project Sanctuary
          The Food Bank
     3. Economic Development Partners
          Developers, Architects, Real estate professionals
     4. General Public
For a complete list of all participants involved in the public process please see Appendix D.
Input from participants at various meetings, hearings, and workshops included the following
requests and City responses:
     1. Request: Consider establishing a legalization route to the considerable number of illegal
         second and third units in Fort Bragg.
         Response: The Housing Element includes a new program to consider establishing a
         legalization (possibly amnesty) program to provide an avenue to legalize second units
         that have been constructed or converted without the necessary permits.
     2. Request: Consider establishing a process so that single family residential units that are
         located in commercial districts, but that have lost their non-conforming status, may be
         used as a residential unit with Minor Use Permit approval.
         Response: The Housing Element includes a new program to consider establishing a
         legalization (possibly amnesty) program to provide an avenue to allow residential use in
         existing single family units in commercial districts that have lost their non-conforming
         status with Minor Use Permit approval.
     3. Request: Work with for profit and non-profit developers on the development of
         affordable housing in Fort Bragg.
         Response: The City worked closely with DANCO on the funding, planning and
         permitting for the new 28 unit senior affordable housing project. The City’s Housing and
         Economic Development Coordinator is responsible for pursuing CDBG, HOME and
         other funding sources to fund affordable housing projects, housing rehab loan program,
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-18

         and improvements to facilities that provide service to the homeless and implement
         various programs of the Housing Element.
     4. Request: Expand services for the homeless, in order to reduce their impact on our
         community.
         Response: The City has implemented a new CDBG funded program that provides: 1)
         intensive case management for homeless individuals and provides them with regular
         health care services, drug treatment, counseling and job skill training.
     5. Request: Increase the adoption of green building practices for all types of residential
         construction by providing incentives, workshops, and education.
         Response: The City has added a Sustainability Element to the General Plan and holds
         workshops on sustainable practices, such as Low Impact Development and Green
         Building.
     6. Request: Reduce the fees for hooking up to the public water and sewer systems.
         Response: The water enterprise is self-funded and fees pay for the provision of existing
         services and past investments in plant and equipment.
     7. Request: The City should work with homeowners to improve energy conservation in
         existing homes.
         Response: The City has completed a two year program to assist low income
         homeowners with energy efficiency. The City also has a CDBG grant application in to
         expand this program to improve water conservation in homes as well.
     8. Request: Consider creating a special improvement district and financing the purchase
         of solar panels by homeowners with a tax.
         Response: The City is going to join the PACE program, which is a tax funded
         improvement district for the installation of solar and energy efficiency improvements to a
         home.
     9. Request: Implement the program to revise development impact fees so that small units
         of one bedroom or less pay a smaller development impact fee, which reflects their
         smaller impact on City infrastructure.
         Response: Program H-2.3.3 was retained to address this request.
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-19
SECTION II: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This section analyzes the demographic, household, employment and housing stock statistics
and trends of Fort Bragg. The analysis is for the entire City of Fort Bragg. It is the basis for the
City’s housing goals, policies and programs as it identifies housing issues, needs and
opportunities as required by State Law. Specifically, the information presented in this chapter
summarizes the following:
              1. Population and employment trends, qualification of existing and projected housing
                  needs for all income levels, quantification of the City’s regional share of housing
                  allocation
              2. Household and housing characteristics analysis
              3. Inventory of land suitable for housing development
              4. Indication of zones for emergency shelters
              5. Analysis of potential and actual government constraints upon maintenance
                  improvement and development of affordable housing
              6. Analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental constraints, including financing,
                  land prices, cost of construction
              7. A Special Housing Needs Analysis
              8. Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to residential
                  development
              9. Analysis of existing affordable housing developments
Information in this analysis is based on the most up-to-date data available from the following
sources: the U.S. Census, the California State Department of Finance, the California
Employment Development Department, a 2009 income and housing conditions analysis
completed in conformance with Housing and Community Development (HCD) guidelines, the
City’s Department of Community Development, and Realfacts. Since the City of Fort Bragg is
very small (7,000 residents) it is not included in the American Community Survey data set, and
for some data points the most up-to-date data is the 2010 census.
While the General Plan takes a ten-year perspective, the Housing Element projects population
and housing needs for a five-year time span to comply with State Housing law that requires
periodic updating of housing elements.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-20

1. POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT & HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS
Population Growth & Projections
The population of the City grew by 38 persons between 2010 and 2013, which represents a 0.1
percent annual increase. See Table 1.1 below.
 Table 1.1 - Population Growth Trends 2010 -2013
                                                                                                    Average Annual Change
   COUNTY/CITY           Population           Population        Population        Population
                                                                                                  Number            Percent
                               4/1/2010            1/1/2011           1/1/2012        1/1/2013                #                  %
 Fort Bragg                       7,273               7,278              7,287           7,311               11               0.1%
  Source: State of California, Department of Finance, E-4 Population Estimates for Cities, Counties, and the State, 2011-2013,
Census
 with 2010 Census Benchmark. Sacramento, California, May 2013.
This slow rate of population growth mirrors past trends. For example, the City’s population
increased by 0.14 percent between 2000 and 2008 from 6,814 residents to 6,868 residents.
Growth over the next five years will also reflect past trends, with growth anticipated to stay in the
0.1% to 0.3% per year range. As the economy has recovered from the recession in Fort Bragg,
development appears to be picking up, hence the slight population growth projected for the next
five years. Additionally, if the City adopts the proposed Specific Plan for the Fort Bragg Mill Site
reuse, this could increase population growth further in Fort Bragg, although the certification of
the Specific Plan is unlikely to happen before 2017. Fort Bragg’s relatively slow growth rate is a
result of slow job growth and geographic isolation.
Neighboring cities and the County of Mendocino have also grown slowly as illustrated in Table
1.2 below. Population growth in Mendocino County generally is very slow, with the
unincorporated parts of the county growing more quickly than the incorporated parts, as retirees
settle in the unincorporated parts of the county.
 Table 1.2 Population Growth Trends 2010 -2013
                                                                                                           Average Annual Change
   COUNTY/CITY             Population             Population             Population       Population
                                                                                                           Number           Percent
                                    4/1/2010                1/1/2011           1/1/2012        1/1/2013                #              %
 Mendocino County
 Fort Bragg                             7,273                  7,278              7,287           7,311              11            0.1%
 Point Arena                              449                    448                448             449                0           0.0%
 Ukiah                                16,075                  15,926             16,030          16,065               -3           0.0%
 Willits                                4,888                  4,879              4,879           4,893                1           0.0%
 Unincorporated                       59,156                  59,181             59,321          59,573             116            0.2%
 County Total                         87,841                  87,712             87,965          88,291             125            0.1%
Fort Bragg’s population also includes a relatively large senior population as illustrated in Table
1.3 below.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                 10-21

 Table 1.3 Population Age 2010
                               Total      Percent
   Total population            7,273      100.0
    Median age (years)         37.4        ( X)
    1 to 18 years              1793       24.7
    18 years and over          5,480      75.3
    21 years and over          5,233      72.0
    62 years and over          1,274      17.5
    65 years and over          993        13.7
 Source: US Census, American Factfinder
Employment Trends
The Arts, Entertainment, Recreation and Accommodation sector is the largest source of
employment at 22.6% of all jobs, because Fort Bragg is a tourist destination. Other significant
employment sectors include retail trade, education, and health care reflecting our role as the
commercial hub of the coastal area of Mendocino County (see Table 1.4). All of these sectors
offer relatively low wages, and consequently our community has a very sizable low income
population.
                                                                    Fort Bragg City, CA
  Table 1.4 - Employment by Industry
                                                                    Estimate Percent
    Civilian employed population 16 years and over                  3,274
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining           104        3.2%
   Construction                                                     434        13.3%
   Manufacturing                                                    154        4.7%
   Wholesale trade                                                  55         1.7%
   Retail trade                                                     368        11.2%
   Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                    64         2.0%
   Information                                                      112        3.4%
   Finance and insurance, real estate, rental, leasing              96         2.9%
   Professional, scientific, and management, and administrative and 266        8.1%
     waste management services
   Educational services, and health care and social assistance      621        19.0%
   Arts, entertainment, and recreation, and accommodation and food  741        22.6%
     services
   Other services, except public administration                     148        4.5%
   Public administration                                            111        3.4%
  Source: ACS DP-03 2007-201; Census FactFinder
The informal and underground economy, while not quantified above, contribute to unreported
income and along with a significant retirement community drive housing prices higher for those
who do not participate in the normal formal economy.
Specific Employment Trends.
Employment growth is very slow in Fort Bragg due to the City’s geographic isolation and is the
primary drag on population growth, as many of our young people leave the community for higher
education and/or jobs elsewhere. Some employment growth is anticipated in retail and
accommodations as a new hotel development and retail shopping mall are proposed for the City
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                       10-22

of Fort Bragg. Additional employment is anticipated in manufacturing as the City’s largest
manufacturer, the North Coast Brewing Company, has expanded operations. None of these
changes will significantly change the total number of jobs or have a noticeable impact on
demand for housing.
Jobs & Housing Balance.
As the center of employment opportunities on the North Coast of Mendocino County, the Fort
Bragg businesses provide more jobs than current City residents can fill and thus the City’s jobs
housing balance is tilted slightly towards jobs. The City currently allows residential development
in every zone except for industrial zoning. Mixed use development requires a Use Permit in all
commercial zones. Additionally, the City recently adopted new Live-Work regulations which
make live-work housing easier to develop in industrial and commercial zoning districts.
Larger Employers, Typical Jobs & Wages.
Fort Bragg’s larger employers include the local hospital, school district, City government, Caito
Fisheries, a number of retailers including Safeway, Harvest Market, Rite Aid, Mendo Mill, Rossi’s
Lumber Company, and a number of restaurants and hotels. Typical occupations include: nurse,
food service, retail sales, clerical office worker, maid, inventory stocker, teacher, waiter, etc. In
general, wages of most service sector jobs are relatively low in the $10 to $15/hr. range, while
professionals such as nurses and teachers earn between $20 to $25/hr.
Household Growth & Characteristics
Number of Housing Units by Tenure and Growth Trends by Tenure. As shown in Table 1.5,
46% of households live in owner-occupied units, while 54% live in renter occupied units. The City
has a relatively high proportion of rental occupied units even through it has relatively few multi-
family units: this is partly because most second units are renter-occupied and second units
comprise a significant proportion of the single family homes in Fort Bragg. The rate of owner-
occupied housing has increased since 2000, when 42.9% of units were owner-occupied. Given
the mortgage crisis and the significant number of people who lost their homes as a result of
foreclosure, one could have anticipated an increase in the percentage of rental properties as
these properties were purchased by investors. However this has not occurred. The decline in
housing prices may have allowed residents who were previously priced out of the market to
purchase a home.
 Table 1.5 – Fort Bragg Households by
 Tenure 2011
 Total
                 Owner         Renter
 Households
 2,913              1,342        1,571
 Percentage          46%          54%
Trends Related to Needed Housing Types.
Fort Bragg needs more multi-family housing units to serve younger families, more large units to
serve large families and more affordable units to serve low-income families, as shown in the
following analysis. Table 1.6 below illustrates that most of Fort Bragg’s rental units are rented by
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-23

younger householders between the ages of 25 and 55, while most of the owner-occupied homes
have householders of more than 45 years of age.
 Table 1.6 - Households by Tenure and Age (2007-2011)
                                         Mendocino County, CA    Fort Bragg City, CA
                                         Estimate     Percent    Estimate       Percent
 Total:                                  34,102                  2,913
  Owner occupied:                        21,020       61.6%      1,342          46.1%
    Householder 15 to 24 years           236          0.7%       0              0.0%
    Householder 25 to 34 years           1,049        3.1%       122            4.2%
    Householder 35 to 44 years           2,535        7.4%       185            6.4%
    Householder 45 to 54 years           4,289        12.6%      286            9.8%
    Householder 55 to 59 years           2,943        8.6%       168            5.8%
    Householder 60 to 64 years           3,296        9.7%       162            5.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years           3,654        10.7%      166            5.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years           2,088        6.1%       152            5.2%
    Householder 85 years and over        930          2.7%       101            3.5%
  Renter occupied:                       13,082       38.4%      1,571          53.9%
    Householder 15 to 24 years           1,072        3.1%       118            4.1%
    Householder 25 to 34 years           3,163        9.3%       335            11.5%
    Householder 35 to 44 years           2,583        7.6%       339            11.6%
    Householder 45 to 54 years           2,819        8.3%       320            11.0%
    Householder 55 to 59 years           1,025        3.0%       83             2.8%
    Householder 60 to 64 years           799          2.3%       76             2.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years           860          2.5%       137            4.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years           537          1.6%       136            4.7%
    Householder 85 years and over        224          0.7%       27             0.9%
 Source: ACS 2011, 5 Year (B25009)
Table 1.7, below illustrates that Fort Bragg has proportionally more large families than the
County as a whole, which is not surprising as Fort Bragg has more rentals than the County, and
larger families are often renters.
 Table 1.7 - Household Size by Tenure (Including Large Households) (2007-2011)
                                   Mendocino County, CA              Fort Bragg City, CA
                                        #              %              #               %
 Owner                                    21,020       61.6%            1,342           46.1%
          Householder living alone         5,498       26.2%              340           25.3%
           Households 2-4 persons        13,832        65.8%              844           62.9%
      Large households 5+ persons          1,690         8.0%             158           11.8%
10 - Housing Element                                                                      2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-24
 Rental                                      13,082          38.4%              1,571              53.9%
          Householder living alone            4,586          35.1%                606               38.6%
           Households 2-4 persons              7301          34.7%                897                4.3%
      Large households 5+ persons              1195           5.7%                 68                0.3%
 Total:                                      34,102                             2,913
    Total Householder living alone           10,084          29.6%                946               32.5%
           Households 2-4 persons            21,133          62.0%              1,741               59.8%
      Large households 5+ persons             2,885           8.5%                226                7.8%
 Source ACS B25007
Table 1.8 below shows that about 15% of Fort Bragg households are female headed households
and 11% are female headed households with children. Overall 50% of all households are under
the poverty line in Fort Bragg, and this statistic holds true for female headed households as well.
 Table 1.8 - Female Headed Households, Fort Bragg, CA (2010)
                                                                                    Percent of
 Householder Type                                                   Number
                                                                                    households (1)
 Female Headed Householders                                                   437           15%
 Female Heads with Own Children                                              307            11%
 Female Heads without Children                                               130             4%
 Female Headed Householders Under the Poverty Level                          218            50%
 Total Households Under the Poverty Level                                  1,451            50%
 Note (1) - the percentages provided by HCD were incorrect. They have been corrected in this table.
Number
In conclusion, slightly more than half of Fort Bragg’s households live under the poverty line. A
relatively small number of these poor households are female headed households. Additionally,
Fort Bragg has more large households and more renting households than the surrounding
county. Overall Fort Bragg has a positive jobs housing balance, with a number of people
commuting into town for employment.
How are Housing Needs of Owners and Renters Being Met
With the State’s elimination of Redevelopment funding for affordable housing, the City’s ability to
assist with the development of affordable housing is limited. However the City has partnered with
Danco Corporation to use Tax Credit funding to construct affordable senior housing. The City
only requires a building permit for the construction of new single family residences and second
units. There is no private market for new multi-family development, unless it is subsidized
through tax credits, CDBG, HOME or some other mechanism and therefore affordable.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-25

2. OVERPAYMENT AND OVERCROWDING
Overpaying
In general, housing is less affordable for low-income households than for higher income
households. However, since many lower income households, especially retirees, may have
purchased their homes many years ago this is not always the case. Table 2.1 presents the
distribution of households by income categories and illustrates the percentage of households
that own or rent at each income category. It is clear from a review of the table that a majority of
both owners and renters at every income level (except for above moderate) are overpaying for
their housing. This reflects the reality that Fort Bragg is a high housing cost retirement
community with limited employment opportunities. Working residents pay relatively high prices
for their housing relative to their incomes, while retirees don’t generally have incomes, but have
wealth and therefore can afford to purchase more expensive homes. The relatively high rate of
overpayment may also be in part due to the underground and illegal economies of Mendocino
County resulting in lower overall reported income. The mismatch may be somewhat overstated
in the table below, as incomes are higher than reported for the portion of the population that
works in the informal economy.
 Table 2.1 - Households by Income Category Paying in Excess of 30% of Income for Housing Cost
 (Overpayment by Income), Fort Bragg, CA
                                  Extremely   Very                           Above             Lower
            Household                Low      Low       Low      Moderate   Moderate   Total   income
 Ownership Households             195       198      247        235        356        1,232   641
 Overpaying owner households      137       117      163        235        21         686     417
 Percentage of overpaying owners  70.2%     59.1%    65.9%      100%       5.9%       55.7%   65.1%
 Renter Households                441       297      341        165        165        1,410   1,080
 Overpaying renter households     367       239      223        73         0          902     829
 Percentage of overpaying renters 83.1%     80.5%    65.4%      44.3%      0.0%       64.0%   76.8%
 Total Households                 637       495      589        401        521        2,642   1,720
 Overpaying households            504       356      386        321        21         1,588   1,246
 % of overpaying households       79.1%     71.9%    65.6%      80.1%      4.0%       60.1%   72.4%
 Source: ACS 2007-2011 B25106
Low-income employed and unemployed are the most likely to pay more than 30% of their
incomes for housing costs. The City assisted this population with the Home Energy Link
Program (HELP) which provides much needed assistance with the payment of electricity bills.
This program ended in April of 2013 due to a lack of funding. The City hopes to re-start the
program, if it is funded through CDBG, for both energy and water conservation. Additionally the
City continues to partner with non-profit housing developers to assist with the development of
affordable housing for seniors, low income and special needs populations.
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-26

Overcrowding
The U.S. Bureau of the Census defines overcrowding as an average of more than one person
per room in a housing unit (excluding kitchens, porches, and hallways). The percentage of
overcrowded housing units is a general measure of the availability of housing units with
adequate rooms for the households who occupy them. In 2011, overcrowding was not much of
an issue in Fort Bragg, with only 7.3 percent of households overcrowded (see Table 2.2), which
is a significant reduction from the 15% rate of overcrowding in 2000. By comparison,
overcrowding has nearly doubled in the State as a whole and is 15% for all housing and 24% for
renter housing.
 Table 2.2 - Overcrowded Households (2011)
                                                                                        Mendocino         Fort Bragg        Percent
                                                                                          County,          California1       Over-
                                                                                        California                          crowded
                                                                                         Estimate           Estimate
 Total:                                                                               34,102            2,832
  Owner occupied:                                                                     21,020            1,154
    0.50 or less occupants per room                                                   15,599            871
    0.51 to 1.00 occupants per room                                                   4,653             228
    1.01 to 1.50 occupants per room                                                   575               30
    1.51 to 2.00 occupants per room                                                   137               25
    2.01 or more occupants per room                                                   56                0
  Renter occupied:                                                                    13,082            1,678
    0.50 or less occupants per room                                                   7,192             893
    0.51 to 1.00 occupants per room                                                   4,992             662
    1.01 to 1.50 occupants per room                                                   579               123
    1.51 to 2.00 occupants per room                                                   263               0
    2.01 or more occupants per room                                                   56                0
 Owner Occupied                           Overcrowded              1.01 or more                  768                 55         4.8%
 Renter occupied                          Overcrowded              1.01 or more                  898                123         7.3%
 Total overcrowded                                                 1.01 or more                 1666                178         6.3%
 Owner Occupied                 Severely Overcrowded                1.5 or more                  193                 25           2%
 Renter occupied                Severely Overcrowded                1.5 or more                  319                   0          0%
 Total severely overcrowded                                         1.5 or more                  512                 25           1%
 Note (1) the data provided by HCD was incorrect. City Staff obtained the correct data from table B25014 from Census FactFinder
 Website.
 Source: ACS 2007-2011 Table B25014
Overcrowding can lead to serious health and safety issues and a more rapid deterioration of the
units. Overcrowding is best reduced by increasing the supply of larger affordable units and
improving workplace opportunities. Accordingly, the City has recently reduced the parking
requirements for large units in the zoning code, thereby reducing the disincentive for production
of these units. Additionally, the Housing Element includes a new program to target a portion of
the CDBG rehab funds to add additional bedrooms to overcrowded units.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                           2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                         10-27
As shown in Table 3.1, low income renters are the most likely to have housing problems, which
are defined as: 1) incomplete kitchen facilities; 2) incomplete plumbing facilities; 3) more than 1
person per room; and/or 4) cost burden greater than 30%. As shown in Table 3.1 below, 97% of
renters with very low incomes (less than 30% Median Family Income (MFI)) have 1 or more
housing problems. Even low income renter households (less than 80% MFI) have a high (81%)
incidence of housing problems. Low income homeowners are similarly burdened with low
affordability and housing problems. To address these issues the City has initiated a housing
rehabilitation loan program which is available for rental properties and home-owner properties
with low income household tenants. Additionally the City engages in an active code enforcement
program for multi-family developments with code violations that impact health and safety.
  Table 3.1 - Housing Problems for All Households - CHAS Data Book, City of Fort Bragg
                                                                    Total         Total                Percent       Percent
                                                                   Owner         Renter       Total    of Owner      of Renter
  Household Income ≤30% MFI                                           55           350         405
     Household has 1 of 4 Housing Problems                            50           340         390           91%           97%
     Cost burden > 30%                                                44           340         384           80%           97%
     Cost burden > 50%                                                40           310         350           73%           89%
  Household Income >30% to ≤50% MFI                                  260           275         535
     Household has 1 of 4 Housing Problems                           160           190         350           62%           69%
     Cost burden > 30%                                               160           190         350           62%           69%
  Household Income >50% to ≤80% MFI                                  255           375         630
     Household has 1 of 4 Housing Problems                           120           305         425           47%           81%
     Cost burden > 30%                                               120           260         380           47%           69%
  Source: State of Cities Data Systems: Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data
Table 3.2 below provides income limits for extremely low income, very low income, low income,
moderate income and above moderate income for the City of Fort Bragg.
 Table 3.2 : Affordability Income levels, City of Fort Bragg, 2010
                                                   All Households      By Household Size
                               % of Area
                                                Low End of High End of 1 Person 2 Person 3 Person  4 Person 5 Person  6 Person
    Affordability Level     Median Income
                                                   Range     Range        HH       HH       HH        HH       HH        HH
                                   (AMI)
 Extreamly Low Income      Below 30% AMI $              -  $ 10,917    $ 7,642 $ 8,733 $ 9,825 $ 10,917 $ 11,790 $ 12,663
 Very Low Income           Below 50% AMI $ 10,918          $ 18,195    $ 12,736 $ 14,556 $ 16,375 $ 18,195 $ 19,650 $ 21,106
 Low Income                50 to 80% AMI        $ 10,918   $ 29,111    $ 20,378 $ 23,289 $ 26,200 $ 29,111 $ 31,440 $ 33,769
 Moderate Income           80 to 120% AMI $ 29,112 $ 36,389            $ 25,472 $ 29,111 $ 32,750 $ 36,389 $ 39,300 $ 42,211
 Above Moderate Income 120%+ AMI                $ 43,667 NA            $ 30,567 $ 29,111 $ 32,750 $ 36,389 $ 39,300 $ 42,211
 Median Income                                  $ 36,389
 Source: American Factfinder, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
4. HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
Fort Bragg is a predominantly residential community. The existing housing stock defines the
character of the City and its neighborhoods and is the City's most valuable resource. The
relatively high number of older homes in the City underlines the need for policies and programs
which continue to maintain and enhance the quality of older residential areas.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                            2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                               10-28

Housing Conditions
In 2009, PMC completed a Housing Conditions Survey that complies with HCD guidelines. The
survey found that, overall, housing in Fort Bragg is of sound condition. Only nine percent of all
units require repairs, and half of units requiring repairs only require minor repairs. Only one
percent of all units are dilapidated or require substantial repair. However this survey did not
include alley houses, which comprise an estimated 25% of the City’s single family housing stock.
Many of these houses are in poor repair and a subsequent housing conditions survey slated for
2015 may find additional housing conditions issues. Please see Table 4.1 below for a review of
the overall housing conditions by unit type.
Table 4.1 - Overall Housing Conditions, Fort Bragg, 2009
Structure Type                       Sound     Minor   Moderate     Substantial  Dilapidated    Total
Single Family, detached garage       89.5%      5.0%        4.0%          0.8%          0.8%   100.0%
Single Family, attached garage       95.5%      2.7%        1.6%          0.3%  -              100.0%
Duplex                               92.1%      7.9%  -            -            -              100.0%
Multi-Family                         94.4%      4.8%        0.8%   -            -              100.0%
 nd
2 Dwelling Unit                      86.4%      7.1%        5.1%          0.5%          1.0%   100.0%
All types                            91.0%      4.7%        3.2%          0.5%          0.5%   100.0%
Source: City of Fort Bragg Housing Conditions Survey Report, PMC, 2009
Annual Construction of Housing Units by Type, 1991-2014
Fluctuations in the type of housing built reflect not only the relative amount of land zoned for
different types of residential development in the City, but also changes in various economic
factors such as the real estate market, availability of financing and the local economy. Table 4.2
indicates the total number of single-family and multi-family homes constructed and demolished
in Fort Bragg from 1991 through March of 2014.
 Table 4.2 - Annual Construction & Demolition of Housing Units By
 Type - 1991 to 2014
 Year         Single   Percent   Multiple    Percent    Demolitions      Net
             Family    of Total   Family     of Total                 Housing
              Units     Units     Units*       Units                  Increase
                         Built                 Built
 1991             35       95%            2        5%             0          37
 1992             34       92%            3        8%             0          37
 1993             11       33%          22       67%              0          33
 1994              6      100%            0        0%             0           6
 1995             28       85%            5      15%              0          33
 1996             28       74%          10       26%              0          38
 1997             19      100%            0        0%             0          19
 1998              5       42%            7      58%              1          11
 1999             16       52%          15       48%              2          29
 2000              9      100%            0        0%             0           9
 2001             16      100%            0        0%             3          13
10 - Housing Element                                                                      2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-29

 2002                  0           NA             NA        NA   NA     NA
 2003                15          47%              17      53%     0     32
 2004                  6         40%               9      60%     1     14
 2005                15          71%               6      29%     3     18
 2006                  6         75%               2      25%     1      7
 2007                  6         43%               8      57%     1     13
 2008                  2         67%               1      33%     0      3
 2009                  5         71%               2      29%     0      7
 2010                  3         38%               5      63%     1      7
 2011                  1         20%               4      80%     0      5
 2012                  1         50%               1      50%     0      2
 2013                  0           0%             28     100%     0     28
 2014 -                0           0%              2     100%     1      1
 March
 Total             267           64%             149      36%    14    402
 Annual
 Average             11                            6              1     17
 Source: City of Fort Bragg Community Development Department, 2014
 Note: * includes second units
As shown in Table 4.2, new housing starts contracted significantly with the recession and have
remained low. The only significant new project was a tax credit funded affordable senior housing
project of 28 units which is located in the Coastal Zone. No housing units were demolished or
converted within the Coastal Zone during this Housing Element period.
Total New Units in 5 Year Housing Element Period
In total, 50 new units were built between the start of the 2009 Housing Element projection period
and the deadline for the adoption of the new Housing Element.
Housing Costs and Affordability
The high, low and average rent for rentals on the market in March of 2014, in the City of Fort
Bragg, are as shown in Table 4.3.
 Table 4.3 - Fort Bragg Rental Rates, March 2014
                          High             Low        Average  N
    1 bedroom          $   1,100       $      550    $    815  7
    2 bedroom          $   1,350       $    1,150    $ 1,213   5
    3 bedroom          $   1,500       $    1,125    $ 1,291   8
    4 bedroom          $   3,400       $    1,850    $ 2,625   2
   Source: Craigslist, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
In addition, property managers and realtors note that rents are increasing. Property managers
have noted a decrease in vacant rental housing and multiple applicants for available units.
Since 2009, rents have increased by an average of 7% for 1 bedrooms, 28% for two bedrooms
and stayed flat for three bedrooms.
10 - Housing Element                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                        10-30
Figure 4.1 illustrates that home prices dropped
from a median sales price in 2008 of nearly
$400,000 to a median sales price of around
$200,000 in 2011. The median home price has
increased more recently to $275,000 in the 4th
quarter of 2013. Foreclosure units are now
uncommon, although there are still distressed
properties on the market.
As shown in Table 4.4, in 2013, 42 units sold
within City limits at a median sales price of
$265,4242. The median price for a two
bedroom unit was $237,262 and the median
sales price for a three bedroom was $282,614.
                                                       Figure 4.1: Home Sales in Fort Bragg, 2008-2013
 Table 4.4 - Average Sales Price, City of Fort Bragg, 2013
           Average Sales                      Sales
 # BR           Price        Average SF     Price/SF    # Sold
 1 BR         233,500.00         526.00     $ 471.48       2
 2 BR         237,262.00       1,489.00     $ 193.37      13
 3 BR         282,614.00       1,606.00     $ 165.87      21
 ALL          265,424.00       1,515.00     $ 200.24      42
Housing Construction Prices and Trends
New housing units are being constructed at a very slow rate in Fort Bragg due to low market
demand for new units, given the relative affordability of existing for-sale units. This is especially
true at the lower end of the market. Additionally because Fort Bragg has a very slow market and
a limited supply of vacant single family lots, new single family residential development is typically
build to suit. There is no speculative single family development, nor has there been in the past
seven years. Thus from zero to three new single family homes have been constructed each year
for the past five years. The last two years have seen no new single family homes built. The
majority of new units are subsidized multi-family units. Given the paucity of new construction
starts for single family residential, it is not feasible to provide a construction price for this type of
activity in Fort Bragg. Although historically, $150 to $200/sf is a good rule of thumb for building
new residential units, depending on design and finishes.
Housing Units by Type of Unit
As indicated in the tables below, Fort Bragg remains predominantly a single-family residential
community. The large proportion of single-family homes is typical for a small coastal city located
in a predominantly rural county. However, relative to many small communities, Fort Bragg has a
fairly significant number of multi-family units which comprise 27 percent of the total housing
stock. Another 15% of “single detached” units are actually secondary units which are typically
rented at affordable rates according to a housing conditions survey completed for the City of Fort
Bragg in 2009.
10 - Housing Element                                                                          2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-31

 Table 4.5 - Fort Bragg, Total Housing Units by Type of Unit, 2011
                                                    Single             Single        Two to         Five       Mobile
                                     Total        Detached          Attached          Four          Plus       Homes
 Total Units                          3,213              2,014              145          386           354             314
 Percent of Units                     100%                 63%              5%          12%           11%             10%
 Source : State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties and the
 State — January 1, 2011- 2013. Sacramento, California, May 2013
The majority of multi-family units are in small apartments of 3 to 19 units and only 1.5% of units
are in multi-family projects of more than 50 units. In the near term the City does not anticipate
any large developments, because the real estate market does not appear to support large multi-
family development and Fort Bragg has relatively few large parcels that can accommodate larger
multi-family projects.
Pending Housing Developments
There are relatively few pending housing developments in Fort Bragg. Habitat for Humanity is
constructing an eight-unit project, two units of which are completed and another two units of
which will be completed within the year. The City is working with Danco Corporation to construct
12 to 15 special needs affordable housing units, however funding for this project has not yet
been secured. The City anticipates that seven or so single family and second units will be
constructed in 2014.
Vacancy
According to the US Census, 10.4 percent of Fort Bragg's housing units were vacant in 2010; by
comparison, vacancy in 2008 was just 8%. Fort Bragg’s housing market has a healthy vacancy
rate, however it is too low to generate market demand for new construction. Please see Table
4.6 to review vacancy data for Fort Bragg.
 Table 4.6 - Housing Stock By Vacancy, 2010
                                                                    Units
 Total housing units                                                    3,196
 Occupied housing units                                                 2,863
  Vacant housing units                                                    333
   For rent                                                                87
  Rented, not occupied                                                      6
   For sale only                                                           30
  Sold, not occupied                                                        5
 For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use                            127
 All other vacants                                                         78
                                                                    Percent
 Vacancy rate                                                         10.40%
 Home owner vacancy rate (1)                                           2.50%
 Rental vacancy rate (1)                                               4.80%
 Census 2010 - SDC - Demographic Research - Department of Finance
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                 10-32

5. ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENTS AT RISK OF CONVERSION
Inventory of At-Risk Units
There are affordable housing units throughout California which were built 30 years ago with
Federal low-interest mortgages from the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
with an agreement that the rents of these units be kept at a level affordable to low income
households. State Government Code Section 65863.10 requires owners of such projects to
provide at least twelve months’ notice of contract termination or prepayment of Federal
assistance to tenants and public agencies. Owners who are proposing to sell or dispose of those
properties must also provide first right of refusal to purchase those properties to those agreeing
to maintain the affordability of the units.
The following units in Fort Bragg are listed by the California Housing Partnership Corporation’s
inventory of Federally Assisted Multi-family Housing. The units are at risk of conversion to
market rate during the next 20 years.
 Table 5.1 Fort Bragg Affordable Housing At Risk, 2014
        Property Name          Street Address   Total Low-  Total  Type of  Elderly   Current Owner   Expiration    Options for  At Risk
                                                  Income    Units  Subsidy   Units                       Date        Renewal
                                                   Units
 FORT BRAGG DEVELOPMENT      520 CYPRESS ST          42       42  Section 8    10   Rural Community    02/28/2031 Non-profit    Not at      515/8 
                                                                                    Housing                        Owned        Risk
                                                                                    Development
                                                                                    Coalition
 RIVER GARDEN APARTMENTS 421 SOUTH ST                40       48  Section 8    34   Orchard River      12/31/2028 CDBG, LIHTC,  At Risk     515/8 
                                                                                    Associates                     HOME Funds
 Moura Senior Housing        400 South Street        38       38    LIHTC      38   Moura Housing   Passed, Not    CDBG, LIHTC, At Risk
                                                                                    Developers      Converted      HOME Funds
 River Gardens Apartments    421 South Street        47       48    LIHTC      34   Orchard River   20+ years      CDBG, LIHTC, At Risk
                                                                                    Associates                     HOME Funds
 Duncan Place Apartments     301 Cypress Street      43       44    LIHTC      ?    Rural Community 20+ years      CDBG, LIHTC, Not at Risk
                                                                                    Housing                        HOME Funds
                                                                                    Development
                                                                                    Coalition
 Source: CHPC http://www.chpc.net/preservation/MappingWidget.html
Conversion Risk, Cost to Preserve, Entity & Financing
Duncan Place - 301 Cypress Street
            Type of Assistance. This project received a loan of $1.5 million in 1984. RCHDC
                rehabilitated these units using Redevelopment funds in 2008 and a title restriction
                was placed on the property to ensure affordability for an additional 55 years.
            Units. The project provides 43 very low income rental units.
            Cost to Preserve. RCHDC is a non-profit affordable housing provider and has no
                intention of converting this project to market rate units as it would be at odds with the
                organization’s mission. These units are not considered at risk by the City of Fort
                Bragg. The estimated total cost of purchasing this project is estimated at $4.9 million.
            Entity to work on preservation. RCHDC.
            Financing. Unnecessary.
Fort Bragg Development - 520 Cypress Street
10 - Housing Element                                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                           10-33

             Type of Assistance. Section 8
             Units. The project provides 42 very low income units.
             Cost to Preserve. This project is not at risk as it is owned by RCHDC. RCHDC is a
              non-profit affordable housing provider and has no intention of converting this project
              to market rate units as it would be at odds with the organization’s mission.
             Entity to work on preservation. RCHDC.
             Financing. Unnecessary.
Moura Senior Housing - 400 South Street
          Type of Assistance. This project received a loan of $1.5 million in 1988, and the
              restrictive clause on the loan was set to expire in 2008.
          Units. The project provides 38 rent assisted elderly units.
          Cost to Preserve. The City estimates that the project could be purchased for
              approximately $4 million. At this time, Moura Housing continues to be operated as an
              affordable senior housing development with a fairly long waiting list. The property
              owner continues to invest in the maintenance and management of the units. The
              property owner continues to operate the project as an affordable senior facility.
          Entity to work on preservation. DANCO Community Partners approached the
              property owner regarding the purchase of the units and an adjacent five acre high
              density parcel. The property owner is not interested in selling the units.
          Financing. HOME funding could be used to purchase the at-risk senior housing
              project. Affordable Housing Tax Credits and CDBG funds are also feasible funding
              options. However the property owner remains opposed to selling the units and
              continues to operate the units as affordable housing.
River Gardens Apartments - 421 South Street
          Type of Assistance. This project received LIHTC funds.
          Units. The project provides 47 very low income units.
          Cost to Preserve. The City estimates that the project could be purchased at current
              prices for market rate housing for approximately $3 million.
          Entity to work on preservation. CDD, Danco Community Partners, RCHDC.
          Financing. Home, Tax Credits, CDBG funding, Home Funds.
Walnut Avenue Apartments - 311 Walnut Avenue
          Type of Assistance. This project received a loan of $2 million in 1982.
          Units. The project provides 56 very low income units.
          Cost to Preserve. The City estimates that the project could be purchased at current
              prices for market rate housing for approximately $3 million.
          Entity to work on preservation. CDD, Danco Community Partners, RCHDC.
          Financing. Home, Tax Credits, CDBG funding, Home Funds.
The City has one inclusionary unit that will expire in 2038. The City has one density bonus
affordable unit. Table 5.2 below lists all affordable housing units in the City of Fort Bragg. There
are 317 affordable housing units within the City of Fort Bragg and 29% of them are at risk.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-34

Table 5.2 All Affordable Housing Projects, Fort Bragg CA
Development                           Location             Year                       Income
                                                           Built Units    Status      Category
                                                                                      Low & Very
Cottages & Cypress Street             Cypress Street       2014   28    Protected
                                                                                      Low
                                                          2010 -                      Low & Very
Habitat for Humanity                  McPherson Street             4       2020
                                                           2014                       Low
Inclusionary Housing Unit             Wipple               2007    1    Protected     Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Dana Street          2004    1    Protected     Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Dick Williams Way   2004 &   6    Protected     Low
                                                           2005
Habitat for Humanity                  Hocher Lain          2003    8    Protected     Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Oak Street           2003    2    Protected     Very Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Stewart Street       2000   10    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Stewart Circle       2000    6    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Community Development Commission      John Cimolino Way    2000   14    Protected     Very Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Holmes Lane          1999    7    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Maple Street         1998    2    Protected     Very Low
Community Development Commission      South Sanderson Way  1997    9    Protected     Very Low
Habitat for Humanity                  South Corry Street   1996    2    Protected     Very Low
Rural Communities Housing Development Howland Court        1995   10    Protected     Very
Corporation                                                                           Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                  Oak Street           1994    2    Protected     Very Low
Community Development Commission      Cypress Street       1993   19    Protected     Very
                                                                                      Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                  South Harold Street  1991    1    Protected     Very Low
Moura Construction                    400 South Street     1990   38   Not Protected Senior
                                                                                      Housing Very
                                                                                      Low/Low
Private/Federal Home Mortgage         Walnut Street        1986   56   Not Protected Very Low
Association
Rural Communities Housing Development 330 Cypress Street   1980   43    Protected     Very Low
Corporation
River Gardens                         421 South Street     1979   48    Protected     Very Low
Total Affordable Housing Units                                    317
Total Affordable Units at Risk                                   29.7%
10 - Housing Element                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-35
6. SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Persons with Disabilities
The number of disabled persons in a city has important planning and social implications and will
affect the demand for specialized handicapped access and transportation facilities, certain social
services, and specialized housing. The most recent (2000 Census) information regarding
disabled people in the City indicated there were 730 persons with one or more disabilities, of
whom 292 (40%) were 65 years and older.
 Table 6.1 Persons with Disability by Employment Status (2000 Census)
                                       5-64 persons     5-64 persons
                                       with             with            Persons Age Total persons
                                       disability,      disability,     65 Plus with with disability % of Total
                                       employed         unemployed a disability (1)                  Population Total Pop.
 Fort Bragg                                       141              297           292           730           11%      6,406
 Percent of Disabled Populations                   19%              41%          40%
 Source: 2000 Census PCT 028
 Note: 1) the data provided by HCD was incorrect.
As shown in Table 6.2 young people Table 6.2 Persons with Disabilities
are most likely to be developmentally                                                                 Fort Bragg (1)
disabled, while working age residents                                                            Number         Percent
of Fort Bragg are most likely to be Total Disabilities Tallied:                                         730
physically, mentally or have an
                                                      Total Disabilities tallied for people 5
employment disability. Seniors are                                                                        53       7%
                                                     to 15 years:
most likely to be physically disabled or
unable to go outside the home.                         Sensory disability                                  -       0%
According to the Redwood Coast                         Physical disability                                 -       0%
Regional Center, the City of Fort                      Mental disability                                  53       7%
Bragg has approximately 147 persons                    Self-care disability                                -       0%
with developmental disabilities.                      Total Disabilities tallied for people
                                                                                                        385       53%
                                                     16 to 64 years:
Developmental disability means a                       Sensory disability                                 43       6%
disability that originates before an                   Physical disability                              104       14%
individual attains age 18 years,
                                                       Mental disability                                  98      13%
continues, or can be expected to
continue, indefinitely, and constitutes                Self-care disability                               28       4%
a substantial disability for that                      Go-outside-home      disability                    82      11%
individual. As defined by the Director                 Employment disability                            149       20%
of     Developmental           Services,       in Total Disabilities Tallied for people
consultation with the Superintendent 65 years and over:                                                 292       29%
of Public Instruction, this term shall                 Sensory disability                                 40       6%
include mental retardation, cerebral
                                                       Physical disability                                70      10%
palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term
shall also include disabling conditions                Mental   disability                                23       3%
                                                       Self-care disability                               24       3%
found to be closely related to mental
retardation or to require treatment                    Go-outside-home      disability                    56       8%
similar to that required for individuals             Source:  2000   Census P 041
with mental retardation, but shall not Note: 1) the data provided by HCD was incorrect.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                          2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                        10-36
include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Housing Needs of Disabled.
People with physical and sensory disabilities are best serviced by housing conforming to
universal design. People with mental and developmental disabilities are best served by
supportive housing. People with go-outside-home disability are best served with meals on
wheels services.
Existing Resources.
 The Redwood Coast Seniors Inc. provides scheduled and on-demand transportation
     services for disabled persons, including seniors, throughout the community and to other
     locations along the coast under contract with the Mendocino Transportation Authority. This
     service provides a monthly average of 38 one-way trips per day for persons with
     wheelchairs, of which 18 are for non-seniors.
 Redwood Coast Senior Center provides a variety of services to disabled seniors including
     stimulating activities, essential programs, and services for active elders. The Center provides
     a daily lunch, calendar of social and educational programs especially designed by and for
     seniors, field trips, special dinners, Meals on Wheels, consultation on any matter of
     importance to independent senior living, high speed internet in a computer lab, secure daily
     care for seniors who are experiencing cognitive decline, and all day transportation service for
     seniors (60+).
 Parents and Friends provides assistance to people with mental and developmental
     disabilities. This organization provides extensive training and assistance to people with
     mental and developmental disabilities.
 Mendocino Coast Hospitality Center provides extensive case management and
     counseling for the homeless mentally ill and mentally ill individuals in transitional housing.
 Mendocino Coast Clinics provides case management and psychological housing for
     individuals with developmental disabilities.
 Ortner provides adult mental health services.
 Redwood Quality Management Services provides mental health services for children.
Zoning and Capacity Available to Serve the Needs of Disabled Residents
The affordability of housing for disabled people is an important concern for Fort Bragg.
According to the Community Development Commission, most disabled persons entitled to SSDI
(Social Security Disabled Insurance) and SSI (Social Security Insurance) benefits receive less
than $800 per month from these sources. The average rent in Fort Bragg is $800 per month, an
amount that exceeds the total monthly benefits typically received by disabled persons. Persons
receiving Section 8 housing assistance would receive assistance in meeting the market rate
rents.
The City is developing a written procedure for processing requests for reasonable
accommodation. A copy of the draft procedure is attached as Appendix E.
The City provides opportunities for housing for persons with disabilities as follows:
 The City of Fort Bragg’s zoning code does not have a definition for “family” nor does it have
     special siting requirements for group homes.
 Transitional housing is allowed in all residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts
     that allow residential development. Transitional housing projects are required to get the
     same type of permit as any comparable unit type (single family, multi-family, live-work) in the
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-37

     residential, commercial or industrial zone. In general, a building permit is required for a single
     dwelling, and Design Review/Use Permit is required for two or more dwelling units.
    Organizational houses of more than 3,000 sf or any project of more than three units requires
     a Use Permit in RM, RH and RVH zones and is not permitted in RS or RL zones. There are
     no special standards, requirements, or performance standards applicable to organizational
     homes or group homes for persons with disabilities or developmental disabilities. The Use
     Permit requirement does not act as a detriment to development for persons with disabilities
     in Fort Bragg: two such facilities are already located in the City; and the typical conditions of
     approval are no more stringent than for other multi-family residential land uses requiring a
     conditional use permit.
    The City completed a comprehensive revision of its Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances
     which included changes to ensure compliance with fair housing laws in 2014.
    With regard to parking, the City complies with the UBC and CALDAG for the number and
     configuration of handicapped parking spaces. Disabled individuals can request a designated
     disabled parking space on the street in front of their residence. In addition, the Zoning
     Ordinance provides for flexible parking standards which would allow a reduction in parking
     requirements for developments for persons with developmental and physical disabilities,
     emergency and transitional housing, and other special housing needs, such as senior
     housing.
    Neither the Land Use Element nor the Zoning Ordinance contains any regulations
     addressing spacing or siting of special needs housing nor the location of such facilities with
     regard to one another.
Housing Programs for Persons with disabilities and developmental disabilities. The City’s
2014 Housing Element will retain the following policy and program from the 2008 Housing
Element.
Policy H-3.1 Available Funding Sources: Utilize County, State and Federal programs and
other funding sources that provide housing opportunities for lower-income and special needs
households.
         Program H-3.1.1 Available Funding: Seek available State and Federal assistance to
         develop affordable housing for seniors, the disabled, lower-income large households,
         and households with special housing needs. Work with the County Community
         Development Commission (CDC), Rural Community Housing Development Corporation
         (RCHDC), and other non-profits to apply for and implement HCD programs such as the
         California Self Help Housing Program (CSHHP), the Multi-family Housing Program
         (MHP), and/or the HOME Program. Seek funding for affordable housing from other
         sources such as the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Tax Credit
         financing, etc.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing:      State and Federal sources
                   Scheduling:     Application for funding as funding cycles occur, at least once per year.
The Elderly
The City's proportion of elderly residents (over 65 years old) has remained at a constant 13 to 14
percent since 2000, as shown in Table 6.3. State projections indicate that the proportion of the
elderly population in Mendocino County is expected to increase in the next ten years. Fort Bragg
will likely follow this trend, but at a slower pace, as seniors from other communities don’t
generally retire to Fort Bragg, rather they tend to retire to the unincorporated areas of the
county.
10 - Housing Element                                                                           2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-38

 Table 6.3 - Fort Bragg Senior Population, 2000, 2008 and 2010
                                          2000      2008      2010      Percent
                                                                        of Total
 Total Population                          7026       7077      7273       7240
 Senior Population (65 Years+)              977        963       993       1,013
 Percentage of Total                     13.9%      13.6%     13.7%       14.0%
 Source: US Census, 2000, 2010, 2012
Table 6.4 illustrates the number and percent of households in 2011 that are senior within the
City of Fort Bragg and more generally in the county. As shown in Table 6.4, 29% of all
households are seniors living in owner-occupied units, this is a much higher percentage than the
19.9% of households that live in owner-occupied units within the City of Fort Bragg. The
proportion of households that are renter occupied by seniors is 7% in the county and 12% in the
city. Overall 32% of units within Fort Bragg are occupied by seniors and 60% of Fort Bragg
senior households live in their own homes, with the remainder 40% living in rental units.
 Table 6.4 - Senior Households by Tenure and Age (2007-2011)
                                       Mendocino County,      Fort Bragg City,
                                       California             California
                                        Estimate     Percent  Estimate    Percent
                                                     of Total             of Total
 Total:                                34,102                 2,913
   Owner occupied:                     21,020       61.6%     1,342      46.1%
 Householder 15 to 60 Years            11052        32.4%     761        26.1%
 Senior Households                     9968         29.2%     581        19.9%
    Householder 60 to 64 years         3,296        9.7%      162        5.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years         3,654        10.7%     166        5.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years         2,088        6.1%      152        5.2%
    Householder 85 years and over      930          2.7%      101        3.5%
   Renter occupied:                    13,082       38.4%     1,571      53.9%
 Householder 15 to 60 years            10662        31.3%     1195       41.0%
 Senior Households                     2420         7.1%      376        12.9%
    Householder 60 to 64 years         799          2.3%      76         2.6%
    Householder 65 to 74 years         860          2.5%      137        4.7%
    Householder 75 to 84 years         537          1.6%      136        4.7%
    Householder 85 years and over      224          0.7%      27         0.9%
 Source: ACS 2011, 5 Year (B25009)
Poverty. According to the 2012 American Community Survey, 14.4% of seniors live below the
poverty line.
Senior Services and Senior Housing. Table 6.5 below illustrates the affordable housing
developments that serve senior citizens. Three of these projects are age limited to seniors,
10 - Housing Element                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-39
namely Cottages at Cypress (27 units), Moura Senior Housing (38 units) and Ocean Lake Senior
Mobile Home Park (70 units). All projects are limited to low and very low income residents except
for the mobile home park which also serves moderate income residents.
 Table 6.5 - Senior Affordable Housing Projects
          Property Name              Street Address        Low-       Total      Elderly      Affordability
                                                         Income       Units       Units
                                                           Units
 Cypress Cottages                 330 Cypress Street        26          27         26      Low and Very Low
 Fort Bragg Development           520 Cypress Street        42          42         10      Low and Very Low
 River Garden Apartments          421 South Street          40          48         34      Low and Very Low
 Moura Senior Housing             400 South Street          38          38         38      Low and Very Low
 River Gardens Apartments         421 South Street          47          48         34      Low and Very Low
 Duncan Place Apartments          301 Cypress Street        43          44         NA      Low and Very Low
 Ocean Lake Senior Mobile                                   NA          70         70
                                  Ocean Lake Drive                                         Moderate and Low
 Home Park
 Total                                                     236         317         26
There is a waiting list for senior housing at the Cypress Cottages, Moura Senior Housing and
Ocean Lake.
The absolute decline in the amount and types of both Federal and State funding and tax credits
to finance development of new housing units for seniors, will limit the ability of the City, non-
profits and for-profit housing developers to develop new units. This is the single largest hurdle to
the development of new affordable senior housing units. However the City continues to assist
developers interested in developing affordable senior units. The Danco Corp just completed 26
units of affordable housing for seniors. The project is a model green project as all the homes are
net-zero energy users and the project is also a model pocket development consisting of 27
separate cottages, with a commons building that has a kitchen and a meeting space. The
beautiful facility was 100% occupied
within one week of opening.
Programs to assist seniors who wish to
continue living in their own homes
provides important psychological and
social benefits, and reduces the need to
build assisted living units. The City of
Fort Bragg provides low interest loans,
funded through CDBG, to qualifying
seniors for maintenance and repair of
their homes.
                                               Danco “Cottages at Cypress” Senior Housing Community
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-40

Large and Female-Headed Households
Female-headed households, are likely to have greater demand than two-parent households for
child care and other social services. There is a clear need for more affordable housing for this
sector of the community. The waiting list for Section 8 housing at the Community Development
Commission of Mendocino County is over 600 persons, and it typically takes more than two
years to obtain housing.
Table 6.6, below illustrates that Fort Bragg has proportionally (%) more large families than the
County as a whole. This is not surprising as Fort Bragg has proportionally more rentals than the
County, and larger families are often renters.
  Table 6.6 - Household Size by Tenure (Including Large Households) (2007-2011)
                                            Mendocino County, CA          Fort Bragg City, California
                                            Number                %        Number                %
                                             21,020             61.6%       1,342             46.1%
  Owner
           Householder living alone           5,498             26.2%        340              25.3%
            Households 2-4 persons           13,832             65.8%        844              62.9%
      Large households 5+ persons             1,690              8.0%        158              11.8%
  Rental                                     13,082             38.4%       1,571             53.9%
           Householder living alone           4,586             35.1%        606              38.6%
            Households 2-4 persons            7301              34.7%        897               4.3%
      Large households 5+ persons             1195               5.7%         68               0.3%
  Total:                                     34,102                         2,913
     Total Householder living alone          10,084             29.6%        946              32.5%
            Households 2-4 persons           21,133             62.0%       1,741             59.8%
      Large households 5+ persons             2,885              8.5%        226               7.8%
  Source ACS B25007
Large families are readily accommodated in Fort Bragg as our community has many larger
single family homes and apartments with three or more bedrooms for rent or sale at any given
time as illustrated below in Table 6.7.
  Table 6.7 - Available Units by Size of Unit, 2014
                                  Rental Units Available                              Units Sold
                     Average Rent         Number of          % of Units  Average Sales       Units    Percent
                      March, 2014      Units available       Available       Price           Sold       Sold
  1 bedroom          $        815              7                32%     $ 233,500              2        6%
  2 bedroom          $      1,213              5                23%     $ 237,262             13       36%
  3 bedroom          $      1,291              8                36%     $ 282,614             21       58%
  4 bedroom          $      2,625              2                 9%     NA                     0        0%
  Total                                        22                  100%                       36          100
  Source: Craig’s List, Century 21 Reality, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                         10-41

Table 6.8 below shows that about 15% of Fort Bragg households are female-headed households
while 11% are female-headed households with children. Overall 50% of all households are under
the poverty line in Fort Bragg, and this statistic holds true for female headed households as well.
In 2000 there were 212 female headed households, thus between 2000 and 2010 the number of
female headed households more than doubled. In general female-headed households face the
same challenges as other households, as they have the same poverty rates as households in
general in Fort Bragg.
 Table 6.8 - Female Headed Households (2010)
                                                                                Fort Bragg
                         Householder Type                              Number           % of HH (1)
 Female Headed Householders                                                   437           15%
    Female Heads with Own Children                                           307            11%
    Female Heads without Children                                            130             4%
 Female Headed Householders Under the Poverty Level                          218            50%
 Total Households Under the Poverty Level                                  1,451            50%
 Note (1) - the percentages provided by HCD were incorrect. They have been corrected in this table.
Farmworkers
The 2010 Census indicated there were 104 persons working in agriculture, forestry, fishing and
hunting in Fort Bragg. This is significantly less than the 259 people employed in this sector in
2000. Most of the workers identified by the Census are employed in the fishing and forestry
sectors, and are therefore not eligible for farmworker housing subsidies, such as from CDBG
grants. Additionally, workers in the fishing and forest industries tend to be fairly well paid and
have low rates of poverty. The City had a community-based farm on three acres up until 2013,
but the farmer has retired.
Families and Persons In Need of Emergency Shelters
Accurate information on the number of homeless persons is not available for the City of Fort
Bragg, however according to Ann Shaw who runs the Mendocino Coast Hospitality Center (the
regional homeless services organization) about 40 to 50% of the county’s homeless are located
in or around Fort Bragg. According to the County’s 2012 Continuum of Care report, there are
around 1,400 homeless people in Mendocino County’s unincorporated area and cities at any
given time, including those in emergency shelters, transitional housing, and permanent
supportive housing for homeless populations (see Table 6.9).
 Table 6.9 - Countywide Homeless Households 2012 CoC
                                                                   Sheltered     Unsheltered         Total
 Households without children                                           93            1,241          1,334
 Households with at least one adult and one child                      12              20             32
 Households with only children                                         0               13             13
 Total Homeless Households                                            105            1,274          1,379
 *Numbers are provided for the Mendocino Continuum of Care. Number represent homeless needs for the
 total Continuum of Care area
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-42

There are about 1,441 homeless persons in total and of these there are 267 chronically
homeless individuals. Most of the homeless are unsheltered; a very small proportion (7.6%) are
sheltered. Homeless individuals and families have a range of special housing needs, including:
 Emergency shelters which provide immediate short-term housing typically limited to less
     than six months.
 Transitional housing, which provides housing between six-months and two years, often
     coupled with intensive case management, alcohol and drug abuse assessment and
     treatment, mental health treatment, life skills and employment training, and assistance with
     credit worthiness. The Hospitality House provides transitional housing facilities. They report
     that the demand for temporary transitional housing exceeds the supply.
 Permanent supportive housing, which offers a stable residential environment with mental
     health counseling, job training, and case management among other services to reinforce the
     advancements of formerly homeless persons up the ladder of the continuum of care.
In 2008, Fort Bragg had 6 transitional housing facilities offering 83 beds for individuals and
families. However, a number of these transitional housing facilities were closed when the non-
profit operating them closed its doors. Consequently, as shown in Table 6.10 below, there are
only 39 transitional housing beds in two facilities in Fort Bragg at this time. The City has
submitted a CDBG grant application (2014) to establish 5 additional transitional housing units
with an additional 15 beds.
Table 6.10 - Transitional and Emergency Housing
Organization                            Type of Shelter Provided                Units/Size
Hospitality House                       Emergency Housing                       20 individual beds, 4
                                                                                family beds
331 N Harrison St 1/2                   Transitional Housing for families with  15 family & individual
                                        children                                beds
Community Development Commission        Shelter Plus Care voucher program       variable
In most cases, homelessness has occurred because local people are unable to afford housing,
rather than as the result of an influx of homeless persons from other areas. The magnitude of
this problem exceeds the resources of the City of Fort Bragg, although the City has initiated a
cutting edge program to provide wrap around supportive services for the most chronically
mentally ill homeless in order to improve outcomes for these individuals and reduce the cost of
services.
The City has complied with Government Code Section 65583(a)(7) and (c)(1) regarding the
identification of adequate sites to facilitate the development of emergency shelters and
transitional housing with programs which identify an area suitable for this use. The City has
amended its Zoning Ordinance to allow transitional housing in every residential zoning district as
a permitted use and emergency housing as a permitted use in the General Commercial (CG)
district. The CG zoning district is an appropriate location for such a facility because:
      There are several underutilized sites within this district;
      There already exist transitional housing facilities in this zoning district;
      This area is centrally located and near public services and stores; and
      Infrastructure, such as water, sewer, roads, and sidewalks, is in place.
The City works with the Mendocino Coast Hospitality Center to identify, acquire, and expand
facilities to serve the homeless in Fort Bragg.
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-43

SECTION III: HOUSING CONSTRAINTS ANALYSIS
This section analyzes the land, financing and regulatory constraints to the successful production
of housing. It informs the City’s housing goals, policies and programs. Specifically, the
information presented in this section includes the following:
              1. Inventory of land suitable for housing development and how it satisfies the ability
                  to comply with the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
              2. Environmental constraints to development of vacant land
              3. Zoning for a variety of housing types, including emergency shelters
              4. Analysis of potential and actual government constraints on maintenance
                  improvement and development of affordable housing, including annexation
                  standards, land use controls, infrastructure, development fees, building codes
                  processing time, and community sentiment
              5. Analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental constraints, including financing,
                  land prices, cost of construction.
7. RESIDENTIAL LAND INVENTORY
This residential site inventory identifies parcels potentially suitable for residential use, especially
multiple-family units. Staff utilized a recent aerial photo, the parcel inventory from the 2008
Housing Element, and staff knowledge to create an updated map and table with up-to-date
vacant land which can accommodate residential development. All parcels are located in
developed areas within the City with water and sewer service.
Regional Housing Needs Assessment
As shown in Table 7.1, the City’s share of the regional housing need is 20 units. The City is
responsible for identifying the land that is both suitable for and can accommodate this level of
residential development. The City is not responsible for the actual construction of the units.
 Table 7.1 - Fort Bragg Regional Housing Needs Assessment
 Allocation by Income Group
                     Very                               Above
      Income                  Low Moderate                           Total
                     Low                              Moderate
 Housing Units        5        3           3              9           20
 Source: MCOG, Draft Mendocino County Regional Housing Needs Assessment
 Plan, 2013
Inventory of Available Land
The City undertook a comprehensive GIS-based analysis to identify the size and number of
vacant parcels in each zoning district. Overall there are approximately 120 acres of vacant and
underutilized residential and mixed-use parcels available for development, as shown in Table
7.2. The residential development potential for each parcel noted in Table 7.2 was calculated in
two ways:
 Potential Maximum Units illustrates the maximum number of units that are developable on
     the site given the site size and units/acre allowed under the zoning. This calculation identifies
     a theoretical maximum if all land use and infrastructure constraints were removed and the
     property built out to its fullest extent.
10 - Housing Element                                                                      2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-44

    Likely Units Given Development Constraints estimates potential unit build-out given all
     known site constraints (slope, soils condition, botanical resources, access issues, etc.). The
     potential units were calculated by taking the area available for residential use and multiplying
     by a factor that represents staff’s estimate of the realistic development envelope on the site.
     This analysis is necessarily a best estimate given staff’s current knowledge. More or less
     development may be possible than this estimate and can only be determined through the
     completion of all relevant studies and analysis on a parcel-by-parcel basis. The resulting
     number was then multiplied against the units per acre density allowed by the zoning to arrive
     at the theoretical maximums.
All sites in the analysis are currently served by City water and sewer services. Some of the
parcels are sufficiently large that they will require the development of internal circulation (streets)
which is a significant expense to development and may reduce overall feasibility of some of the
sites.
 Table 7.2 - Vacant Land Analysis for Residential Development Potential,
 Fort Bragg, 2014
                                                                        Likely Units
                                 Maximum       Acres of
                                                            Maximum        Given
    General Plan Designation     Units Per     Vacant
                                                               Units   Development
                                   Acre          Land
                                                                        Constraints
 Low Density Residential (RL)         6           24.1          144          96
 Medium Density Residential (RM)     12            6.2           75          67
 High Density Residential (RH)       15           18.9          283         198
 Very-High Density Residential       24           47.6         1,143        522
 (RVH)
 Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)     24           10.0          241         183
 General Commercial (CG)             24            4.8          116         104
 Central Business District (CBD)     40            8.5          339         160
  Total                                          120.2         2,342       1,331
 Source: Community Development Department, City of Fort Bragg, 2014
Several conclusions can be drawn from Table 7.2. First, the City has sufficient vacant and
underdeveloped land to meet its regional housing allocation of 21 units, since 1,331 units could
be built within City limits, given environmental constraints. The majority of these units could be
higher-density multi-family units in very high density and mixed use Zoning Districts. For a
complete list of all vacant properties (by parcel number), zoning, and potential units please see
Appendix B. The total acreage of available multi-family land and the total number of units has
declined from the 2009 housing element, because some parcels have been developed for
housing, including 30 units of affordable housing, and significant environmental constraints have
been discovered on three large parcels which will significantly reduce the development feasibility
and envelope. However, despite sufficient vacant and underdeveloped land, our relatively weak
housing market limits the actual amount of housing that is built each year. However, as shown in
Table 7.3 below, the City has more than adequate zoning to meet the current Regional Housing
Needs Assessment (RHNA) requirements.
10 - Housing Element                                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-45

 Table 7.3 - Summary of Vacant Sites by Income in Comparison to the RHNA
                                                                              Likely Units RHNA
       General Plan Designation                Likely Income Category            Given     Require-
                                                                              Constraints  ments
 Low Density Residential (RL)           Above Moderate Income                       96         9
 Central Business District (CBD)        Moderate Income                            160
                                                                                               3
 Medium Density Residential (RM)        Moderate Income                             67
 High Density Residential (RH)          Low, Very Low Income, Extremely Low        198
                                        Income
 Very-High Density Residential (RVH)    Low and Very Low Income, Extremely         522
                                        Low Income
                                                                                              8*
 Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)        Low and Very Low Income, Extremely         183
                                        Low Income
 General Commercial (CG)                Low and Very Low Income, Extremely         104
                                        Low Income
  Total                                                                           1331        21
Note: * 50% of the eight units (i.e. four units) are for Extremely Low Income households.
State legislation (SB 1019) requires the City to zone an adequate number of sites that permit
multi-family residential uses without a conditional use permit to allow the City to meet its housing
need for very-low and low income households. The RVH zoning district permits multi-family
housing without a conditional use permit, and these vacant sites can accommodate up to 522
units. Additional multi-family housing can be built with a conditional use permit: namely, 67 units
in the RM District, and 198 units in the RH District. A conditional use permit can be obtained if
the developer provides a traffic study for a project. However, a significant portion of parcels
zoned for higher density housing are located within the Coastal Zone and require a Coastal
Development Permit. In addition, all multi-family development of three or more units requires
Design Review.
State law requires the City to have sufficient vacant land with zoning to accommodate housing
for lower-income households (GC Section 65583.2 (c) (3)). State law allows the City to meet this
requirement by zoning sufficient vacant land with default densities of 15 units per acre to
encourage the development of housing for lower-income households. As shown in Table 7.2
above, there are currently 71 acres of vacant land within City limits which is zoned for 24 units
per acre or greater, which is more than adequate to accommodate the needed 21 units of
extremely low, very low and low income affordable housing mandated by our RHNA housing
allocation. These vacant properties can accommodate up to 970 units given known site
constraints.
Significant progress has been made toward alleviating the shortage of affordable housing
through the collaborative efforts of the City and nonprofit housing organizations. Nonetheless,
there continues to be a large unmet need for this type of housing in the community. The City is
currently in discussions with a number of affordable housing developers to develop additional
affordable housing in Fort Bragg.
Specifically, the City of Fort Bragg is working with the Danco Communities, which is an
affordable housing development company. Danco Communities specializes in the use of tax
credits, HOME funds, CDBG, and Redevelopment funds in order to offer rents that, combined
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                    10-46
with tenants’ utilities, do not exceed one third of their monthly income. These projects can help
cities and counties meet their state mandated housing element and contribute to a healthier local
economy. Danco Communities’ affiliates maintain ownership of these developments for a
minimum of 55 years, ensuring that they are well-managed and well-maintained. Danco just
completed a 27 unit 100% affordable senior housing project and is now working with Parents
and Friends to develop a 20 unit affordable housing project for people with developmental
disabilities.
Habitat for Humanity. The City continues to work with Habitat for Humanity and has changed
the zoning code to provide one planning incentive for sweat-equity affordable housing, such as
that developed by Habitat for Humanity. Habitat for Humanity is currently constructing an eight
unit, in-fill, self-help affordable housing development in Fort Bragg.
Environmental Constraints to Development of Vacant Land
Environmental constraints to housing development include the following key issues:
 Botanical resources. Known and potential botanical and wetland resources on undeveloped
     sites can constrain the development envelope and therefore the total number of units on a
     vacant site. Where these constraints are known the number of likely units has been reduced
     in Table 7.2 above. Within the Coastal Zone, this constraint becomes even more significant
     as the Local Coastal Program requires a 50 to 100 foot setback from any Environmentally
     Sensitive Habitat Areas.
 Traffic and access. A few of the sites are constrained by limitations of access, such as
     requirements for easements for access and limitations by Caltrans on the number of
     additional encroachments onto Route 1. In addition, some sites will require street and
     frontage improvements for development. These improvements would be required as part of
     the subdivision process, use permit, or coastal development permit process and would be
     borne by the developer.
 Water storage. The City of Fort Bragg has a deficit of adequate water storage in a 50 year
     drought condition and this may limit development of units in the near term. In order to
     remedy this issue the City of Fort Bragg is in the design, engineering and environmental
     review phase of the construction of a 45 acre foot reservoir which will address the water
     storage issue for the next five to ten years. The City anticipates completion of the reservoir
     by 2016.
 Water pressure. The south Fort Bragg pressure zone may not be adequate to serve an
     additional large two story development of more than 50 units. The City has undertaken an
     analysis of the pressure zone and has identified a potential solution. The solution will be
     implemented as part of the City’s regular Capital Improvement Plan or as a condition of
     approval for a significant development that will impact the water pressure in the zone to a
     sufficient degree to impact the City’s ability to fight fires.
Existing and Planned Water, Sewer and Dry Utilities
Most sites have ready access to water, sewer and dry utilities. All residential development must
pay for the physical connection to the City’s water and sewer systems, and the cost of this
connection depends on the distance of the project from the main lines. Within City limits all
parcels with residential zoning are within a reasonable connection distance for sewer and water.
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-47

Map 1: Vacant Land
10 - Housing Element                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                               10-48
Appendix B provides a detailed list of all vacant sites which includes APN numbers, street
addresses, acreage, and a description of known site specific development constraints such as
slope, presence of wetlands, bluff retreat buffers, presence of botanical resources, etc.
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Zoning for Transitional and Supportive Housing
The City’s Land Use and Development Code treats transitional and supportive housing in all
residential, commercial, and industrial zones as multi-family, live-work, or single family housing,
depending on design. As such, it is permitted as a single-family home and as a use by right
without any need for a use permit or design review in all residential zoning districts. Multi-family
developments require a Use Permit approval in the RM, RH, RVH, CG, CH and CBD zones.
Live-work developments require a Use Permit approval in the Light Industrial (IL) zone. There
are 89 vacant acres of RM, RH, RVH, CG, CH and CBD zoned land in Fort Bragg which can
accommodate up to 1,116 units.
Zoning for Single Room Occupancy
SRO housing (also known as rooming or boarding) is permitted with Minor Use Permit and
Design Review approval in the RM, RH, and RVH zones. The City has 72 acres of vacant land
which can accommodate up to 787 dwelling equivalent units of SRO housing.
Zoning for Second Units
Second units are a permitted use in any residential zoning district (RR, RS, RL, RM, RH, RVH)
so long as the site is at least 6,000 SF and adjacent to a street width of 36 feet or more. Second
units of more than 18 feet in height require a Minor Use Permit. There are significant
opportunities for secondary units especially in single family residential zones which are already
developed with single family homes. Indeed, this is one of the most common types of
development that occurs in the City of Fort Bragg. In order to encourage additional second unit
production, the City of Fort Bragg established a secondary unit program, which provides free
architectural drawings, building permit level detailed plans, Title 24 analysis, and structural
analysis for any property owner in Fort Bragg who would like to construct a second unit. The
second units range in size from 522 SF to 767 SF and include efficiency, one and two bedroom
designs.
Zoning for Farmworkers
Fort Bragg does not have any agriculturally zoned land within City limits and therefore does not
address farmworker housing specifically.
Zoning for Employee Housing
For Bragg allows employee housing in all residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts
and employee housing is regulated identically to nonemployee housing. It is regulated
according to the number and type of units, not according to the type of resident.
Manufactured Housing and Mobile homes
A mobile home park is a conditional use requiring a Use Permit in all residential districts.
Individual mobile homes and manufactured homes are a permitted use in all residential districts.
Mobile homes outside of mobile home parks must have exterior siding as found in conventional
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                            10-49

residential structures, 12 inch overhangs on roofs, and a foundation. Manufactured homes do
not have any specific design requirements and are not subject to Design Review. The City has
37 acres of property zoned for single family use (the most likely location for a manufactured
home) which could accommodate 216 units of manufactured housing.
Zoning for Multi-family
The City of Fort Bragg has 96 acres of vacant land which can accommodate up to 1,235 multi-
family housing units at a verity of densities.
Zoning and Vacant Land Available for Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters provide homeless persons with short-term housing accompanied by limited
supplemental services. Transitional housing, which provides housing for a period between six
months and two years, assists individuals and families to move from homelessness to
permanent housing. Transitional housing facilities usually provide supportive services to assist
formerly homeless persons. These stages are described in the “Continuum of Care” model
utilized by the County.
The City of Fort Bragg allows emergency shelters as a permitted use in the General Commercial
(CG) zoning district. As shown in Table 7.2 above, there are currently 4.8 acres of vacant land
zoned as CG. This vacant land is more than adequate to meet the community’s need for
emergency shelters. The City does not require any special development or management
standards for emergency shelters. Emergency shelters are subject to the same land use and
zoning controls as any development that is a permitted use within the General Commercial
zoning district.
In addition, the City of Fort Bragg works extensively with local non-profit service providers to
develop and expand emergency shelters, transitional housing, and homeless services. A list of
City Facilities is included in Table 6.10 above. These facilities are appropriately located in areas
with access to supportive health, welfare, social, employment, and public transportation services.
10 - Housing Element                                                                    2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-50

8. ANALYSIS OF GOVERNMENT CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT
Annexation Standards
The policy adopted by the Mendocino County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO)
regarding annexation proposals is an important land use regulation affecting development in Fort
Bragg, as well as other cities in Mendocino County. The standards and procedures set forth in
the LAFCO policy affect its review of requests for City annexation of lands proposed for
development. The application of these standards does not constitute a constraint to housing
development since they do not exceed the annexation requirements contained in State law.
Land Use Controls
Zoning
The Fort Bragg zoning ordinance, the Inland Land Use and Development Code (ILUDC),
contained within the City's Municipal Code, sets forth zoning designations and development
requirements for construction activity within the City. State law requires that the zoning
ordinance be consistent with the General Plan. The Fort Bragg’s ILUDC underwent a
comprehensive update in 2014 to implement the 2009 Housing Element update and the overall
2013 General Plan Update. The following changes were made to the Land Use and
Development Code to promote housing development.
The inclusionary Housing Ordinance was modified to comply with new case law and City
Council direction as follows:
      1. Inclusionary Housing Requirements: Provide a graduated                       requirement  for
         inclusionary housing proportional to the number of units built.
               a. Exempt projects of four units or less (rental, for-sale, multi-family and single-
                  family) from the inclusionary housing requirement, consistent with the existing
                  ordinance.
               b. For projects with five to ten units: Require 20% of units to be “affordable by
                  design” (i.e., small units, second units – less than 600 sf) with no income or price
                  limits. This recommendation is based on the fact that a 10% inclusionary
                  requirement for projects of less than 10 units would result in a fractional unit.
                  Requiring a higher percentage (20%) but with a lower cost to the project (smaller
                  units that are affordable by design) is fairer than rounding up to a whole number.
               c. For projects of 10 to 20 units: 10% inclusionary requirement. This would result in
                  one to two units per project.
               d. For projects of 20 units or more: 15% inclusionary requirement. A 15%
                  requirement is significant and may incentivize smaller projects as directed by
                  Council. The current ordinance has a 15% inclusionary requirement for projects
                  of 7 units or more.
               e. When imposition of the inclusionary requirements results in a fractional number of
                  units, the applicant would pay a fraction of the in-lieu fee proportional to the
                  fraction number.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-51

      2. Rental Unit Requirements: Developers of rental housing complexes could meet the
          inclusionary requirements through any of the following mechanisms:
              a. For projects of less than 10 units, construct a minimum of 20% of units as
                  “affordable by design” units; or
              b. Enter into a contract with the City to provide on-site inclusionary housing as
                  defined in #1 above, with income-determined rents, if a developer requests and
                  receives an incentives or a density bonus from the City; or
              c. Pay an in-lieu fee based on Inclusionary Housing Requirements established in #1
                  above.
      3. For-Sale Unit Requirements:
              a. Inclusionary housing would be required as defined in #1 above; or
              b. Alternative equivalent action to build second units at a 2:1 ratio to meet the
                  inclusionary requirement for the first 30 units of a single family project; or
              c. Payment of an in-lieu fee.
     4. Exemptions from Inclusionary Housing Requirements: Projects of less than 4 units,
         affordable housing units in affordable or mixed-income developments, sweat equity
         housing projects, affordable senior housing developments, housing projects for persons
         with special needs, units of less than 600 SF, and other exemptions as approved by City
         Council.
     5. Subdivisions: Inclusionary housing would be required for major subdivisions (5 or more
         parcels) regardless of the acreage. Currently the City’s Inclusionary Housing ordinance
         requires that subdivisions of more than 5 acres, without development, donate enough
         land to accommodate required inclusionary units.
     6. Inclusionary Housing Resale Limitations: Revise resale limitations so that owners can
         gain equity over time.
         a.       Allow for equity to build over time. The ad hoc committee recommends that
                  Council adopt Habitat for Humanity’s affordability and equity-building timeframe
                  for for-sale inclusionary units. Habitat for Humanity’s sweat equity formula
                  includes:
                        i. Equity accrual during the first 5 years is limited to equity accrued through
                           the mortgage and down payments; it does not include any market related
                           appreciation.
                       ii. Equity accrual in years 6 through 15 would include 10% of the market
                           appreciation per year of extra ownership plus equity accrued through the
                           mortgage payment and the property owner’s down payment.
                      iii. After 15 years the family would accrue all market and mortgage pay-off
                           related equity.
                  If a home is sold prior to 15 years of ownership, the equity that is not accrued by
                  the homeowner would go into City’s Housing Trust Fund to support affordable
                  housing development.
         b.       Reduce the required time for affordability. The ad hoc committee recommends 15
                  years for for-sale units and 25 years for rental units.
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-52

           c.      Provide flexibility in how developers can comply with the regulations.
                      i.  Continue to provide for a waiver of all or a portion of the inclusionary
                          requirements as established for rental housing in CLUDC Section
                          17.32.060(A)(1)(c) which states:
                          “To the extent necessary to avoid a hardship or taking, upon a showing by
                          the applicant that imposition of the requirement on the residential project
                          will cause undue hardship or legal taking under the California or United
                          States constitutions, and that the residential project will contribute
                          significantly to affordable housing opportunities in the City.”
                     ii.  Expand this waiver to apply to both rental and for-sale housing projects.
                    iii.  Allow for alternative equivalent actions, such as: donation of land,
                          payment of in-lieu fee, compliance through developer-proposed and
                          Council-approved mechanism such as second units, smaller units,
                          inclusionary by design.
A number of changes were made to the City’s parking requirements to create more flexibility
when requiring parking as part of residential and affordable housing developments. Changes
include:
1. Allow a reduction in the parking requirement through a Minor Use Permit (MUP).
2. Revise the multi-tenant site parking requirements to reflect best practices in setting parking
     requirements for shared use parking facilities.
3. Allow the use of on-street parking through an MUP for projects located in areas with extra
     available on-street parking.
4. Reduced parking requirements for deed restricted senior and affordable housing to reflect
     current best practice.
5. Revise parking requirements to: 1) eliminate separate parking requirements for residential
     care facilities and 2) provide for a minimum and maximum parking requirement for each
     category to reflect best practice.
6. Require a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces for multi-family and non-residential
     projects.
7. Revise mixed-use residential/commercial projects which should be allowed to share parking
     if the different uses have different peak parking periods.
8. Provide an opportunity to approve reduced parking if certain bicycle facilities are
     incorporated into a project.
Additionally a number of changes were made to provide for more flexibility for and opportunities
to develop housing, as follows:
 1. Revise live-work limitations on use, to provide more feasible use for light industrial
       activities. Revise floor area requirements to provide more flexibility in design and size of
       live-work unit. Eliminate requirement that ground floor must be used for non-residential
       uses. Eliminate requirement to integrate living and work space. Eliminate parking
       requirement as it is already stated in parking section.
10 - Housing Element                                                                         2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-53

 2. Revise mixed use projects section to allow residential uses on the ground floor (on non-
       primary street frontage) and to address hours of operation for commercial components of
       mixed use projects. Implements program H-2.2.2 and program H-2.2.3 of the 2009
       Housing Element.
 3. Multi-Family Projects: Add requirement to develop one universal design unit in projects of
       more than ten units (according to the universal design concept for handicapped
       accessibility). Implements Program H-3.7.1, H-3.7.2 and H-4.2.2 of the 2009 Housing
       Element.
 4. Revise second unit requirements to eliminate all reference to design review so that second
       units are reviewed based on non-discretionary standards and as a ministerial action.
 5. Allow Cohousing as a use permit use in the RM, RH and RVH zoning districts. Cooperative
       Housing (Co-Housing) is defined in the ILUDC as “a type of Multi-Family residential
       development. It typically consists of smaller units (which may or may not include a kitchen)
       and a larger cooperative kitchen and gathering space for residents.”
 6. Revise the zoning ordinance to allow ground floor residential in mixed-use projects in the
       CBD along the rear of properties that back onto alleys.
As shown in Tables 8.1, Table 8.2, Table 8.3 and Table 8.4, residential land use is currently
allowed within six residential zones, and as mixed-use projects in four commercial zones. The
City’s land use controls are not restrictive and in some cases more permissive of residential
development than land use controls in similar small towns. As illustrated in the tables, the City
provides for two story development in all zones, and three and four story residential development
in the majority of zones. In addition, the City’s lot coverage ratios and FAR requirements allow
for significantly compact higher density residential development. Setbacks are reasonable given
adjacent uses and the character of the community. A Use Permit is required for projects on land
zoned for medium densities or 6-15 units, as is a Coastal Development Permit required for all
projects with the exception of single family homes that are located within the City’s Coastal
Zone. A conditional use permit is not required for Very High Density Residential zone which
allows 12 to 24 units per acre.
 Table 8.1- Permit Requirements by Type of Residential Development in
 Residential Zoning Districts
                                          PERMIT REQUIRED BY
                                               DISTRICT
                                                  RR          RS   RL   RM   RH    RVH
 Condominium conversion - 3 units maximum
                                                  —            —   —     P   —      —
 per parcel
 Home occupation                                   P           P    P    P    P     P
 Mobile home park                                 UP          UP   UP   UP   UP    UP
 Mobile/manufactured home                          P           P    P    P    P     P
 Multi-family housing, 2 or 3 units               —            —   —     P    P     P
 Multi-family housing, 4 or more units            —            —   —    UP   UP     P
 Co-Housing, 4 or more units                      —            —   —    UP   UP     P
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                10-54

 Organizational house (sorority, monastery,
 residential care, care for the elderly, etc.) of         —                 —  —      UP  UP     UP
 more than 3,000 SF or three units.
 Residential accessory use or structure                    P                P   P      P   P      P
 Residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE),
                                                          —                 —  —      UP  UP     UP
 6 or more clients
 Rooming or boarding, 6 or more persons                   —                 —  —     MUP MUP    MUP
 Second units (2)                                          P                P   P      P   P      P
 Single-family dwelling                                    P                P   P      P   P      P
 Table 8.2 - Permit Requirements by Type of Residential
 Development in Commercial Zoning Districts
                                                           CN  CO       CBD   CG     CH
 Emergency/transitional shelter                            —    —        —      P     —
 Home occupation                                            P    P        P     P      P
 Live-work unit                                           MUP  MUP     MUP    MUP     —
 Multi-family dwellings                                     P   UP       UP    UP     UP
 Residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE)          —    UP       UP    UP     —
 Residential care facility, 7 or more clients              —    UP       UP    UP     —
 Residential component mixed use project                    P   UP      P(2)    P      P
Table 8.3 - Residential Land Use Controls, 2014
    Table 4.2.3 City of Fort Bragg Current Land Use Controls, 2014
                                                   Max
                                                   Units
                                                   per              Lot       Minimum    Height
                                                   Acre  FAR    Coverage       Lot Size  Limit
    Residential
       Suburban Residential                        3     NA        25%        15,000      28 ft
       Low Density Residential                     6     0.4       40%         6,000      28 ft
       Medium Density
    Residential                                    12    0.4       50%         6,000      35 ft
       High Density Residential                    15    0.4       75%            A       35 ft
       Very High Density
    Residential                                    24    0.4       None           A       45 ft
    Commercial
       Central Business District                   40     A        None          2,000    35 ft
       General Commercial                          24     A        None          5,000    35 ft
       Highway Visitor
    Commercial                                     24     A        None          6,000    35 ft
    Notes: A = determined by review authority
    Source: City of Fort Bragg, 2014
10 - Housing Element                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                         10-55

Table 8.4 - City of Fort Bragg Development Standards, 2014
                                       Front        Side        Rear       Coastal
                                      Setback     Setback      Setback      Zone
Residential
   Suburban Residential                 25 ft        10 ft       20 ft     None
   Low Density Residential              20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     None
   Medium Density Residential           20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     CDP
   High Density Residential             20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     CDP
   Very High Density
Residential                             20 ft        5 ft        10 ft     CDP
Commercial
   Central Business District           None         None         15 ft     CDP
   General Commercial                   10 ft        10 ft        5 ft     CDP
   Highway Visitor Commercial           15 ft        15 ft       10 ft     CDP
Notes: CDP = Coastal Development Permit required in Coastal Zone
Source: City of Fort Bragg, 2014
Taken together, the residential and commercial zones provide for residential development either
through a Use Permit process or as a permitted use in over 50 percent of the land within City
limits for a variety of housing types including multi-family rental housing, mobile homes,
emergency shelters and transitional and supportive housing which are treated as either single
family or multi-family residential depending on the project configuration.
Subdivision Standards
The standards for on- and off-site improvements contained in the Subdivision Ordinance do not
constitute a constraint to housing development. These standards are summarized below and are
no more restrictive than those typically found in other Mendocino County jurisdictions. Indeed, in
some cases, less restrictive standards exist in Fort Bragg, since sidewalks with full curb and
gutters are not required for all types of residential subdivisions.
Table 8.5 - On and Off-site Improvement Standards
   Sidewalks                     Sidewalks are required on both sides of the street in residentially zoned
                                 areas, with the exception that the RS district does not require a sidewalk
                                 for lots equal to or larger than 15,000 square feet.
   Sidewalk Width                Sidewalks shall be at least 4 feet with 1/2 foot for curb, and not less than
                                 3 5/8 inches thick. Sidewalks shall be adjacent to curbs unless the
                                 conditions of tentative map approval provide otherwise.
   Curbs                         Curbs shall be provided in all residential areas with sidewalks.
   Minimum Street Widths         The minimum width of pavement for lots 6,000 square feet - 24 feet with
                                 curb, gutter and sidewalk; for lots 6,001 to 15,000 square feet - 40 foot
                                 curb-to-curb is required; for lots >15,001 square feet - 18 feet paved with
                                 a 2 foot rocked shoulder.
   Cul-de-sacs                   A paved turn around shall be provided at the ends of cul-de-sac streets.
                                 The radius for the edge of pavement or curb line shall be 30 to 50 feet
                                 depending on lot size. A hammerhead turnaround is allowed on a case-
                                 by-case basis with approval of the Fire Department.
   Standard Radii for Curb       All residential street intersections: 20 foot minimum.
   Returns at Street Corners
10 - Housing Element                                                                              2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                    10-56
Inclusionary Housing Requirements
The Inclusionary Housing Program does not constitute a constraint to housing development and
is an established and proven method to ensure the construction of affordable housing. There are
approximately 48 jurisdictions in California with inclusionary housing programs that have led to
the production of over 20,000 affordable below market rate units.1 The cost of providing
inclusionary units would either: 1) reduce the profit margin of the developer; 2) be reflected in a
reduction in the value of the land; 3) be partially compensated for by density bonuses, fee
reductions, or other government incentives; or 4) a combination of these effects. The allocation
of this burden would depend on general market conditions and the relative bargaining power of
the parties.
In addition, the revised Housing Element contains many incentives that would reduce the cost of
providing inclusionary units, such as density bonuses, a higher density mixed-use land use
designation, and use of housing funds.
Secondary Dwelling Units
Section 18.42.170 of the Land Use and Development Code sets forth regulations for secondary
dwelling units which are permitted in all residential zones. These regulations allow secondary
dwelling units provided the following standards are met:
      There may be only one secondary dwelling unit per single-family parcel.
      The parcel shall have a minimum lot size of 6,000 SF.
      Secondary dwelling units must meet all standards of the zoning district. They are limited
         to 18 feet in height, unless located over a garage, in which case they can be 24 feet with
         a minor use permit.
      A separate entrance is required.
      The secondary dwelling unit shall not exceed 960 square feet.
      Impermeable surfaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area. Secondary
         dwelling units are not permitted where access is provided from streets less than 36 feet
         wide.
Site and Design Review
Residential development of two or more units requires Design Review. The intent of the Design
Review process is to preserve and improve the natural beauty of the City’s setting and ensure
that the new development is visually harmonious with its surroundings. The Citywide Design
Guidelines establish illustrated and objective criteria for site and building design, landscaping,
lighting and signage. The Design Guidelines clearly state required design elements and
encouraged design elements for incorporation into residential projects. In addition, the illustrated
and objective design criteria are clearly stated for all types of residential development including:
single-family, additions, and multi-family development. Single family homes and second units are
not subject to design review. The Guidelines do not represent a constraint to housing production
in Fort Bragg.
Coastal Act Regulations
In the Coastal Zone, the City’s Local Coastal Program poses limitations on development,
particularly higher density development. Projects in the Coastal Zone are regulated under the
City Coastal General Plan, and Coastal Land Use and Development Code. Residential
development of more than one unit must obtain a Coastal Development Permit (CDP) and a Use
1
         Inclusionary Housing Survey Report, San Diego Housing Commission, 1992.
10 - Housing Element                                                                   2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-57

Permit for conditional uses. A Coastal Development Permit is required for new construction and
for some additions and expansions. Coastal Development Permits are reviewed by the Planning
Commission, are appealable to the City Council. The cost of a typical Coastal Development
Permit is $1,950. Coastal Development Permits for properties located to the west of the first
public road can be appealed to the State Coastal Commission.
3. Development Fees
The City requires payment of various fees such as application, processing, development impact
fees, connection fees, etc. All fees are tied to the City's actual costs of providing necessary
services. These fees are reviewed and adjusted periodically.
Fees for planning applications (e.g. Design Review, Use Permit, Variance, Rezoning, and
subdivision map approval) range from $150 to $1,950. The fees charged by the City to process
and review development applications are lower than comparable market-rate fees for technical
plan review tasks. For a complete list of development fees, please see Appendix F.
Additional fees include statutory school impact fees and parkland dedication fees, charges levied
for building, electrical, plumbing, and other permits, and City capacity fees (development impact
fees).
          For a typical three-bedroom, two-bathroom single-family home, City planning fees,
              building fees, and water, sewer and drainage capacity fees total approximately
              $16,000.
          For a typical multi-family project, the City planning fees, building fees, water, sewer
              and drainage capacity fees total approximately $13,000.
Fee schedules are available at the Community Development Department. The fees required for
residential development are based on meeting actual costs of providing City services such as
fire, police, potable water and wastewater treatment.
4. Building Codes & Code Enforcement
Building codes and enforcement do not constrain housing development in Fort Bragg. As the
City of Fort Bragg does not maintain its own Building Department, the Mendocino County
Building Inspection Department provides building inspection and code enforcement service.
New construction is required to meet the requirements of the most recent version of the Uniform
Building Code (UBC) including the Uniform Housing Code. The code sets forth building
standards and requires inspections to ensure compliance. In accordance with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act, the City’s building code includes requirements that new
residential construction have a minimum percentage of units that are fully accessible to the
physically disabled. While the building codes and their enforcement may increase the cost of
housing, they are designed to ensure the provision of safe and structurally sound housing.
The County Building Department inspects housing units when an owner seeks a building permit
for additional construction, or when a specific complaint relating to the health and safety of the
building occupants is received.
The City’s Code Enforcement officer addresses violations of the City’s codes and receives
approximately 50 complaints a year. About 10-15 of these cases relate to housing issues. Most
10 - Housing Element                                                                  2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                              10-58

involve substandard housing, health and safety complaints, unpermitted construction, and illegal
travel trailer occupancy.
5. Processing Time
The time taken to process development applications affects housing costs, since interest on
loans must continue to be paid and the longer it takes for the development to be approved, the
higher the costs will be. The time to process residential development applications does not
constitute a constraint in Fort Bragg.
The following are estimated processing times for residential development applications for a
building permit for a dwelling with no special permit or exception to the standards required:
           Community Development Department - ½ to one hour.
           Public Works – ½ hr. to three weeks.
           Building Department - two hours to two weeks.
Review requiring a discretionary permit involving one or more public hearings (e.g. Variance,
Design Review, Coastal Development Permit and Use Permit):
           Community Development Department and Planning Commission – 8 to 12 weeks.
           Building Department – 2 to 4 weeks.
Review requiring a change of zoning, major subdivision approval, or preparation of an
Environmental Impact Report (EIR):
           Community Development Department, Planning Commission, or City Council – four
              months to one year.
           Building Department - two hours to two weeks (Includes code compliance, structural,
              grading, and Title 24 review. Does not include back-up time, rework by applicant, or
              field inspections and varies with the complexities of the plan. Back-up time varies with
              volume of applications in the department and can be as long as two to three weeks.)
Single-family units are a permitted use by right and do not require a conditional use permit or
Design Review and as indicated above typically take one to two days but can take up to two
months if a Coastal Development Permit is required. The City has adopted Citywide Design
Guidelines with clear illustrations and text to streamline and facilitate the Design Review
process.
Multi-family housing development requires a conditional use permit in the RM and RH zoning
districts and in all commercial districts. A use permit typically takes two to three months to
process where no CEQA review or other entitlements are required. The use permit requirement
for multi-family housing provides the City with the opportunity to require a traffic analysis for the
project. Specifically the ILUDC requires the following:
18.71.060 - Use Permit and Minor Use Permit
       Application filing and processing. An application for a Use Permit or Minor Use Permit shall be filed and processed in
       compliance with Chapter 18.70 (Permit Application Filing and Processing). The application shall include the information
       and materials specified in the Department handout for Use Permits, and the following information.
       1.    Fiscal and economic analysis. An application for a warehouse retail project as defined in Article 10 (Glossary)
             shall include a fiscal and economic analysis.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                           2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                          10-59

        2.   Traffic Study. A traffic study shall be required for uses determined by the Director or City Engineer to be high trip
             generators.
             a. The traffic study shall identify both cumulative and project-specific traffic impacts.
             b. All traffic impacts shall be reduced, to the maximum extent feasible, through compliance with applicable
                   development standards and/or conditions of approval.
A traffic study can be completed fairly quickly at a reasonable cost by a consultant and is
required so that the City can complete the necessary environmental review (compliance with
CEQA) for projects that are likely to be high trip generators. This is not a significant inhibitor to
development and is necessary so that the City can comply with the requirements of CEQA.
Multi-family housing in the RVH zone only requires Design Review and typically takes two to
three months from the time of a submission of a complete application. The time to obtain
approvals for single and multi-family housing does not constitute a constraint on housing
development in Fort Bragg.
These processing times are comparable to the time taken for processing similar projects in
surrounding jurisdictions.
6. Infrastructure Constraints
Despite the development potential figures mentioned earlier, there are potential constraints to
increased housing development related to the adequacy of the City’s infrastructure. These
include:
 The City’s water storage capacity must be increased to meet current and anticipated growth.
     The City is currently developing a 45 acre raw water reservoir to address this issue. The
     project is in the design and environmental review phase and staff anticipates that it will be
     completed within two to three years.
 Several areas have inadequate storm drains and others are in need of repair. This problem
     is being actively assessed by the City.
 The sewer treatment system will be significantly upgraded over the coming ten years with
     significant investments in the equipment, financed through increases in user fees.
 Financial limitations exist, since the City relies on retail sales tax and transient occupancy for
     its revenue.
7. Potential & Actual Non-Governmental Constraints
Cost of Land and Construction
Market constraints include the cost of land and improvements, construction costs, interest rates,
profit, property taxes and the wide range of factors which determine consumer preference in the
housing market. Most of these factors are beyond the control of local governments, although
occasionally the cost of land and interest rates can be reduced in order to encourage affordable
housing production.
The availability of financing is a key component in determining the affordability of homes. Small
increases in the interest rates can have a significant impact on the amount of monthly mortgage
payments and thereby limit many people from qualifying for a home loan.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                          10-60

The cost of land and housing construction in Fort Bragg is generally less than in other coastal
areas in the County. An informal survey of local real estate brokers and developers indicated the
following range of costs for construction of a single-family home in the City:
          Land costs                      $100,000 to $125,000 for a 6,500 to 7,500 square foot lot.
          Construction costs              $125 to $200 per square foot, although construction costs
                                           exhibit a high degree of variability depending on the type of
                                           amenities included
          Permit and fees                 $15,000/unit
          Total average cost              $200/SF2
There is little data regarding land and construction costs for multi-family housing, because few
market-rate multi-family units have been developed in Fort Bragg in recent years. However, land
costs (including wastewater, water, grading, and drainage improvements) for a typical
townhouse development are in the range of $25,000 to $35,000 per unit, and construction costs
average approximately $105 per square foot. According to Terra Partners, construction costs for
affordable single-family units generally range from $100 to $120 per square foot. Utilizing self-
help programs, single-family unit construction costs can be reduced to $90 to $110 per square
foot. Multi-family units using tax credit financing range from $130 to $170 and higher per square
foot. Construction costs and home prices can be reduced by reducing the amount of amenities
and the quality of building materials. Furthermore, larger developments or higher-density
projects can reduce the per-unit costs.
8. Cost and Availability of Financing
Financing issues impact sales prices or rental payments in a variety of ways.
 When the interest rate charged for construction loans is too high, developers will choose to
     forgo a project because it will not be financially feasible. Typically when construction loans
     get too pricy relative to the sales price for new developments, development as a whole will
     slow or stop. This constrains supply and increases the prices of existing units.
 The ability to construct affordable Tax Credit financed projects depends on the strength of
     the overall economy and the demand for tax credits. Currently the demand for tax credits is
     somewhat suppressed because of the overall decline in the economy. This kind of financing
     has become harder to obtain even for affordable housing developers.
 The rate charged for a long-term mortgage affects the prospective buyer or renter and is
     fluctuating between 4.5 and 5 percent over the past five years. Rates are currently below 5
     percent. The decline in home prices coupled with low interest rates has resulted in many
     home sales over the past three years.
 Prices have fallen by between 25 to 50 percent since 2010. Combined with low mortgage
     rates and federal incentives, housing affordability rates have improved dramatically.
 Financing for new housing development is currently constrained due to the nationwide credit
     tightening. Table 8.6 shows the disposition of home loan applications for residents within the
     Santa Rosa Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) in 2006, which includes Sonoma and
     Mendocino Counties. Applications are broken down by applicant income level.
2
  According to North Coast Builders Exchange
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                  10-61

 Table 8.6 - Conventional Home Loan Applications
 Santa Rosa MSA (Sonoma and Mendocino Counties), 2012
                                                        Conventional Loans
 Applicant Income Level                         %
                                                           % Denied           % Other
                                          Approved
 Very Low (<50% Median
                                              59%            24%               16%
 Family Income (MFI))
 Low (50-80% MFI)                             65%            16%               19%
 Moderate (80-120% MFI)                       70%            13%               17%
 Upper (120%+ MFI)                            69%            12%               18%
 Total                                        68%            14%               18%
 Source: FFIEC, Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) Data, 2014
 The OTHER column represents mortgage offers extended by the bank but rejected by the
 borrower (for any reason), incomplete applications as well as any other circumstance that
 could not be construed as a “rejection” by the lender.
9. Community Sentiment
Community attitudes toward housing play a crucial role in determining the type and cost of
housing that will be built in the City. City staff works proactively with developers of potentially
controversial housing projects to help them address legitimate community concerns regarding
the type of housing proposed, the design, and the impacts of the development on noise, traffic,
parking, and City services. Staff works with the developer to involve the community in the early
phases of a project to inform the developers of the community’s desires. Typically the City holds
a pre-application meeting with the applicant and staff. A pre-application workshop with the
community and Planning Commission can also be held at the applicant’s request on projects
that are anticipated to be controversial due to their location, size, and/or design. The pre-
application meetings are not required.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                           10-62

Overall, the community of Fort Bragg values the historic character of the Central Business
District and the quietness of its residential neighborhoods. Most residents would concur that
housing should be available to all economic segments of the community, and there has been
little opposition to the many affordable housing units built to date.
9. OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION
The City encourages energy conservation in residential projects and through long range
planning activities. The City has undertaken the following activities to reduce energy use and
encourage green building practices.
      1. Design Review process includes energy use criteria. The building orientation, street
         layout, lot design, landscaping, and street tree configuration of all residential projects and
         subdivision proposals are reviewed in order to maximize solar access and energy
         conservation.
      2. The City has established minimum densities for all medium and high density zoning
         districts.
      3. The City allows flexible parking standards for mixed-use development projects and for all
         projects in the Central Business District.
      4. The City is working with Georgia-Pacific (GP) on the completion of a Specific Plan for the
         former GP Mill Site. The preferred land use plan includes significant higher density
         housing development adjacent to the City’s downtown.
      5. The City has completed a Green House Gas Inventory and a Climate Action Plan which
         identifies opportunities to improve energy conservation and reduce greenhouse gas
         emissions throughout the municipal operations.
      6. The City provides green building workshops and green building information to builders
         and homeowners
      7. The City’s housing rehabilitation program addresses underperforming heating and
         cooling systems in low-income units.
      8. The City implements a construction and demolition waste recycling ordinance which has
         resulted in significant recycling of materials.
In addition, the City has adopted a new Sustainability Element that includes a number of new
energy conservation and green building policies and programs which will be implemented over
the next five years.
10 - Housing Element                                                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-63

 Appendix A: Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element - Progress in Implementation & Evaluation
#
                                   Program                                                 Purpose - Implementation of        Evaluation                               Status
                                                                                           Policy Indicated
Program H-1.1.1
                                   Housing Rehabilitation Projects: Seek funding           Policy H-1.1: Housing              The City received CDBG funds to       Retain. The City will begin its third
                                   through the Community Development Block Grant           Rehabilitation: Continue and       offer single and multi-family housing round of CDBG funded housing
                                   (CDBG) program and other State and/or Federal           expand the City’s housing          rehab loan program for two 2-year     rehab program in 2014.
                                   programs to assist in the rehabilitation and            rehabilitation and preservation    programs. The City successfully
                                   conservation of multi-family residential projects.      programs.                          implemented the programs with more
                                   Work with non-profit and for-profit affordable                                             than ten units successfully
                                   housing developers as possible to achieve                                                  rehabilitated.
                                   successful rehabilitation of multi-family housing.
Program H-1.1.2
                                   Target Areas: Continue to identify target areas and See above                              Achieved. The City used its 2008         Retain. A new housing conditions
                                   specific properties where housing rehabilitation is                                        housing conditions survey to target      survey will be completed in the
                                   most needed through a periodic update of the                                               rehab funds to specific challenged       2014 to 2019 timeframe.
                                   housing conditions survey which identifies the                                             neighborhoods and blighted
                                   neighborhoods and areas requiring rehabilitation                                           properties. A number of blighted
                                   assistance.                                                                                properties were rehabilitated and
                                                                                                                              increased code enforcement which
                                                                                                                              resulted in the demolition of two
                                                                                                                              severely blighted and problematic
                                                                                                                              properties.
Program H-1.1.3
                                   Housing Rehabilitation/Preservation Program:        See above                              Achieved. The City obtained funding      Retain
                                   Continue the City’s housing rehabilitation program                                         for a CDBG housing rehab loan
                                   which provides low interest loans for the                                                  program in 2009 and again with
                                   rehabilitation of homes owned or occupied by very-                                         HOME funds in 2013, which have
                                   low to moderate-income households. Continue to                                             been very successful. The City has
                                   seek funding from CDBG, HOME and other                                                     applied for an additional HOME grant
                                   sources for the housing rehabilitation loan                                                to continue the housing rehab
                                   program. Facilitate citizen awareness of the City’s                                        program.
                                   rehabilitation loan program.
Program H-1.1.4
                                   Capital Improvement Program: Consider capital       See above                              The City implemented a number of         Retain
                                   improvement projects necessary to maintain the                                             capital improvements projects in
                                   community’s older neighborhoods as part of the                                             older neighborhoods, namely, a safe
                                   City Council’s annual review of the Capital                                                routes to schools project, a sidewalk
                                   Improvement Program.                                                                       installation project, a number of street
                                                                                                                              resurfacing projects, and a traffic
                                                                                                                              calming project.
Program H-1.2.1
                                   Housing Rehabilitation in Non-Residential Areas:        Policy H-1.2: Discourage           The City permitted three substantial     Retain. The new housing element
                                   Continue to permit substantial rehabilitation of, and   Conversion of Residential Units:   renovations to legal non-conforming      also includes a new program to
                                   additions to, existing housing located in zones         Discourage the conversion of       housing units.                           consider permitting single family
                                   where it is a legal nonconforming use. Require a        residential units to other uses.                                            residential use of SFR structures
                                   conditional Use Permit and Design Review                                                                                            that have lost their non-conforming
                                   approval for substantial renovations.                                                                                               status as housing units in
                                                                                                                                                                       commercial and industrial zones.
                                                                                                                                                                       This would allow for the successful
                                                                                                                                                                       reuse of a number of debilitated
                                                                                                                                                                       SFRs in commercial zones.
                                   Regulate Conversion of Residential Space for the see above
Program H-1.2.2 Program H-1.3.1
                                                                                                                              The City closed down seven illegal       Retain and continue to enforce
                                   Cultivate of Medical Marijuana: Continue to                                                grow houses in residential homes as      ordinance.
                                   implement the City’s medical marijuana cultivation                                         part of a coordinated coed
                                   ordinance to limit the area in a residential structure                                     enforcement program with law
                                   that can be used for cultivation of Medical                                                enforcement. This ordinance has
                                   Marijuana.                                                                                 been very useful.
                                   Energy Conservation Program: Continue to provide Policy H-1.3 Energy Conservation          Staff has not had sufficient time to     Retain. Funding for the REDI
                                   energy conservation and green building materials & Green Building: Promote energy          provide green building workshops.        program has been exhausted. The
                                   and techniques workshops, display board and conservation improvements and                  However the City did implement an        City has applied for new funding for
                                   brochures. Consider establishing an energy green building improvements for                 energy conservation program with         this program from CDBG and if
                                   conservation program with a local energy audit non-existing and proposed residential       REDI which was very successful and       funded will continue the program in
                                   profit to work with home owners to identify energy units.                                  served hundreds of clients.              2015.
                                   saving improvements to homes.
Program H-1.3.2 Program H-1.3.3
                                                                                          See above                           A successful program. In 2014,           Remove. Program has been
                                   Green Building Program: Provide expedited plan                                             DANCO completed 26 LEED                  superseded by policies and
                                   review for green building projects and provide                                             Platinum net zero senior homes.          programs in the new Sustainability
                                   green building information for the public.                                                 This project received expedited          Element.
                                                                                                                              review (2 months) for a CDP/UP and
                                                                                                                              DR.
                                                                                           See adobe                          The zoning ordinance was not been        Remove. Program has been
                                                                                                                              revised to include incentives. Instead   superseded by policies and
                                   Incentives for Green Building: Consider revising
                                                                                                                              green building features are included     programs in the new Sustainability
                                   the Zoning Ordinance to allow the City Council to
                                                                                                                              as part of design review.                Element.
                                   authorize one or more planning incentives for
                                                                                                                              Consequently 30 residential units
                                   development projects that achieve a USGBC LEED
                                                                                                                              have been constructed with green
                                   Certification rating or higher or that achieve
                                                                                                                              building features. Additionally with
                                   compliance with another comparable green building
                                                                                                                              the new California Building Code
                                   certification program, such as the Build It Green
                                                                                                                              requiring green building as a normal
                                   program.
                                                                                                                              part of construction, inclusion of
                                                                                                                              incentives in no longer a useful or
                                                                                                                              necessary incentive.
                                  ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                  10 - Housing Element                         10-64                                       2014
                                  Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Program H-1.3.4
                                                   Financing for Alternative Energy and Energy See above                                            This program will be implemented          Remove, this program is being
                                                   Conservation: Consider establishing a special                                                    through the PACE program, which will      implemented by the County. All
                                                   improvement district for alternative energy                                                      be implemented at a County level.         green building programs and
                                                   (photovoltaic, wind, etc.) and energy conservation                                               The City may chose to implement a         policies are now in the new
                                                   projects. With the establishment of a special                                                    City level PACE program if the            Sustainability Element.
                                                   improvement district home and business owners                                                    County fails to do so.
                                                   would be able to apply for funding from the City for
                                                   the installation of alternative energy systems and/or
                                                   energy conservation measures (better insulation,
                                                   appliance upgrades, etc.), and pay the funds back
                                                   through a special district tax amortized over the life
                                                   of the system.
Program H-1.4.1
                                                                                                          Policy H-1.4. Preserve At Risk            This program is being implemented         Retain.
                                                   Develop At-Risk Units Program: Maintain an Units: Work with private and non-                     as staff resources and funding
                                                   inventory of at risk affordable housing units and profit         affordable   housing            sources allow. Currently it is very
                                                   work with property-owners and non-profit affordable developers to preserve at-risk               difficult to obtain funding to preserve
                                                   housing organizations to preserve these units by affordable housing projects.                    at risk units. Our focus has been on
                                                   identifying and seeking funds from Federal, State                                                developing new affordable projects
                                                   and local agencies to preserve the units.                                                        with very long terms of affordability.
Program H-2.1.1
                                                                                                             Policy H-2.1 Regional Housing          The City maintains an inventory of       Retain.
                                                   Inventory of Infill Sites: Maintain the inventory of      Needs: Ensure that adequate            vacant infill sites in our GIS database.
                                                   vacant      and     underdeveloped        residentially   residentially-zoned     land      is   It is available to any who are
                                                   designated land in the City’s GIS system. Provide         available to accommodate the           interested.
                                                   copies of the inventory for public distribution on the    City’s Regional Housing Needs
                                                   City website.                                             Determination as described in
                                                                                                             Section II.
Program H-2.2.1
                                                                                                             Policy        H-2.2      Mixed-Use     This has been implemented in the        Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                                                                             Development:       Encourage    the    zoning code. However most of the        language and incorporated it into
                                                   Mixed Use in the Central Business District:               development of residential uses in     CDB is built out and no new             policy H-2.2.
                                                   Continue to permit multiple family residential units,     conjunction      with   commercial     residential development has occurred
                                                   at a residential density of up to 40 units per acre,      enterprises in commercial zones,       within the CBD. As the GP Mill Site
                                                   above the ground floor in the Central Business            where the viability of the             is developed there will be an
                                                   District (CBD).                                           commercial activities would not be     opportunity to complete new mixed
                                                                                                             adversely affected.                    use higher density residential projects
                                                                                                                                                    in the expanded downtown.
Program H-2.2.2 Program H-2.2.3 Program H-2.2.4
                                                   Consider Allowing Ground Floor Residential: See above                                            Implemented in the zoning code.        Deleted.
                                                   Consider revising the zoning ordinance to allow                                                  This has not yet resulted in new units
                                                   ground floor residential in mixed-use projects in the                                            but may do so as the economy
                                                   CBD along the rear of properties that back onto                                                  recovers and there is increased
                                                   alleys.                                                                                          demand for new residential units.
                                                   Mixed Use Zoning Regulations: Revise the zoning See above                                        Implemented in the zoning code.           Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                   ordinance to clarify permitting and performance                                                                                            language and incorporated it into
                                                   standards for commercial uses in mixed-use                                                                                                 policy H-2.2.
                                                   districts in order to minimize conflicts between
                                                   residential and commercial uses.
                                                   Mixed Use Development in Commercial Districts:                        See above                  Implemented in the zoning code.        Deleted.
                                                   Continue to provide for additional housing                                                       This has not yet resulted in new units
                                                   development opportunities in commercial districts,                                               but may do so as the economy
                                                   through the implementation of mixed use zoning                                                   recovers and there is increased
                                                   which provides for residential density of 24 units                                               demand for new residential units.
                                                   per acre in the CO, CH and the CG zoning districts
                                                   with a conditional Use Permit.
Program H-2.3.1 Program H-2.3.2
                                                   Secondary Dwelling Unit Design: Continue to               Policy H-2.3 Secondary Dwelling        Secondary unit designs have been          Revised to reflect the ministerial
                                                   implement the City’s pre-approved secondary unit          Units: Continue to facilitate the      prepared and are available free of        approval process for secondary
                                                   program to provide affordable and aesthetically           construction of secondary dwelling     charge. The pre-approval aspect is        units.
                                                   pleasing second unit designs for the development          units on residential properties.       no longer applicable because all
                                                   of secondary units in Fort Bragg.                                                                second units are approved
                                                                                                                                                    ministerial.
                                                   Parking Requirements for Secondary Units:                             See above                  Implemented in the zoning code.           Deleted.
                                                   Consider revising the zoning ordinance so that a                                                 This has increased the production of
                                                   new parking space is not required where the                                                      secondary units.
                                                   establishment of the required on-site parking space
                                                   for a secondary unit would result in a new curb cut
                                                   and the elimination of an on-street parking space.
                                                   Reduced Development Impact Fees for Secondary
Program H-2.3.3
                                                                                                                         See above                  Not yet implemented. The City will        Retained.
                                                   Units and Smaller Units: Consider establishing an                                                revise this fee when it completes a
                                                   updated Development Impact Fee for small                                                         comprehensive development impact
                                                   residential units that recognizes the reduced                                                    fee update.
                                                   impacts on the City’s sewer, water, drainage,
                                                   parks, and streets of smaller units of one bedroom
                                                   or less.
Program H-2.4.1:
                                                   Continue to apply established design standards to         Policy   H-2.4    Manufactured Implemented in the zoning code.          Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                   applications for the placement of manufactured housing    Housing: Continue to encourage There has been relatively limited new language and incorporated it into
                                                   units on permanent foundations in residential zoning      manufactured homes.            construction of residential units so its policy H-2.4.
                                                   districts.
                                                                                                                                            not clear if this policy is working or
                                                                                                                                            not.
                                                  ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                  10 - Housing Element                         10-65                                       2014
                                                  Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Program H-2.5.1
                                                  Continue to update the vacant parcels map and provide   Policy      H-2.5      Infill Housing:    Implemented and ongoing. Tis          Retained.
                                                  information to potential developers about infill        Encourage housing development             information is provided to developers
                                                  development opportunities in Fort Bragg.                on existing infill sites in order to      interested in undertaking new project
                                                                                                          efficiently       utilize      existing   in Fort Bragg.
                                                                                                          infrastructure.
Program H-2.6.1 Program H-2.6.2
                                                  Redevelopment Funds: Use           the 20 percent       Policy H-2.6 Redevelopment        Redevelopment Agency has been                       Deleted.
                                                  Housing Set-Aside Funds to          assist with the     Agency: Utilize Redevelopment     disbanded by the State. Program is
                                                  development, conservation, or       rehabilitation of   Agency housing set-aside funds to not working.
                                                  affordable housing consistent       with community      implement housing programs for
                                                  housing priorities.                                     lower- income households.
                                                  Update the Five-Year Implementation Plan: Revise See above                                        Redevelopment Agency has been               Deleted.
                                                  the Redevelopment Five-Year Implementation Plan                                                   disbanded by the State. Program no
                                                  to include specific criteria for use of the 20 percent                                            longer necessary.
                                                  of the tax increment revenues collected which are
                                                  allocated to the Housing Set Aside Fund. Include
                                                  criteria for the provision of full or partial fee waivers
                                                  for affordable housing projects.
Program H-3.1.1
                                                  Available Funding: Seek available State and             Policy H-3.1: Available Funding           The City has worked with two non-     Retain and revise language slightly.
                                                  Federal assistance to develop affordable housing        Sources: Utilize County, State and        profits on the development of
                                                  for seniors, the disabled, lower-income large           Federal programs and other                affordable housing. Specifically the
                                                  households, and households with special housing         funding sources that provide              City has worked with Habitat for
                                                  needs. Work with the County Community                   housing opportunities for lower-          Humanity on an 8 unit project and
                                                  Development       Commission       (CDC),     Rural     income    and     special   needs         Danco on a 28 unit project. The City
                                                  Community Housing Development Corporation               households.                               assisted with grant writing for the
                                                  (RCHDC), and other non-profits to apply for and                                                   Danco project and assisted both
                                                  implement HCD programs such as the California                                                     projects with the planning process by
                                                  Self Help Housing Program (CSHHP), the Multi-                                                     providing planning incentives for the
                                                  family Housing Program (MHP), and/or the HOME                                                     projects. This program is very
                                                  Program. Seek funding for affordable housing from                                                 successful.
                                                  other sources such as the United States
                                                  Department of Agriculture (USDA), Tax Credit
                                                  Redevelopment Financing: Require developers
Program H-3.1.2
                                                                                                          See above                                 Program no longer relevant as the           Deleted.
                                                  utilizing redevelopment financing or funding to                                                   Redevelopment Agency has been
                                                  include language in agreements with the City                                                      disbanded by the State.
                                                  permitting persons and households eligible for HUD
                                                  Section 8 rental assistance or Housing Voucher
                                                  Folders to apply for below-market-rate units
                                                  provided in the development.
Program H-3.1.3
                                                  School Facility     Reimbursement:       Encourage      See above                                 Funding program is no longer                Deleted.
                                                  developers of affordable housing to apply for the                                                 available at the state level.
                                                  Proposition 1A School Facility Fee Reimbursement
                                                  Program (SFFRP) financed by the California
                                                  Housing Finance Agency. Consider making this a
                                                  requirement for development receiving subsidies or
                                                  density bonuses for very-low rental income units.
Program H-3.2.1
                                                                                                          Policy H-3.2: Encourage Senior            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Deleted.
                                                                                                          Housing: Allow affordable and             Use and Development Code. This
                                                  Flexible Parking: Continue to allow flexible parking    market    rate senior     housing         has made affordable housing projects
                                                  requirements and a density bonus for affordable         projects to be developed with             for seniors easier to develop.
                                                  and market rate senior housing projects as              density bonuses and flexible
                                                  required by law.                                        parking standards where found to
                                                                                                          be consistent with maintaining the
                                                                                                          character of the surrounding
                                                                                                          neighborhood.
Program H-3.2.2 Program H-3.3.1 Program H-3.3.2
                                                  Affordable Senior Housing: Maintain an inventory        See above                                 This inventory is available to the     Retain.
                                                  which identifies properties which are potentially well-                                           public and is maintained in the City's
                                                  suited for senior housing. Work with developers to                                                GIS system.
                                                  facilitate obtaining funding and construction of
                                                  senior housing.
                                                  Senior Shared Housing: Continue to allow the Policy H-3.3: House Sharing:                         Implemented in 2014 update of Land          Deleted. Retained some of the
                                                  conversion of existing residences into shared Encourage and facilitate house                      Use and Development Code. Its               language and incorporated it into
                                                  housing for seniors (i.e., suites with shared sharing programs for seniors.                       unclear if many shared living               policy H-3.3.
                                                  living/cooking facilities) and separate residential                                               situations for seniors have resulted
                                                  facilities for an on-site manager, with a use permit                                              from this program. Its difficult to track
                                                  in all residential zones.                                                                         as no permit is required.
                                                  Encourage Co-Housing: Evaluate the Land Use See above                                             Implemented in 2014 update of Land          Revised language and made
                                                  and Development Code to determine if the code                                                     Use and Development Code. There             program into a policy.
                                                  inhibits  the   development     of   co-housing                                                   is one developer interested in
                                                  developments in the medium, high and very-high                                                    creating a cohousing project. No new
                                                  density zoning districts. Consider revising the                                                   co-housing projects have been built
                                                  LUDC to better accommodate co-housing                                                             although the new Cypress Street
                                                  developments as needed.                                                                           senior project has some
                                                                                                                                                    characteristics of co housing.
                                                    ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                    10 - Housing Element                         10-66                                       2014
                                                    Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
Program H-3.4.1
                                                                                        Policy H-3.4: Increase Affordable    Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain in modified form.
                                                                                        Housing Development: Encourage       Use and Development Code as
                                Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Amend the               the construction of housing units    allowed by the Palmer Case. This
                                Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which requires           which are affordable to households   policy has not resulted in new
                                residential developments of seven or more units to:     with   very-low     to    moderate   development of inclusionary units.
                                a) provide 15 percent of for sale units at prices       incomes.                             Most residential development in Fort
                                affordable to moderate and median income                                                     Bragg is one or two infill units. The
                                households; b) construct all required inclusionary                                           only large project is an affordable
                                housing on-site unless an alternative equivalent                                             housing project which did not need to
                                action is approved by City Council; c) implement                                             comply with the inclusionary
                                the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance which                                              ordinance because the funding's
                                requires the construction of one small secondary                                             sources for the project and the
                                unit and/or one inclusionary unit in projects of four                                        covenants were more limiting than
                                to six units.                                                                                the City's inclusionary ordinance and
                                                                                                                             the Director determined that the
                                                                                                                             project was an equivalent project.
Program-3.4.2
                                                                                        See above                            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain in modified form.
                                Support Self Help Housing: Consider revising the                                             Use and Development Code. One
                                Zoning Ordinance to allow City Council to provide                                            project of eight units has utilized the
                                one or two planning incentives for self-help                                                 program and resulting changes in the
                                affordable housing based on the level of                                                     zoning ordinance to fit two additional
                                affordability, project design, and neighborhood                                              units on the project that site, which
                                character and constraints (circulation, scale,                                               would not have been feasible without
                                parking availability, playground access, etc.)                                               the change in the ordinance.
Program H-3.4.3
                                                                                        See above                            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain in modified form.
                                Support SRO Housing: Continue to encourage and                                               Use and Development Code. No new
                                facilitate Single-Room Occupancy Units by allowing                                           SRO housing has been permitted.
                                rooming and boarding with a Minor Use Permit in                                              However the City has received an
                                the RM, RH, and RVH zones.                                                                   application for a hostel which will
                                                                                                                             benefit from this ordinance change.
Program H-3.4.4 Program-3.5.1
                                                                                        See above                            Not implemented. This program has Retain.
                                Prioritize City Services for Lower Income                                                    not been implemented.
                                Developments: Establish procedures to grant
                                priority service for sewer and water services to
                                lower-income residential developments.
                                Density Bonus Regulations: Revise the Zoning            Policy H-3.5: Density Bonus          Implemented in 2009 update of Land Delete.
                                Ordinance as needed to incorporate the Density          Incentives: Continue to provide      Use and Development Code. No
                                Bonus provisions of State Law requiring the             density bonuses to projects that     projects have taken advantage of the
                                granting of a density bonus and additional              provide a required percentage of     density bonus incentives.
                                incentives. Adopt an ordinance setting forth the        total units affordable to very-low
                                requirements of the Density Bonus Program and           and low-income households and
                                defining affordable sales prices and rents, the         for seniors as required by State
                                affordability criteria, and additional incentives.      Density Bonus law.
                                Seek Funding to Develop or Rehabilitate Housing
Program H-3.6.1
                                                                                        Policy H-3.6: Large Families:        Difficult to implement due to             Retain with minor modifications.
                                for Large Low-Income Families: Work with CDC,           Encourage housing for large          recession and lack of funding for
                                RCHDC, or other affordable housing developer to         families.                            affordable housing projects.
                                identify a potential new construction or
                                rehabilitation project that will serve large lower-
                                income families and obtain and administer a HCD
                                HOME grant or CDBG grant specifically to
                                accommodate large families.
                                Consider Developing a Program to use the HCD
Program H-3.7.1
                                                                                        Policy H-3.7: Housing for the Implemented. 28 units were                       Delete.
                                Universal Design Checklist as part of Design            Disabled: Continue to facilitate developed with universal design
                                Review for all Multi-family Projects. HCD’s             barrier-free housing in new access.
                                Universal Design Checklist was formulated as a          development.
                                contract between a builder and buyer. However
                                this checklist may be modified for inclusion into the
                                design review procedure for a subset of the units in
                                new multifamily developments.
Program H-3.7.2
                                Consider Adoption of a Universal Design                 See above                            Implemented in 2014 update of Land Delete.
                                Ordinance. Develop a universal design ordinance                                              Use and Development Code. See
                                that sets types of units which will be covered and                                           above.
                                what features should be included in those units to
                                achieve accessibility for the disabled.
                                Policy H-3.8: Emergency and Transitional Housing:                                            Implemented. There have been no           Retain as two programs rather than
                                Continue to allow emergency shelters and                                                     new emergency or transitional             a policy. Program H-3.9.3 and
                                transitional shelter within the City as a permitted                                          housing in Fort Bragg. However our        Program H-3.9.4
                                use in the General Commercial (CG) zoning                                                    homeless services organization is
                                district.                                                                                    looking at a number of properties to
                                                                                                                             establish transitional housing and this
                                                                                                                             policy will help with that.
Program H-3.8.1
                                Ongoing Estimates of the Demand for Emergency           Policy H-3.8: Emergency and Implemented and ongoing. This is                   Retain.
                                Housing: Continue to work with the Fort Bragg           Transitional Housing: Continue to completed every year.
                                Police Department and homeless service providers        allow emergency shelters and
                                in the community to maintain ongoing estimates of       transitional shelter within the City
                                the demand for emergency housing in Fort Bragg          as a permitted use in the General
                                and to develop strategies to meet that demand           Commercial (CG) zoning district.
             ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
             10 - Housing Element                         10-67                                      2014
             Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Program H-3.8.2 Program-3.9.1
                                                                                                                           See above                   Implemented. The City has a very                    Retain and include supportive
                                                                   Inter-Agency Cooperation: Continue to work with                                     successful CDBG funded program to                   services.
                                                                   private, non-profit, County, and State agencies to                                  provide supportive services to the
                                                                   provide emergency housing for the homeless.                                         homeless to help them get out of
                                                                                                                                                       shelters and into transitional housing
                                                                                                                                                       and be successful.
                                                                                                                       Policy H-3.9: First Time Home Implemented in the zoning ordinance.                  Retain and implement according to
                                                                   First Time Home Buyers: Continue to require Buyers: Encourage affordable Not implemented on the ground                                  market need.
                                                                   through the inclusionary housing ordinance, the housing for first time home buyers. because there were no market rate
                                                                   provision of housing units affordable to first time                                 for sale projects large enough to
                                                                   home buyers who qualify for affordable housing.                                     require inclusionary units.
Program 3.9.2:
                                                                   Funding Sources for First Time Home Buyers:             See above                             Implemented. This program was not         Retain.
                                                                   Consider applying for funding sources for first time                                          successful because their were no
                                                                   home buyers such as HCD’s HOME Program, and                                                   applicants that qualified for the loan.
                                                                   provide referrals to FHA programs offered by local
                                                                   lenders and sweat-equity programs operated by
                                                                   non-profit housing organizations.
                                                                   Housing Discrimination Complaints: Continue to
Program H-4.1.1
                                                                                                                           Policy H-4.1: Equal Housing Implemented.                                        Retain.
                                                                   facilitate equal housing opportunity by referring       Opportunity: Continue to facilitate
                                                                   housing discrimination complaints to the Fair           non-discrimination in housing in
                                                                   Housing Division of HUD. Continue to distribute         Fort Bragg.
                                                                   information regarding equal housing opportunity
                                                                   laws and the equal housing opportunities for Fair
                                                                   Housing at City Hall.
Program H-4.1.2 Program H-4.2.1 Program H-4.2.2
                                                                                                                           See above                             Implemented. However no housing       Retain.
                                                                   Non-discrimination     Clauses:    Provide    non-                                            has been constructed with direct City
                                                                   discrimination clauses in rental agreements and                                               financial assistance.
                                                                   deed restrictions for housing constructed with City
                                                                   assistance.
                                                                   Use Housing Funds: Consider using the City’s            Policy H-4.2: Improve Accessibility   Implemented. However with the             Retain with some clarifications to
                                                                   housing funds to subsidize the construction of          to Housing: Make it easier to         demise of Redevelopment, the City         the text.
                                                                   renovations and improvements that improve the           develop housing for seniors and       has relatively little funding in its
                                                                   accessibility to affordable housing for qualified       persons with disabilities.            Housing Fund.
                                                                   seniors and persons with disabilities.
                                                                   Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with               See above                             Implemented and on going. 28 units        Retain
                                                                   Disabilities: Review the City’s land use and                                                  with universal design have been
                                                                   building regulations to identify constraints that may                                         developed in the housing element
                                                                   exist for the provision of housing for persons with                                           period.
                                                                   disabilities, and adopt measures to facilitate
                                                                   reasonable accommodations for persons with
                                                                   disabilities. Publicize revisions to land use
                                                                   regulations       providing       for     reasonable
                                                                   accommodation for persons with disabilities.
Program H-4.2.3 Program H-4.2.4 Program H-5.1.1 Program H-5.1.2
                                                                   Reasonable Accommodation: Ensure all new,               See above                             Implemented and on going. 28 units        Retain.
                                                                   multifamily construction meets the accessibility                                              with universal design have been
                                                                   requirements of the federal and State fair housing                                            developed in the housing element
                                                                   acts through local permitting and approval                                                    period.
                                                                   processes.
                                                                                                                           See above                             Implemented in 2014 update of Land Retain. With some changes to the
                                                                   Revise Zoning Ordinance to permit supportive and
                                                                                                                                                                 Use and Development Code. No new language as program H-3.9.4
                                                                   transitional housing as a residential use and only
                                                                                                                                                                 applications for transitional housing
                                                                   subject to those restrictions that apply to other
                                                                                                                                                                 have been submitted since the LUDC
                                                                   residential dwellings of the same type in the same
                                                                                                                                                                 update.
                                                                   zone.
                                                                                                                   Goal H-5: Increase housing       Implemented in 2014 update of Land Delete.
                                                                   Revise Zoning Ordinance to Address Lot Coverage opportunities and improve needed Use and Development Code.
                                                                   Ratio: Revise the zoning ordinance so that the services to expand housing
                                                                   maximum Lot Coverage Ratio is 75% for the High development opportunities.
                                                                   Density Residential zone.
                                                                                                                           See above                             Implemented. The City has               Retain.
                                                                   Continue to Pursue Strategies to Address Water                                                completed a comprehensive leak
                                                                   Storage, Pressure, and Supply Issues: Continue to                                             detection program, replaced water
                                                                   pursue strategies to: 1) add additional water                                                 mains that had leaks, completed the
                                                                   storage capacity to the City’s water supply system;                                           design and environmental review for
                                                                   2) identify and fix water leaks in the water supply                                           a new water storage reservoir, and
                                                                   system; 3) address water pressure issues that                                                 applied for a point of use water rights
                                                                   impact development potentials; and/or 4) seek new                                             change petition in order to secure the
                                                                   water supply as opportunities arise.                                                          City's water access, storage and
                                                                                                                                                                 distribution future.
Program H-6.1.1
                                                                                                                        Policy H-6.1: Public Participation: Implemented.                                   Retain.
                                                                   Workshops: Continue to hold workshops and public Continue to encourage and
                                                                   hearings to discuss proposed revisions to the City’s facilitate public participation in the
                                                                   Housing Element.                                     formulation and review of the
                                                                                                                        City's housing and development
                                                                                                                        policies.
                                                                  ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                  10 - Housing Element                         10-68                                       2014
                                                                  Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                  Annual Report: Prepare an annual report that
Program H-6.2.1
                                                                        Policy H-6.2: Annual Review of Implemented each year.   Retain.
                  describes the amount and type of housing              Housing Element Implementation:
                  constructed, the stock of affordable housing units,   Carry out an annual progress
                  demolition permits, and conversion of residential     report on implementation of the
                  units to other uses, and other housing-related        Housing Element.
                  activities for review by the EDAC, Planning
                  Commission, and City Council.
                  Comments
                  The new Housing Elements goals, policies and programs will be effective. The revised element builds on the past Housing Element's
                  success. Since the economic recession has perfectly aligned with the prior housing element's period, it is too early to know what exactly
                  can be learned from that implementation process and carried forward. However the successes identified above certainly should and
                  have been carried forward. Residential development in Fort Bragg is slow, due to our rural isolated location and relatively slow rate of
                  economic and population growth. However a number of the program from the last element have improved the housing stock and the
                  feasibility of developing new market rate and affordable housing for a wide range of residents, some with special needs. Over the long
                  term the majority of additional units will occur at multi-family densities on the 325 acre former Mill Site, once that property is rezoned.
                  Until then, new affordable units will be built in collaboration with non-profit partners and old units will be rehabbed through private and
                  public investments.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________
10 - Housing Element                         10-69                                       2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
APPENDIX B: PARCEL SPECIFIC INVENTORY OF VACANT AND
UNDERUTILIZED LANDS
EXHIBIT B: PARCEL-SPECIFIC INVENTORY OF VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED LANDS
                                                                                   Maximum Units
                                                                                                                  Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                                  Existing Use
                                         General               Max                                 Likely Units
                                          Plan                Density                                (Given
                                                     Zoning                Acres                                  Access        Access
                                         Design-              (Units/                              Development
APN              Address                  ation                Acre)                               Constraints)                                                  Potential Developm ent Constraints
Vacant Parcels
                                                                                                                                                                 This parcel is relatively unconstrained other than requirements
                                                                                                                                                                 that development not negatively impact the isolated Todd Point
                                                                                                                                                                 Aquifer from w hich parcels in the County rely for potable
018-450-41       1250   DEL MAR DR       RH/CH     RH/CH        15      18.87      283                 198        Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 w ater. The section adjacent to Hare Creek has steep slopes
                                                                                                                                                                 that constitute a small percentage of the over all parcel. The
                                                                                                                                                                 CH designation allow s 24 units per acre.
008-056-11       441 NO FRANKLIN ST       CBD       CBD         40       0.22       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-162-06       126 NO MAIN ST           CBD       CBD         40       0.16       7                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-164-36       105 NO MCPHERSON ST      CBD       CBD         40       0.16       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-092-05       416 NO FRANKLIN ST       CBD       CBD         40       0.16       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-164-38       144 NO FRANKLIN ST       CBD       CBD         40       0.16       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-162-07       120 NO MAIN ST           CBD       CBD         40       0.10       4                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-181-08       309    REDWOOD AVE       CBD       CBD         40       0.02       1                   1         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                               Parking
                                                                                                                                                Lot,             Parcels consists of RR sidings and a portion of the Skunk Train
008-151-23       100 WE LAUREL ST         CBD       CBD         40       0.99      40                  16         Yes           Yes
                                                                                                                                               Round             roundhouse. Pollution may be present.
                                                                                                                                               House
                                                                                                                                               Parking Parcel largely built out w ith Campbell Timberland Mgmt HQ and
008-151-22       90 WE REDWOOD AVE        CBD       CBD         40       2.47      99                  10         Yes           Yes           Lot, Office Skunk Train ow ned parking lot behind Figuieredo's Company
                                                                                                                                               Building Store. Vacant areas may have pollution issues.
008-154-23       231    REDWOOD AVE       CBD       CBD         40       0.11       4                   4         Yes           Yes            Parking           No know n constraints
008-056-23       412 NO MAIN ST           CBD       CBD         40       0.09       4                   3         Yes           Yes            Parking           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 Approx. 0.3 acres is a pond. Area undergoing environmental
008-161-08       90 WE REDWOOD AVE       CBD/IH    CBD/IH       40       3.83      153                 92         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 remediation. Property ow ner is interested in selling parcel.
008-172-09       251 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       1.06      25                  23         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-54       790 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.37       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-35       191    SOUTH ST           CG       CG          24       0.35       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-210-33       830 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.34       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-350-22       211 WE ELM ST             CG       CG          24       0.34       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-162-21       127 NO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.30       7                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-29       731 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.28       7                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-163-10       102 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.23       6                   5         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-28       721 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.22       5                   5         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-27       711 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.20       5                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-030-22       620 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.19       5                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-210-34       840 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.17       4                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-210-50       810 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.16       4                   4         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-48       No Street Address         CG       CG          24       0.15       3                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-51       701 SO FRANKLIN ST        CG       CG          24       0.07       2                   2         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-040-30       720 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.07       2                   1         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-173-13       350 SO MAIN ST            CG       CG          24       0.33       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Parking           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 No know n development constraints other than utility
018-440-58       1151 SO MAIN ST           CH       CH          24       2.73      66                  52         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 infrastructure upgrade needs
018-150-61       1190 SO MAIN ST           CH       CH          24       1.95      47                  42         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 Approx. 1.5 acres subject to Haul Road setback req't and
069-241-27       1201 NO MAIN ST           CH       CH          24       2.26      54                  22          No            No            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 w etland constraints
008-044-12       705 NO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.53      13                  11         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-120-47       851 SO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.39       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-034-07       801 NO MAIN ST            CH       CH          24       0.39       9                   8         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-120-48       845 SO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.34       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-120-46       150    SOUTH ST           CH       CH          24       0.33       8                   7         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-047-11       657 NO MAIN ST            CH       CH          24       0.16       4                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-055-20       100 EA FIR ST             CH       CH          24       0.08       2                   2         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                Ware-
008-033-02       925 NO FRANKLIN ST        CH       CH          24       0.68      16                  15         Yes           Yes                              No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                house
008-055-16       500 NO MAIN ST            CH       CH          24       0.20       5                   4         Yes           Yes           Car Wash Underutilized car w ash in relatively poor condition in CBD.
                                                                                                                                                                 Approximately half of the parcel may be constrained by
018-090-02       700    RIVER DR           CO       CO          24       2.45      59                  29         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 w etland habitat/vegetation/intermittent stream
                                                                                                                                                                 Approx. 0.6 acre is roadw ay/sidew alk associated w ith
018-090-16       700    RIVER DR           CO       CO          24       2.77      67                  27         Yes           Yes            Vacant            healthcare facility. Approx 1.25 acres unencumbered,
                                                                                                                                                                 remainder w ith possible w etland/riparian constraints.
018-230-12       537    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH           24       0.48      11                  10         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-230-11       557    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH           24       0.26       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel is very constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-31       1020   GLASS BEACH DR     RH       RH          15       2.94      44                  10         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 required geological setback from the river bluff edge
                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel is very level and exhibits w et areas during the rainy
018-113-03       970    CHESTNUT ST        RH       RH          15       2.05      31                  12         Yes           Yes            Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                 season
018-113-22       105    MINNESOTA AVE      RH       RH          15       0.47       7                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
 10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                                   2014
                                                                                                                                                                 Partially developed, approx 2.5 acres appear constrained by
018-230-32
 Fort Bragg 425 NO HARBOR DR
             Inland           RH/OS
                      General Plan                 RH/OS        15       4.37      66               10-70
                                                                                                     13           Yes           Yes            Vacant            riparian habitat and steep slopes and of that 1.3 acres is Open
                                                                                                                                                                 Space designation
                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-33       1080   GLASS BEACH DR     RL       RL          6        4.46      27                   2         Yes           Yes            Vacant            required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                                 Development is severly constrained.
008-290-73       1329   CEDAR ST           RL       RL          6        2.40      14                  13         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
020-490-38       1411   OAK ST             RL       RL          6        1.03       6                   6         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
018-100-42       485 SO LINCOLN ST         RL       RL          6        0.92       6                   5         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-302-28       1328   CEDAR ST           RL       RL          6        0.57       3                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
008-290-34       1325   CEDAR ST           RL       RL          6        0.57       3                   3         Yes           Yes            Vacant            No know n constraints
                                                                            Maximum Units
                                                                                                           Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                         Existing Use
                                     General              Max                               Likely Units
                                      Plan               Density                              (Given
                                                Zoning              Acres                                  Access        Access
                                     Design-             (Units/                            Development
APN          Address                  ation               Acre)                             Constraints)                                                Potential Developm ent Constraints
                                                                                                                                                        Approx. 0.6 acre is roadw ay/sidew alk associated w ith
018-090-16   700    RIVER DR           CO       CO         24      2.77     67                  27         Yes           Yes           Vacant           healthcare facility. Approx 1.25 acres unencumbered,
                                                                                                                                                        remainder w ith possible w etland/riparian constraints.
018-230-12   537    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.48     11                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-230-11   557    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.26      6                   6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                        Parcel is very constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-31   1020   GLASS BEACH DR     RH       RH         15      2.94     44                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                        required geological setback from the river bluff edge
                                                                                                                                                        Parcel is very level and exhibits w et areas during the rainy
018-113-03   970    CHESTNUT ST        RH       RH         15      2.05     31                  12         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                        season
018-113-22   105    MINNESOTA AVE      RH       RH         15      0.47      7                   6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                        Partially developed, approx 2.5 acres appear constrained by
018-230-32   425 NO HARBOR DR        RH/OS     RH/OS       15      4.37     66                  13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           riparian habitat and steep slopes and of that 1.3 acres is Open
                                                                                                                                                        Space designation
                                                                                                                                                        Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-33   1080   GLASS BEACH DR     RL       RL         6       4.46     27                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                        Development is severly constrained.
008-290-73   1329   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       2.40     14                  13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-490-38   1411   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       1.03      6                   6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-42   485 SO LINCOLN ST         RL       RL         6       0.92      6                   5         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-28   1328   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-34   1325   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-83   251    RASMUSSEN DR       RL       RL         6       0.55      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-282-30   530 SO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.49      3                   3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-072-10   194    GROVE ST           RL       RL         6       0.42      3                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-112-24   189    OLSEN LN           RL       RL         6       0.37      2                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-510-62   20    SWING TREE LN       RL       RL         6       0.35      2                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-02   745    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.35      2                   2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-24   1348   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.26      2                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-33   937    CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-05   850    LAUREL ST          RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-130-50   440 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-60   430 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.20      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-37   1013   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-29   1342   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-41   1331 EA OAK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-086-14   634 NO HARRISON ST        RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-233-33   136    PARK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-38   126 NO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-65   445 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-210-22   830    WOODWARD ST        RL       RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-13   471 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-33   407 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-042-01   260 WE SPRUCE ST          RL       RL         6       0.15      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-01   749    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.15      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-120-40   320 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.14      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-350-08   978    STEWART ST         RL       RL         6       0.12      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-053-26   451    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.11      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-083-17   305 EA BUSH ST            RL       RL         6       0.10      1                   1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                        This site has no know n constraints to additional development.
018-210-29   860    HAZELWOOD ST       RL       RL         6       2.98     18                  16         Yes           Yes           1 SFH
                                                                                                                                                        The SFH is in good condition.
                                                                                                                                                        Virtually entire parcel is w ooded. Possible pygmy/high w ater
020-520-22   1600   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       4.91     29                  15         Yes           Yes           2 SFH            table thought entire parcel. Tw o existing SFHs are in good
                                                                                                                                                        condition and occupy about 30 % of site.
008-047-17   627 NO MAIN ST            RL       RL         6       0.17      1                   1         Yes           Yes           SFH              No know n constraints
018-440-50   200 WE OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      1.01     12                  11         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-59   400    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.95     11                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-38   350    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.93     11                  10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                            10-71
                                                                                                     Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                   Existing Use
                                     General              Max                         Likely Units
                                      Plan               Density            Maximum     (Given
                                                Zoning              Acres                            Access        Access
                                     Design-             (Units/                      Development
APN          Address                  ation               Acre)             Units     Constraints)                                                Potential Developm ent Constraints
                                                                                                                                                  Approx. 0.6 acre is roadw ay/sidew alk associated w ith
018-090-16   700    RIVER DR           CO       CO         24      2.77      67           27         Yes           Yes           Vacant           healthcare facility. Approx 1.25 acres unencumbered,
                                                                                                                                                  remainder w ith possible w etland/riparian constraints.
018-230-12   537    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.48      11           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-230-11   557    CASA DEL NOYO DROS/RVH OS/RVH          24      0.26       6            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is very constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-31   1020   GLASS BEACH DR     RH       RH         15      2.94      44           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                  required geological setback from the river bluff edge
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is very level and exhibits w et areas during the rainy
018-113-03   970    CHESTNUT ST        RH       RH         15      2.05      31           12         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                  season
018-113-22   105    MINNESOTA AVE      RH       RH         15      0.47       7            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  Partially developed, approx 2.5 acres appear constrained by
018-230-32   425 NO HARBOR DR        RH/OS     RH/OS       15      4.37      66           13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           riparian habitat and steep slopes and of that 1.3 acres is Open
                                                                                                                                                  Space designation
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-010-33   1080   GLASS BEACH DR     RL       RL         6       4.46      27            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                  Development is severly constrained.
008-290-73   1329   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       2.40      14           13         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-490-38   1411   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       1.03       6            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-42   485 SO LINCOLN ST         RL       RL         6       0.92       6            5         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-28   1328   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-34   1325   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.57       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-290-83   251    RASMUSSEN DR       RL       RL         6       0.55       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-282-30   530 SO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.49       3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-072-10   194    GROVE ST           RL       RL         6       0.42       3            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-112-24   189    OLSEN LN           RL       RL         6       0.37       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
020-510-62   20    SWING TREE LN       RL       RL         6       0.35       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-02   745    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.35       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-24   1348   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.26       2            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-33   937    CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-05   850    LAUREL ST          RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-130-50   440 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-60   430 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.20       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-250-37   1013   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-29   1342   CEDAR ST           RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-41   1331 EA OAK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-086-14   634 NO HARRISON ST        RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-233-33   136    PARK ST            RL       RL         6       0.18       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-302-38   126 NO SANDERSON WAY RL            RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-100-65   445 SO HAROLD ST          RL       RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-210-22   830    WOODWARD ST        RL       RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-13   471 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-33   407 SO WHIPPLE ST         RL       RL         6       0.16       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-042-01   260 WE SPRUCE ST          RL       RL         6       0.15       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-041-01   749    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.15       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-120-40   320 NO HARBOR DR          RL       RL         6       0.14       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-350-08   978    STEWART ST         RL       RL         6       0.12       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-053-26   451    WEST ST            RL       RL         6       0.11       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-083-17   305 EA BUSH ST            RL       RL         6       0.10       1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  This site has no know n constraints to additional development.
018-210-29   860    HAZELWOOD ST       RL       RL         6       2.98      18           16         Yes           Yes           1 SFH
                                                                                                                                                  The SFH is in good condition.
                                                                                                                                                  Virtually entire parcel is w ooded. Possible pygmy/high w ater
020-520-22   1600   OAK ST             RL       RL         6       4.91      29           15         Yes           Yes           2 SFH            table thought entire parcel. Tw o existing SFHs are in good
                                                                                                                                                  condition and occupy about 30 % of site.
008-047-17   627 NO MAIN ST            RL       RL         6       0.17       1            1         Yes           Yes           SFH              No know n constraints
018-440-50   200 WE OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      1.01      12           11         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-59   400    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.95      11           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-38   350    OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.93      11           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-150-55   100 EA OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.88      11            9         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-440-49   250 WE OCEAN VIEW DR      RM       RM         12      0.74       9            8         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-080-31   630    DUBOIS LN          RM       RM         12      0.58       7            6         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-080-13   630    DUBOIS LN          RM       RM         12      0.46       6            5         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-31   430 SO HARRISON ST        RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-052-30   430 SO HARRISON ST        RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-194-07   150 SO HARRISON ST        RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-186-10   211 NO CORRY ST           RM       RM         12      0.17       2            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                  No know n development constraints other than need to
018-340-04   441    SOUTH ST          RVH      RVH         24      7.99     192           150        Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                  upgrade utility infrastructure for w ater and sew er
                                                                                                                                                  Parcel is constrained by rare plant communities and has a
008-350-59   900    JOHN CIMOLINO WAYRVH       RVH         24      2.47      59           10         Yes           Yes           Vacant           required geological setback from the river bluff edge.
                                                                                                                                                  Development w ill be unlikley
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                                      10-72
                                                                                                                   Ready Sewer   Ready Water
                                                                                                                                                 Existing Use
                                              General                 Max                           Likely Units
                                               Plan                  Density              Maximum     (Given
                                                            Zoning                Acres                            Access        Access
                                              Design-                (Units/                        Development
APN                Address                     ation                  Acre)               Units     Constraints)                                                Potential Developm ent Constraints
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel may be constrained by rare plant communities and has
008-350-60         920   STEWART ST             RVH       RVH          24       3.59       86           43         Yes           Yes           Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                a required geological setback from the river bluff edge
018-150-58         No Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       1.32       32           29         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-130-13         440   ALGER ST               RVH       RVH          24       0.50       12           11         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel drops off steeply tow ard river and after front yard set
018-150-56         No Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       0.75       18            4         Yes           Yes           Vacant           backs and geologic setback is determined has very small area
                                                                                                                                                                for development - less than 20%
008-191-27         142 NO MCPHERSON ST          RVH       RVH          24       0.14        3            3         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel drops off steeply tow ard river and after front yard set
018-150-57         N0 Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       0.41       10            2         Yes           Yes           Vacant           backs and geologic setback is determined has very small area
                                                                                                                                                                for development - less than 20%
008-192-24         301   MADRONE ST             RVH       RVH          24       0.07        2            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
018-230-23         550   CASA DEL NOYO DR RVH             RVH          24       0.07        2            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
008-082-23         619 NO MCPHERSON ST          RVH       RVH          24       0.06        1            1         Yes           Yes           Vacant           No know n constraints
                                                                                                                                               Mobile           Parcel has mobile home park occupying 1.6 acres of land and
                                                                                                                                               Home             a large level area of 1.46 vacant acres fronts Boatyard drive
018-150-59         No Street Address            RVH       RVH          24       6.95      167           33         Yes           Yes
                                                                                                                                               Park &           and appears unconstrained. Steep slopes occupy balance
                                                                                                                                               Vacant           (3.95 acres). Parcel is currently for sale.
                                                                                                                                                                Parcel is very level and exhibits numerous persistent w et
018-113-01         552 SO LINCOLN ST            RVH       RVH          24       3.20       77           23         Yes           Yes           2 SFH            areas during the rainy season. The existing 2 SHF are in good
                                                                                                                                                                shape, the remainder of the site is undeveloped.
                                                                                                                                                                About 2/3 of the parcel is dedicated as open space w ith steep
018-340-03         601   CYPRESS ST           RVH/OS RVH/OS            24       9.08      218           131        Yes           Yes           1 SFH            slopes, riparian and w etland vegetation leaving about 33% of
                                                                                                                                                                the site is available for additional development
                                                                                                                                                                About half of the parcel is zoned open space w ith slopes that
                                                                                                                                                                exceed 75%, leaving about 30% of the site possible for
018-220-02         440   SOUTH ST             RVH/OS RVH/OS            24      11.05      265           80         Yes           Yes           1 SFH            development. The Property ow ner has completed a minor
                                                                                                                                                                subdivision creating four parcels and hopes to develop 3 SFH
                                                                                                                                                                and the remainder of the parcel w ith multi-family.
Subtotal Vacant Sites                                                          148        2,396          1,276
Underutilized, Non-Vacant Parcels
Subtotal Non-Vacant Underutilized Sites                                        181        ####           1,595
Total  All data
Note: The  Sitesin this Appendix are different than the residential buildout figures
                                                                               184 3,262           1,605
                                                                                     contained in the Background Reports and in references to residential buildout in other Elements of the
General Plan since it uses more conservative assumptions for calculating buildout (i.e., it reduces the development potential of multi-family properties by about 75 percent); it includes
Note: The data in this Appendix are different than the residential build out figures contained in the Background
Reports and in references to residential build out in other Elements of the General Plan since it uses more
conservative assumptions for calculating build out (i.e., it reduces the development potential of multi-family properties
by about 75 percent); it includes underutilized parcels; and it includes the residential component of mixed use
development. The unit development potential for underdeveloped sites was further reduced on a case-by-case basis
taking into account the existing development on the site and other constraints.
No Zoning Ordinance or General Plan amendments would be needed to achieve the densities noted above.
10 - Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                                                          10-73
      APPENDIX C: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
TABLE C-1: AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
Development                              Location                     Year                                 Income
                                                                     Built      Units          Status     Category
Cottages at Cypress Street (Danco)       Cypress Street               2014        28         Protected       Low/Very
                                                                                                               Low
Inclusionary Housing Unit                Whipple                      2007         1         Protected         Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Dana Street                  2004         1         Protected         Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Dick Williams Way          2004 &         6         Protected         Low
                                                                     2005
Habitat for Humanity                     Hocher Lane                  2003         8         Protected         Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Oak Street                   2003         2         Protected       Very Low
Rural Communities Housing                Stewart Street               2000        10         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Rural Communities Housing                Stewart Circle               2000         6         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Community Development Commission         John Cimolino Way            2000        14         Protected       Very Low
Rural Communities Housing                Holmes Lane                  1999         7         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Maple Street                 1998         2         Protected       Very Low
Community Development Commission         South Sanderson              1997         9         Protected       Very Low
                                        Way
Habitat for Humanity                     South Corry Street           1996         2         Protected       Very Low
Rural Communities Housing                Howland Court                1995        10         Protected         Very
Development Corporation                                                                                      Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                     Oak Street                   1994         2         Protected       Very Low
Community Development Commission         Cypress Street               1993        19         Protected         Very
                                                                                                             Low/Low
Habitat for Humanity                     South Harold Street          1991         1         Protected       Very Low
Moura Construction                       South Street                 1990        38           At Risk      Senior Very
                                                                                                             Low/Low
Private/Federal Home Mortgage            Walnut Street                1986        56           At Risk       Very Low
Association
Rural Communities Housing                Cypress Street               1980        43         Protected       Very Low
Development Corporation
River Gardens                            South Street                 1979        48           Pending       Very Low
Total Affordable Housing Units                                                   285
      Protected means rental or resale controls are in effect for at least the next ten years.
      10 - Housing Element                                                                             2014
      Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                       10-74
APPENDIX D: COMMUNITY INPUT & REVIEW
The following community members provided comments and requested changes to the 2014
Housing Element update:
City Council
      Mayor Dave Turner
      Vice Mayor Meg Courtney
      Councilmember Heidi Kraut
      Councilmember Doug Hammerstrom
      Councilmember Scott Deitz
Planning Commission
      Derek Hoyle, Chair
      Teresa Rodriguez, Vice Chair
      Mark Hannon, Commissioner
      Sage Statham, Commissioner
      Stan Miklose, Commissioner
General Public
      Chuck Greenberg, Habitat for Humanity
      Paul Clark, Century 21 Fort Bragg Realty
      Amy Wynn, Permit Agent and Land Use Consultant
      George Reinhardt, NHUDG
10 - Housing Element                                                     2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                          10-75

APPENDIX E: PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING REQUESTS FOR
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
        PROCEDURE FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION IN THE CITY’S LAND
          USE AND ZONING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS PURSUANT TO FAIR
                                               HOUSING LAWS.
Sec. 1. Purpose.
It is the policy of the City of Fort Bragg, pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and
the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (hereafter “fair housing laws”), to provide individuals with
disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access
to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This ordinance
establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and
building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with the intent and
purpose of fair housing laws.
Sec. 2. Findings.
The City of Fort Bragg City Council finds:
The federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act
impose an affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodation in their land use and
zoning regulations and practices when such accommodation may be necessary to afford individuals with
disabilities an equal opportunity to housing;
          A.        The Housing Element of the jurisdiction must identify and develop a plan for removing
          governmental constraints to housing for individuals with disabilities including local land use and
          zoning constraints or providing reasonable accommodation;
          B.        The Attorney General of the State of California has recommended that cities and
          counties implement fair housing reasonable accommodation procedures for making land use
          and zoning determinations concerning individuals with disabilities to further the development of
          housing for individuals with disabilities;
          C.        A fair housing reasonable accommodation procedure for individuals with disabilities
          and developers of housing for individuals with disabilities to seek relief in the application of
          land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures will further the
          jurisdiction’s compliance with federal and state fair housing laws and provide greater
          opportunities for the development of critically needed housing for individuals with disabilities.
Sec. 3. Applicability.
Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with
disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and
10 - Housing Element                                                                                  2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-76

zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements,
when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.
An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or
more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of
such impairment.
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her
representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of
a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing
opportunities.
Sec. 4. Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process.
Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at public
information counters in the planning, zoning and building departments, advising the public of the
availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation
shall be available to the public in the Planning and Building and Safety departments.
Sec. 5. Requesting Reasonable Accommodation.
     A. In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability, any eligible person as defined in
          Sec. 3 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations,
          policies, practices and procedures.
     B. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide the following information:
                   (1)      Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation;
                   (2)      Name and address of the property owner(s);
                   (3)      Address of the property for which accommodation is requested;
                   (4)      Description of the requested accommodation and the regulation(s), policy or
                   procedure for which accommodation is sought; and
                   (5)      Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s)
                   with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling.
     C. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to
          respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.
     D. A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be
          filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A
          reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual’s obligations to comply with other
          applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.
10 - Housing Element                                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-77

     E. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the
         jurisdiction will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible.
Sec. 6. Reviewing Authority.
         A.        Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the “reviewing
         authority,” using the criteria set forth in Sec. 7.
         B.        The reviewing authority shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable
         accommodation within thirty (30) days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant
         with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the
         required findings set forth in Sec. 7.
         C.        If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the
         reviewing authority may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing
         laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional
         information is made, the thirty (30) day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant
         responds to the request.
Sec. 7. Required Findings.
The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation
shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following factors:
          (1) Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable
          accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing
          laws;
          (2) Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an
          individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws;
          (3) Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative
          burden on the jurisdiction and;
          (4) Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the
          nature of the jurisdiction’s land use and zoning or building program.
Sec. 8. Written Decision on the Request for Reasonable Accommodation.
          A.       The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail
          the basis of the decision, including the reviewing authority’s findings on the criteria set forth in
          Sec. 7. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant’s right to appeal and to request
          reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The notice of decision shall
          be sent to the applicant by certified mail.
          B.       The written decision of the reviewing authority shall be final unless an applicant
          appeals it to the jurisdiction’s planning commission.
10 - Housing Element                                                                             2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                      10-78

         C.       If the reviewing authority fails to render a written decision on the request for reasonable
         accommodation within the thirty (30) day time period allotted by Sec. 6, the request shall be
         deemed granted.
         D.       While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations
         otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force
         and effect.
 Sec. 9. Appeals.
          A. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the reviewing authority’s written decision, an applicant
          may appeal an adverse decision. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing.
          B. If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the jurisdiction will
          provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible.
          C. All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. Any information identified
          by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of
          the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.
          D. Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other
          state or federal remedy available.
10 - Housing Element                                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                     10-79

APPENDIX F: CITY OF FORT BRAGG DEVELOPMENT FEES.
CITY OF FORT BRAGG: Planning & Development Fees
                                         Category                                     Fee
 General Information & Letters
          Address Listing                                                              $20
          Research Fee                                                                 $60
          GIS Site Map                                                                 $20
          Zoning Letter                                                               $105
 Sign Permit
          Permanent signs                                                              $50
          Temporary signs                                                              $50
 Building Permits
                                                                              1% of valuation of
          Building Permit Surcharge on Construction Permits [1]
                                                                                building permit
          General Plan Maintenance Fees [1]:
                                                                                 1.5% of total
                Construction permits
                                                                               permit valuation
                                                                                1.5% of assigned
                                                                               valuation based on
                Residential mobile homes                                       gross floor area of
                                                                               mobile home times
                                                                                   $51 per sf
 Construction & Demolition Waste Recycling Deposit
             New construction                                                       $.37/sf
             Remodel or renovation                                                  $.47/sf
             Demolition                                                             $.52/sf
             Road, sidewalk or driveway                                             $.26/sf
             Waste Management Checklist Processing Fee                                 $25
 Planning Permits
                                                                                minimum $750
          Pre-application Analysis
                                                                                    deposit
          Administrative Permits:
                Administrative Coastal Development Permit                             $575
[1] Fee waived for utility permits, demolition permits with no valuation, re-roof permits, foundation
permits under existing structures, and re-siding.
10 - Housing Element                                                               2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                               10-80

                Administrative Design Review                                                  $575
                Administrative Variance                                                       $575
                Amendment to Administrative Permit                                            $500
                Certificate of Appropriateness                                                $575
                                           Category                                           Fee
                Certificate of Compliance                                                     $900
                Emergency Permit                                                              $525
                Floodplain Development Permit                                                 $575
                Lot Line Adjustment                                                           $775
                Medical Marijuana Cultivation Minor Use Permit                                $445
                Minor Use Permit [2]                                                          $575
                Planning permit extension of time (non-subdivision, public hearing not
                                                                                              $180
          required)
                Planning permit extension of time (non-subdivision, public hearing
          before Director
                required)                                                                     $295
                Public Hearing for Administrative Permit                                     $1,050
          Permits Requiring Planning Commission Review Hearing. For each
          permit requiring Planning Commission review, applicant shall pay $1,100            $1,100
          for the hearing plus the fees identified below for the specific permit type(s):
                Adult-Oriented Business Permit                                               $1,300
                Certificate of Appropriateness                                                $500
                Coastal Development Permit                                                    $850
                Coastal Development Permit – Second Unit                                      $850
                Design Review                                                                 $300
                Use Permit                                                                    $700
                Variance                                                                      $400
                Amendments to Design Review, Coastal Development Permit, Use
                                                                                              $500
          Permit [3]
          Planning permit extension of time (non-subdivision, public hearing before
                                                                                             $1,440
          Planning Commission required)
          Appeal to City Council or Planning Commission                                      $1,000
 Developer Deposit Account - Planning Permits & Amendments
          Annexation                                                                      costs incurred
          Development Agreement                                                           costs incurred
          Environmental Review, Negative Declaration, Environmental Impact
                                                                                          costs incurred
          Report
             Mitigation Monitoring                                                        costs incurred
          General Plan Amendment                                                          costs incurred
          Local Coastal Plan Amendment                                                    costs incurred
10 - Housing Element                                                                        2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-81

                                                                                 Determined at time
          Inclusionary Housing Fees [4]
                                                                                   of application
          Planned Development                                                      costs incurred
          Rezoning                                                                 costs incurred
          Specific Plan                                                            costs incurred
                                          Category                                     Fee
          Subdivision
                Extension of Time                                                      $225
                Final Map                                                        $690 + $20/parcel
                Improvement Plan, Plan Check & Construction Inspections            costs incurred
                Minor Subdivision (less than 5 parcels)                            costs incurred
                Major Subdivision (5 parcels or more)                              costs incurred
                Parcel Merger                                                      costs incurred
                Parcel Map                                                       $690 + $20/parcel
                Reversion to Acreage                                               costs incurred
  Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)
          TAC Review – Minor                                                           $695
          TAC Review – Major [5]                                                   costs incurred
          Limited Term Permit Not Requiring Technical Advisory Committee
                                                                                       $150
          Review
  Parking In-Lieu Fees
             Existing Commercial Building                                            No fee [6]
             New Commercial Building                                                 No fee [6]
  Code Enforcement:
          Type 1 Code Enforcement Activity: Sign permit, fence & retaining wall
          issues, expired permit, overgrown vegetation, lawn parking, inoperable       $290
          vehicle, broken windows, and other similar code enforcement activities
[2] Does not include Medical Marijuana Cultivation MUPs.
[3] No environmental and no public hearing required.
[4] Fee based on current home price sales and income levels.
[5] Major events would require a developer deposit account. Fee waived for non-commercial events.
[6] Temporary moratorium.
10 - Housing Element                                                                 2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                 10-82

          Type 2 Code Enforcement Activity: Building maintenance, unsafe
          dangerous building, nuisance conditions, condition of approval violation,
                                                                                                  $440
          illegal home occupation, blight, and other similar code enforcement
          activities
          Type 3 Code Enforcement Activity: Illegal second unit, construction
          without permits, change of use without permit, establishment of an                      $600
          unpermitted use, and other similar code enforcement activities
          Type 4 Code Enforcement Activity: Illegal marijuana cultivation, nuisance
          conditions such as abandoned buildings that provide setting for illegal                 $820
          activities
          Double Fee for Non-compliance with Request to Stop Violation                           double
          for code violations not abated within 45 days of the code violation letter               fee
          Violations (Penalty Fee)
          Penalty fee shall be equal to fee for required application(s), or where there
                                                                                          Required app fee or
          is not
                                                                                                 $1,000
          a set fee, $1,000
At the discretion of the Director, a deposit account may be required in lieu of a flat fee for any planning
permit(s) deemed likely to substantially exceed the City’s typical costs in processing the permit.
10 - Housing Element                                                                            2014
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
                                                   10-83

2.       LAND USE ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Land Use Element is the heart of the Inland General Plan since it has the broadest scope
of the required elements and provides an overview of the long-term development and
conservation goals and policies of the City. Map LU-1: Land Use Designations describes the
desired types and intensity of land use for the City’s Inland Area and its relevant portion of the
Sphere of Influence. The goals, policies, and programs in this element should be considered in
relation to this map.
This Element covers the following policy areas:
•        Sphere of Influence and Annexation
•        Redevelopment
•        Land Use Designations
•        Residential Land Uses
•        Commercial Land Uses
•        Industrial Land Uses
The Land Use Element establishes policies and programs to maintain the existing pattern of
land uses within the City’s Inland Area while anticipating and providing for future growth and
development. It is expected that growth will continue to occur at a slow but regular pace (i.e.,
less than 0.5 percent per year) as experienced in the last decade.
Commercial land uses in the City’s Inland Area are located along the Highway One and Franklin
Street corridors. The Central Business District, located between Oak and Pine Streets, is the
historic, civic and cultural core of the community. Industrial lands are located on North Franklin
Street immediately north of the Central Business District, and on Highway One north of Pudding
Creek. Residential neighborhoods are located east of the commercial core.
Land Use Element policies support a concentrated development pattern by encouraging infill
development on vacant and underutilized sites throughout the Inland Area. The Inland General
Plan identifies potential lands east of the City which may be suitable for annexation. These
lands in the City’s Sphere of Influence are designated for residential development. The Inland
General Plan establishes annexation policies to ensure that the expansion of the City occurs in
an orderly fashion and that clear public benefits are achieved by expanding the municipal
boundaries.
B.       The Sphere of Influence and Annexation
The Inland General Plan applies to both publicly and privately owned land within the City’s
Inland Area boundaries and its broader Planning Area. State law permits the City to plan for
areas outside of its boundaries if the City determines those areas have a relationship to the
City’s planning needs. The Planning Area is defined in this Plan as lands within the City and the
City’s designated Sphere of Influence (as approved by the Mendocino County Local Agency
Formation Commission or LAFCO) which represents areas that may be annexed to the City and
for which urban services may be provided. The purpose of a Sphere of Influence is twofold: to
2 – Land Use Element                         2-1                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

ensure that urban development takes place in an orderly manner, and to allow for the land use
and development policies of a city to be recognized in areas that will eventually be part of the
City. The Inland General Plan establishes policies for the Sphere of Influence which ensure that
development requiring annexation can be adequately served by infrastructure and that the costs
associated with annexations are fairly allocated. It provides for the orderly development and
extension of City services within the Sphere of Influence. Map LU-2 indicates the boundaries of
the City and its Sphere of Influence. Map LU-3 indicates the Annexation Areas within the
Sphere of Influence, as defined by the City Council.
Areas within the Sphere of Influence are currently under County jurisdiction and are regulated
by the Mendocino County General Plan and Zoning Ordinance. Although the County is not
bound by Fort Bragg’s Inland General Plan, the City will work with the County to assure that
County land use decisions in Fort Bragg’s Sphere of Influence are compatible with this Inland
General Plan. Furthermore, if and when lands within the City’s designated Sphere of Influence
are annexed to the City, the land use designations assigned by the City’s Inland General Plan
provide guidance for future development densities, and the policies and land use designations
established by the Inland General Plan become effective upon annexation to the City.
C.       Redevelopment
The status of California Community Redevelopment Law is uncertain at the time of the adoption
of this Inland General Plan. The successor agency to the Redevelopment Agency has some
remaining abilities to eliminate blighted areas and to improve the local economy. The future of
the Successor Agency to the Redevelopment Agency is unclear at this time; various bills are
wending their way through the political process which may revise some portion of
redevelopment agency powers and abilities.
D.       Land Use Designations
The Inland General Plan establishes land use designations shown on Map LU-1: Land Use
Designations. Each land use designation is described relative to the development density or
intensity, and the types of activities, or land uses permitted. Residential density is defined by
dwelling units per net acre.
E.       Applying Land Use Designations to Specific Properties
The Land Use Element provides the primary basis for City decisions on development
applications. Privately and publicly-sponsored projects must be consistent with all parts of the
Inland General Plan, but the Land Use Element is the first place to find out what type of
development would be appropriate in a specific location, or what location would be suitable for a
particular development type.
Densities described under the applicable land use designations are maximums; maximum
densities can only be achieved after meeting all of the other policies and implementation
programs of the Inland General Plan. The City does not guarantee that an individual project will
attain the maximum density indicated by the land use designations. The Inland General Plan
includes maps identifying hazards and constraints, floodplains, street systems, parkland, and
2 – Land Use Element                           2-2                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

trails which are an integral part of the Inland General Plan and which must be consulted in order
to obtain a complete interpretation of Inland General Plan policies and implementation programs
applicable in a given area or parcel of land. Other elements of the Inland General Plan contain
specific policies to preserve Fort Bragg's character and appearance, and to protect sensitive
environmental resources.
F.       Residential Land Use Designations
Large Lot Rural Residential (RR5)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings in the more rural areas located on the
northern fringes of the City and is assigned to areas within the Sphere of Influence which are
similarly designated by the County’s Land Use Map. The large lots are intended to preserve the
low density, rural character of lands on the edge of the City and to be compatible with adjacent
development patterns within the unincorporated areas of Mendocino County. The maximum
allowable density is 1 unit per 5 acres.
Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings on the northern fringe of the City where
the existing development pattern is comprised of one- to two-acre parcels and where
infrastructure is inadequate to support higher development densities. The maximum allowable
density is 1 unit per 2 acres.
Rural Residential (RR1)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings in a semi-rural environment. The RR1
designation is located primarily on the eastern edge of the City, where larger lots serve as a
transition between the RL neighborhoods of the City and the rural lands in the unincorporated
areas. The maximum allowable density is 1 unit per acre.
Suburban Residential (RS)
This designation is intended for single-family dwellings and is assigned to areas where
infrastructure limitations and/or environmental constraints inhibit the establishment of urban
development densities. The allowable density range is 1 to 3 units per acre.
Low Density Residential (RL)
This designation is intended for single-family residences on standard City lots in residential
neighborhoods surrounding the more densely developed core of the City. With issuance of a
conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as
convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small
clusters of retail establishments. The allowable density range is 3 to 6 units per acre.
2 – Land Use Element                           2-3                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Medium Density Residential (RM)
This designation is intended for a variety of housing types, including single family homes,
duplexes, triplexes, townhouses, and apartment units located in proximity to parks, schools, and
public services. With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited neighborhood-serving
commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés, and restaurants located
primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments. The allowable
density range is 6 to 12 units per acre.
High Density Residential (RH)
This designation is intended to allow a variety of higher density housing types, including
townhouses, apartments, and mobile home parks on sites that are large and provide important
open space or large properties where the City wishes to see creative planning and design. It is
assigned primarily to larger parcels where innovative site design can provide for a mix of
housing types, aesthetic and functional open space areas, and other features that enhance the
development and the neighborhood. With issuance of a conditional use permit, limited
neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores, cafés and
restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail establishments.
The allowable density range is 10 to 15 units per acre. Residential densities above 6 units per
acre may only be permitted for projects which include open space, provide affordable housing,
clustered housing, energy conservation, and/or aesthetically pleasing design features.
Very High Density Residential (RVH)
This designation is intended to allow high density multi-family housing on sites that are close to
commercial areas and public services. Apartments, mobile home parks, and similar types of
residential uses are allowed in this designation. With issuance of a conditional use permit,
limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses are permitted, such as convenience stores,
cafés, and restaurants located primarily on individual parcels or in small clusters of retail
establishments. The allowable density range is 12 to 24 units per acre.
G.       Commercial and Industrial Land Use Designations
Central Business District (CBD)
This designation applies to the core of the downtown which is the civic, cultural, and commercial
center of the community. Uses and site development patterns in the Central Business District
are typically pedestrian-oriented. This designation is intended to accommodate government
and professional offices, retail stores, theaters, and other similar uses. Residential uses on
upper floors or on the ground floor at the rear of buildings are encouraged at a density of up to
40 units per net acre.
Neighborhood Commercial (CN)
This designation provides small-scale, convenience shopping and services for surrounding
residential neighborhoods. Retail and service businesses such as grocery stores, laundromats,
restaurants, beauty salons, and similar types of uses are allowed in this designation.
General Commercial (CG)
2 – Land Use Element                         2-4                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

The General Commercial designation is intended for a less compact and intensive type of
development than found in the Central Business District. Typical land uses in this designation
depend more on vehicular than pedestrian access and include automotive and service-related
outlets, retail sales, hardware, paint or carpeting sales, offices, apparel stores, and food stores.
Shopping centers are allowed with approval of a conditional use permit. Residential uses are
permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear of buildings at a maximum
density of up to 24 units per acre.
Highway Visitor Commercial (CH)
This land use designation applies to land uses serving residents and visitors on sites which are
located along Highway One and arterials at the entry points to the community. Typical uses
allowed in this designation include motels and other lodging enterprises, restaurants, and retail
outlets. Residential uses are permitted above the ground floor or on the ground floor at the rear
of buildings at a maximum density of up to 24 units per acre.
Office Commercial (CO)
This designation is intended to serve the office and institutional needs of the community and
permits such uses as professional offices, hospitals, medical clinics, and banks. Commercial
uses supportive of the office and institutional uses, such as blueprint and copy shops, cafés and
restaurants, pharmacies, and similar retail establishments are permitted. Residential uses are
permitted at a maximum density of 24 units per acre with a conditional use permit.
Heavy Industrial (IH)
This designation is intended for a range of heavy industrial uses including manufacturing,
assembly and processing, and the storage and distribution of raw materials, aggregate plants,
and related heavy industrial uses which are generally incompatible with and require locations
removed from residential and visitor serving uses.
Light Industrial (IL)
This designation is intended for a variety of commercial, manufacturing, wholesale and
distribution, and industrial uses which do not generate a significant amount of on-site customer
traffic or high levels of noise, dust, odors, or other potential off-site nuisance characteristics.
Manufacturing uses are permitted provided they occur within an enclosed structure. Other uses
permitted in this designation include offices ancillary to permitted uses, agricultural product
sales and services, construction yards, and automobile repair shops.
H.       Other Land Uses
Parks and Recreation (PR)
This land use designation is intended for public parks and recreational facilities. Typical uses
include passive and active recreational facilities, including trails, playgrounds, parking lots,
interpretive facilities, rest rooms, storage sheds, and other structures needed to accommodate
public use or provide for maintenance of the land and recreational facilities.
2 – Land Use Element                           2-5                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Agriculture (A)
This land use designation is assigned to land in the Sphere of Influence which is similarly
designated by the Mendocino County General Plan. The lands which are designated
Agriculture are within the floodplain of the Noyo River and are well-suited and appropriately
retained for the production of crops or livestock grazing. The allowable density is one unit per
40 acres.
Open Space (OS)
This land use designation is intended for areas of land which are largely unimproved and used
for the preservation of natural resources and habitats, passive outdoor recreation, scenic
resources, or for the protection of public health and safety (e.g., preservation of floodplains).
Allowable uses include rest rooms, storage sheds, and other structures required to provide for
maintenance of land and/or in support of recreational uses.
Public Facilities and Services (PF)
This land use designation is intended for existing and proposed public buildings, utility facilities,
water and wastewater treatment plants, and related easements.
I.       Population Density and Building Intensity
State law mandates that general plans include standards of population density and building
intensity for all of the territory covered by the plan. To satisfy this requirement, the Inland
General Plan includes building intensity for each of the land use designations, expressed in
units per acre for residential uses.
Population densities for residential land use designations are based on an average household
size of 2.5 persons, except for Very High Density Residential which is based on an average of
2.1 persons per household. If there is a discrepancy between dwelling units per acre and
persons per acre, the dwelling units per acre measure (e.g., building intensity) shall govern.
The population densities are:
     x Large Lot Rural Residential (RR5)                    up to 0.5 persons per acre
     x Medium Lot Rural Residential (RR2)                   up to 1.25 persons per acre
     x Rural Residential (RR1)                              up to 2.5 persons per acre
     x Suburban Residential (RS)                            up to 7.5 persons per acre
     x Low Density Residential (RL)                         up to 15 persons per acre
     x Medium Density Residential (RM)                      up to 30 persons per acre
     x High Density Residential (RH)                        up to 37.5 persons per acre
     x Very High Density Residential (RVH)                  up to 50 persons per acre
     x General Commercial (CG) Mixed Use                    up to 50 persons per acre
     x Highway Visitor Commercial (CH) Mixed Use            up to 50 persons per acre
     x Office Commercial (CO) Mixed Use                     up to 50 persons per acre
     x Central Business District (CBD) Mixed Use            up to 50 persons per acre
J.       2022 Buildout Projections
2 – Land Use Element                          2-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The following properties are owned by the City of Fort Bragg
                                                                               HW
                                                                                 Y1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and are not contiguous to the City limits. They have been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     annexed to the City and are assigned the General Plan land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     use classification of Public Facilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      APN                                     PURPOSE
                                                                                                                                              AIRPORT                                         ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    018-391-07                                                Hwy 20 Water Tank (fire station)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    019-070-01                                                Newman Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    019-460-21                                                Waterfall Gulch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    019-470-08
  N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 020-270-48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    020-480-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Madsen Hole
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Water Treatment Plant/Corp. Yard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    020-500-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Revision date: July 2012
                                                        Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr                   ee
                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                         EL
                                                         ELM
                                                          LM ST
                                                          LM ST.
                                                                                                                                                             PERKINS
                                                         SP
                                                          PRRUCE
                                                            RU
                                                             U E S
                                                             UCE STT.                                                                                                                                                                                         PUDDING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UDDING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DN                     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CREEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          REEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             K                        RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                    BRANDON
                                                                                                                                             BUSH
                                                                                                                                             BU SH
                                                                                                                                                 H ST.
                                                                                                                                                  FIR
                                                                                                                                                  FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                                      STREET
                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                  PINE
                                                                                                                                                  PI NE
                                                                                                                                                      E STREET
                                                                                                                                                        STREET
                                                                                 STREET                                                STR
                                                                                                                                       STREET
                                                                                                                                          EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P E T E R S O N L N.
                                                                                               McPHERSON
                                                                                               McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                          TREET
                                                                                                                                                  LAUR
                                                                                                                                                  L AUREL
                                                                                                                                                      REL STR
                                                                                                                                                      RE  STREE
                                                                                                                                                            REE
                                                                                                                                                              ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D E N N IS O N L A N E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MA L L L A N E
                                                                      STRE
                                                                      STREET
                                                                         EET
                                                                                                                                            REDW
                                                                                                                                            RE
                                                                                                                                            R EDW
                                                                                                                                                WOOD
                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                WOO
                                                                                                                                                  OD AVEN
                                                                                                                                                      V NU
                                                                                                                                                        NUE
Oce                                                                              FRANKLIN
                                                                                 FRANKLIN                                              HARRISON
                                                                                                                                       HARR SON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                  ALDE
                                                                                                                                                  ALDER
                                                                                                                                                     E  STREET
                                                                                                                                                        STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO N S O N W A Y
    an
                                                                      MAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CT.
                                                                                                                                                  M RO
                                                                                                                                                  MAD
                                                                                                                                                  MADRONE
                                                                                                                                                      ONE
                                                                                                                                                      ONE                                          ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WILLOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WILLOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W SSTT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HAROLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HARO
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AROLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                          OLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                            D STR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LINCOLN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LINCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OLN ST.
                                                                                            MA
                                                                                             AP
                                                                                              PLE
                                                                                                E STR
                                                                                                    REE
                                                                                                    REET
                                                                                                                                                      WHIPPLE
                                                                                                                                                      WHIPPL
                                                                                                                                                           LE ST.
                                                                                                                                                                       CORR
                                                                                                                                                                       COR RY ST.                                                                                     WALL ST.
                                                                                            HA
                                                                                             AZZE
                                                                                                EL ST.
                                                                                STREE
                                                                                STREET
                                                                                    ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VE
                                                                                            CHESTN
                                                                                            CH  TNU
                                                                                                TNUT ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YO
                                                                                                                                                                       GROVE
                                                                                FRANKLIIN
                                                                                        N
                                                                                             WALN
                                                                                                NUT
                                                                                                NU                                                    ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                  MAIN ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P.                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LR                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D                                     UL                                                                                           VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HA                                                                         NO Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Map LU-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DO L P
                                                                                              TLE
                                                                                             MYR                                                                                                                                                                                                 LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                                                                                                                    Industrial Land Use Designations
                                                                                                                                                                                              VE
                                                                                                                                                                                       RI
                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR5                         Large Lot Rural Residential                                                                                                 IL                   Light Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (1 unit per 5 acres)
                                                                                                                                                     Y       O
                                                     HWY 1                                                                                        NO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Medium Lot Rural Residential                                                                                                                     Heavy Industrial
                           HARB
                             RB
                              BOR
                               OOR
                                 RAAV
                                    VENU
                                       UE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR2                         (1 unit per 2 acres)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR1                         Rural Residential                                                                                                           IT                   Timber Resources Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (1 unit per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Suburban Residential
            OCE
            O EAN
              E N VIEW
                     W   DRIV
                            VE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SR                          (1-3 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Other Designations
                                                                                                                  SOU
                                                                                                                  S U
                                                                                                                    UTH
                                                                                                                    UT  HARBOR DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RL                          (3-6 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HD                   Harbor District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RM                          (6-12 units per acre)
                                                     HWY.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          High Density Residential                                                                                                    PR                   Parks and Recreation
                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                  LLITS                         R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RH                          (6-15 units per acre)
                                                                                                                  OLD WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Very High Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V                                                                                                                           PF                   Public Facilities and Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HW                                              RVH                         (6-24 units per acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y.                                                                                                                                                                                                    OS                   Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commercial Land Use Designations                                                                                                                       A                    Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CBD                         Central Business District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CN                          Neighborhood Commercial
                                            HWY
                                            H
                                            HWWY 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CG                          General Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CH                          Highway Visitor Commercial                                                                                                                       Redevelopment Agency
                                                         SIMPSON
                                                         S MP N LA
                                                                 LANE
                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO                          Office
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f     Commercial                                                                                                                                Coastal Zone
          Assessor's                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                within City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The boundaries of the Land Use Designations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           g       are general
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       g       and schematic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  illustrating the policies of the General Plan. Refer to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Parcel Maps at the Community Development Department for updated parcel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  boundary maps.
                                                                                     Y1
                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                            ROAD
     N
                                                              Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                k
                                                               ELM ST.
                                                               SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK        RD.
                                                                                                                                BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                PINE STREET
                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LN.
                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                  McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                 LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                           STREET
  Oce
                                                                                                                            REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                    FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                ALDER STREET
      an
                                                                           MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K TERR                                                  SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CT.
                                                                                                                                MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                                     HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                    WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                  CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                HAZEL ST.
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                     FRANKLIN
                                                                                                 WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                        MAIN ST.
   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Map LU-2
                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                     YO                                                                                                                 CITY BOUNDARY
                                                           HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     & SPHERE of INFLUENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Boundary
                              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coastal Zone Boundary
                                                           HWY.
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                                                                       Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                          2   0
                                                   HWY 1
Source: City of Fort Bragg
        July, 2012
                                                               SIMPSON LANE
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
For Schematic purposes only
                                                                                     Y1
                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                            ROAD
     N
                                                              Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                k
                                                               ELM ST.
                                                               SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK      RD.
                                                                                                                                BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                PINE STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                                       2
                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LN.
                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                  McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                 LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DENNISON LANE
                                                                           STREET
  Oce
                                                                                                                            REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                    FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                ALDER STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3                                      3
      an
                                                                           MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K TERR                                                  SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CT.
                                                                                                                                MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                                     HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                    WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                  CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                HAZEL ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                     FRANKLIN
                                                                                                 WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                        MAIN ST.
   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                     YO
                                                           HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Map LU-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ANNEXATION AREA
                              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Inland General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Boundary
                                                           HWY.
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                                                                       Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                          2   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #    Annexation Areas
                                                   HWY 1
Source: City of Fort Bragg
        July, 2012
                                                               SIMPSON LANE
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
For Schematic purposes only
A background report was prepared in 2002 that estimates the amount of new development that
would occur through 2012 given the land use designations and other policies and programs
included in this Inland General Plan and past development trends. However this level of
development was not achieved by 2012. The methodology for calculating the 2022 buildout
projection for this Inland General Plan Update follows:
x    The existing number of residential units is from the 2010 census.
x    The existing (2012) square footage of commercial and office development were derived
     from adding the square footage of space developed during the past ten years (56,000 SF) to
     the 2002 General Plan estimate of 1.5 million square feet.
x    The existing-2010 SF of industrial space was derived from aerial photos, but excludes the
     structurally unsound vacant industrial buildings on the Mill Site.
x    In 2008 the City reduced its sphere of influence to coincide with the spatial extent of the
     City’s water and sewer service areas. All development numbers for the SOI reflect this.
x    2022 estimates for new development are based on applying past development trends on a
     rational basis to the Inland General Plan area based on vacant land opportunities in the
     inland area. These past trends and allocation include:
        Over the past ten years, on average 15 new single family and ten multi-family units are
           built in the City per year. Projecting these past trends through 2022, roughly 250 new
           residential units would be developed throughout the City. However, only about 25% of
           these would be developed in the Inland Area because much of the Inland Area is
           developed and it has limited multi-family zoning.
        The City adds about 14,300 SF of commercial space per year. Thus through 2022,
           about 143,000 SF of commercial/retail would be built in the City as a whole. About
           30% of this development would occur in the Inland Area because it has one third of the
           commercial/office zoned property in Fort Bragg.
        The City adds about 100 hotel rooms every ten years, however there are no areas
           zoned for hotel uses in the Inland Area.
        The city adds approximately 20,000 SF of Industrial every ten years and about half of
           the light and heavy industrial zoned property in the City is in the Inland Area, so the
           Inland Area should see about 10,000 SF of new industrial through 2022.
Table LU-1 show 2010 levels of development in the City and its Sphere of Influence, and the
2022 development potential in the City, the Inland Area, and the SOI.
2 – Land Use Element                            2-7                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

TableLU1:City,SOI,InlandGeneralPlanArea2022BuildOutPotential
                                                                                  2022 New Construction,             2022 New Constrcution,
                                                    Existing2010                       Entire City               Inland General Plan Area
                                                                                      New            New               New            New
                                            CityExisting     SOIExisting     Construction    Construction     Construction     Construction
Use                                       Development        Development           inCity          inSOI        inInlandArea       inSOI
Residential(units)                            3,313               200               250               15                63              15
   SingleFamily&SecondUnits                 2,078               200               150               14                38              14
   Multifamily                                  1,235                 0               100               0                 25               0
Commercial/Office(SquareFeet)*            1,556,000               0             143,000             0               42,900             0
Industrial(SquareFeet)**                    316,000                0              20,000             0               10,000             0
Lodging(Rooms)                                 959                 15               100               0                  0               0
Sources:Census,2010,CityofFortBragg,2012.2002FortBraggGeneralPlan,LandUseElementTablesLU1andLU2,2004
*2010estimateforcommercial/officeincludes2002GeneralPlanestimateplusnewdevelopmentoverthepasttenyears
**2010estimateexcludesindustrialbuildingsontheMillSite,whichisbeingdecomissionedandredevelopedintononindustrialuses
K.           Goals, Policies and Programs
Using the Land Use Designations and Map
Goal LU-1                 Promote development and conservation of land in Fort Bragg according to
                          the pattern shown on the Land Use Designations Map.
Policy LU-1.1 Implementation of the Land Use Designations Map: Implement the Land Use
Designations Map by approving development and conservation projects consistent with the land
use designations, and ensure consistency between the Inland General Plan and the Inland
Land Use and Development Code.
             Program LU-1.1.1: Request that the County of Mendocino maintain or, if warranted,
             revise its General Plan in accordance with the land use designations of the Fort Bragg
             Inland General Plan for the area within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
Sphere of Influence
Goal LU-2                 Establish and maintain clear boundaries and guidelines for the future
                          expansion of Fort Bragg.
Policy LU-2.1 Boundaries of the Sphere of Influence: Retain the existing Sphere of Influence
boundaries, as shown on Map LU-2.
Policy LU-2.2 Sewer and Water Connections outside of the Municipal Service District
Boundary: Out-of-area service agreements may be approved for new connections to the
sanitary sewer system for development proposals that are located outside of the Municipal
Service District Boundary and that comply with the policy of the Municipal Improvement District
2 – Land Use Element                                                       2-8                                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

regarding projects that provide affordable housing per Resolution No. ID 230-2003, adopted on
December 8, 2003.
Policy LU-2.3 County Referrals: Request referrals from the County for all development projects
in the City’s Sphere of Influence which are under the jurisdiction of Mendocino County.
         Program LU-2.3.1: Follow agreed to procedures between the City and Mendocino
         County for project review within the Fort Bragg Sphere of Influence.
Policy LU-2.4 Annexation Standards: Require annexations to the City to meet all of the
following standards:
•        Areas annexed must be able to be served by existing City facilities and by facilities
         provided by other agencies, or by environmentally and economically feasible
         improvements to these facilities. Prior to City approval of an annexation application,
         findings shall be made indicating that: necessary public and private infrastructure to
         support the development is available, or that a development plan for extending or
         upgrading the infrastructure has been adopted, and that the annexation would not result
         in a substantial reduction or deterioration of public services and facilities, including
         streets, water supply, wastewater treatment, storm drainage facilities, fire, police,
         schools, and other public services and facilities.
•        Proposed annexations must be contiguous to existing developed areas. Annexation
         proposals that “leapfrog” over vacant and undeveloped land shall not be approved.
•        Based on a cost-revenue analysis, annexations shall have a cumulative net positive
         fiscal effect on the City within fifteen years of approval.     The fiscal analysis must
         demonstrate that annexed properties would generate sufficient City revenues to pay for
         ongoing services to the annexed area and infrastructure cost benefiting annexed area
         borne by City – such as public safety, road maintenance, street lighting, etc. To achieve
         this, property owner(s) may be required to establish Mello-Roos districts and/or other
         forms of benefit assessment districts as a condition of, and at the time of, annexation to
         the City.
•        All annexation applications shall include an environmental review document which
         provides full disclosure of any potential adverse environmental impacts. To the
         maximum extent possible, annexations that would result in significant environmental
         impacts will not be approved.
•        A development plan, including maps and text, showing how existing and proposed future
         development within the annexation area contributes to the attainment of Inland General
         Plan goals and policies, shall be submitted with an annexation application.
•        All proposed future development within an annexation area shall be consistent with the
         land use designations shown on the Land Use Designations Map and all other
         requirements of the Inland General Plan and the Fort Bragg Municipal Code.
•        A cost-revenue analysis is not required for parcels that are annexed by the City of Fort
         Bragg for public purposes.
2 – Land Use Element                           2-9                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program LU-2.4.1: Require a fiscal impact analysis of proposed annexations, at the
         applicant’s cost, as deemed appropriate by the City. The fiscal impact analysis shall
         include, at a minimum, the cost of providing City services on a per capita basis for
         residential projects, or per square foot of building for commercial and industrial projects,
         the impact on existing and future property owners, and a comparison of the potential
         revenues anticipated from the proposed annexation versus the cost to the City of
         providing services for a period of at least five years from the date of project completion.
         Program LU-2.4.2: Consider annexation requests allowing higher densities than those
         indicated on the Land Use Designations Map in the east Fort Bragg area when
         accompanied by a master plan showing dedications of land and/or funding mechanisms
         for public access trails, greenbelts, parkland and/or a ballfield complex in this area.
         The "east Fort Bragg" area is defined as the area between Pudding Creek and the Noyo
         River and east of the existing City limits.
Policy LU-2.5 Discourage Piecemeal Annexations: Discourage annexations of small, individual
parcels of land in a piecemeal fashion.
         Program LU-2.5.1: Consider revising the Inland Land Use and Development Code to
         establish a minimum area for an annexation request or a process for pre-approval of the
         annexation area by the City Council prior to accepting an annexation application as
         complete.
         Program LU-2.5.2: Annexation applications should include, to the maximum feasible
         extent, the entire annexation area as shown in Map LU-3: Annexation Areas.
         Annexation applications for smaller subareas may be allowed for parcels that are
         annexed by the City of Fort Bragg for public purposes and for projects that provide
         affordable housing consistent with the criteria established in Resolution No. ID 230-
         2003, adopted on December 8, 2003.
Commercial Land
The goals and policies in this section ensure that the Central Business District remains the
historic, civic, cultural, and commercial core of the community. There are also policies
encouraging mixed use and infill development to strengthen the other commercial areas of the
City. The Circulation and the Community Design Elements provide goals and policies
addressing parking, alleyways, and the overall appearance of commercial development.
Goal LU-3          Ensure that the Central Business District remains the historic, civic,
                   cultural, and commercial core of the community.
Policy LU-3.1 Central Business District: Retain and enhance the small-scale, pedestrian-
friendly, and historic character of the Central Business District (CBD).
         Program LU-3.1.1: Utilize City-owned land at City Hall and Bainbridge Park for historic
         and cultural uses, public assembly, and entertainment.
         Program LU-3.1.2: Residential uses are permitted only above the ground floor or at the
         rear of buildings on the ground floor.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 10                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Policy LU-3.2 Mixed Uses: Support mixed use development (i.e., a combination of residential
and commercial uses) in the Central Business District that does not conflict with the primary
retail function of this area.
Policy LU-3.3 Historic Buildings and Mixed Uses: In the Central Business District and in other
commercial areas with historic residential structures, encourage residential uses, mixed
residential, and commercial uses, and the preservation of historic structures.
Policy LU-3.4 Encourage Infill Development: Encourage infill development of vacant and
underdeveloped land in the Central Business District and adjacent commercial areas before
amending the Inland General Plan and rezoning to obtain additional commercial land
elsewhere.
Policy LU-3.5 Encourage Smart Growth: Locate new residential, commercial, or industrial
development within, contiguous with, or in close proximity to, existing developed areas.
Policy LU-3.6 Re-Use of Existing Buildings: Encourage the adaptive re-use and more complete
utilization of buildings in the Central Business District and other commercial districts.
         Program LU-3.6.1: Consider establishing incentives such as low-interest loans for
         rehabilitation and installation of fire sprinklers in buildings to encourage the reuse of
         upper floors of existing buildings in the Central Business District for housing, offices, and
         other uses.
Goal LU-4          Promote the economic vitality of the City’s existing commercial areas.
Policy LU-4.1 Formula Businesses and Big Box Retail: The location, scale, and appearance of
formula businesses and big box retail shall not detract from the economic vitality of established
commercial businesses, and shall be consistent with the small town, rural character of Fort
Bragg.
Policy LU-4.2 Large-Scale Commercial Development: To maintain scenic views along Main
Street and to ensure that building sizes at the City’s gateways are in scale with the community,
no commercial building shall exceed the following limitations on the gross floor area:
       a) between the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges - maximum 50,000 square feet
       b) east of Highway One and north of Pudding Creek Bridge - maximum 30,000 square
           feet
Policy LU-4.3 Standards for Commercial Uses in Residential Areas: Commercial uses in and
adjacent to residential areas shall not adversely affect the primarily residential character of the
area.
2 – Land Use Element                             2 - 11                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Recreation and Visitor-Serving Facilities
Fort Bragg serves as the regional service center for the Mendocino coast and many support
services needed for recreation and tourist-oriented businesses on the coast are located here.
No shortage of visitor-serving land use exists in the City.
Industrial Land
The lumber and fishing industries have played an important role in the formation and growth of
Fort Bragg. Both of these industries are in transition, and the local economy is evolving from a
natural resource-based economy to a more service-oriented economy. Fort Bragg is the
commercial, educational, medical, and professional service center for a large portion of the
Mendocino coast. Future growth in the local economy is projected to occur in the retail, tourism,
and service sectors.
The Inland General Plan is intended to support the growth and vitality of existing industries
while ensuring that the community is prepared to actively participate in the decision-making
process as new industries develop in Fort Bragg and as current industrial lands transition to
other uses.
Goal LU-5          Support industrial development which is consistent with the protection,
                   enhancement, and restoration of natural and scenic resources.
Policy LU-5.1 Siting New Industrial Development: Site new industrial development so that it is
contiguous with, or in close proximity to, existing developed areas able to accommodate it, or
where such areas are not able to accommodate it, in other areas with adequate public services
and where it will not have significant adverse effects on natural and scenic resources, either
individually or cumulatively.
Policy LU-5.2 Industrial Land Use Standards: Require that industrial development avoid or
minimize creating substantial pollution, noise, glare, dust, odor, or other significant adverse
impacts.
         Program LU-5.2.1: Continue to enforce, and revise as needed, Inland Land Use and
         Development Code standards with regard to noise, glare, dust, odor, and other
         potentially adverse impacts of industrial activity.
Residential Land
The residential neighborhoods of Fort Bragg are one of its most precious assets. Due to the
layout of the City, most residential neighborhoods are relatively separated from commercial,
retail, and industrial developments. Homes are typically located on local and collector streets,
rather than on the busier arterial streets, thereby minimizing the number of residents exposed to
heavy traffic and noise.
Many of the residences in Fort Bragg were built more than forty years ago and ongoing repair
and renovation are required to maintain these older homes. It is a priority of this Inland General
Plan to promote the preservation and rehabilitation of these older neighborhoods. Other
priorities include maintaining the character of existing residential areas and providing additional
2 – Land Use Element                           2 - 12                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

areas for affordable housing, particularly for senior citizens. More detailed policies and
programs regarding housing and enhancing the quality of the City’s residential neighborhoods
are contained in the Housing and the Community Design Elements.
Goal LU-6          Provide adequate land to accommodate the housing needs of all income
                   groups.
Policy LU-6.1 Preserve Neighborhoods: Preserve and enhance the character of the City’s
existing residential neighborhoods.
         Program LU-7.1.1: Use the minimum density indicated by the Land Use Designations
         Map as a starting point when determining specific density for a residential project.
         Densities above the minimum may be achieved only through a combination of the
         following: excellence of design, provision of affordable housing, effective mitigation of
         environmental constraints and impacts, demonstrated ability to provide services, and
         compatibility with adjacent development.
2 – Land Use Element                         2 - 13                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

3.       PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
This Element is intended to identify essential public facilities, buildings, and services and to describe
policies and programs that will ensure that the existing and future population of Fort Bragg is provided
the best feasible level of public services and infrastructure. Although not required as a separate
Inland General Plan element, this element compiles the public facilities planning requirements of the
circulation, conservation, and open space elements in Government Code Section 65302.
B.       Water Supply and Distribution
                                                 The City's current water supply system consists of the
                                                 Newman Reservoir, the Simpson (Waterfall Gulch)
                                                 diversion, and a direct diversion in the Noyo River
                                                 (which includes a wet well in the Noyo River, a pump
                                                 station at the Noyo River, and various conveyances to
                                                 the water treatment plant.
                                                 The City currently obtains about 50 percent of its
                                                 water from the Noyo River.           Under its existing
                                                 temporary license, the City is entitled to draw up to
                                                 1,500 acre feet of water per year from the Noyo River
                                                 so long as withdrawals do not exceed 3.0 cubic feet
                                                 per second and specified amounts are maintained in
                                                 the river to meet the needs of the fish population. The
City's Water Permit limits how much water can be pumped from the Noyo River during drought
conditions. These limits were established by the State Department of Health Services because it
concluded that the City must ensure sufficient flows within the river necessary to support the fish
population. To comply with these Permit conditions, the City requires that new development
implement measures that limit new water demand. Additionally, the City is developing new water
storage facilities to ensure adequate water during severe drought years and to meet the needs of
future development in both the Inland Area and the Coastal Zone.
In 2010, the City produced 223 million gallons (685 acre feet) of water from its three sources or about
610,000 gallons per day. Of this water, 129 million gallons were used for residential purposes and 53
million gallons for commercial/industrial use. On a daily basis the City currently produces about 50
gallons/resident and 78 gallons/1,000 SF of commercial/industrial space. Residential development
within the Inland Area through 2022 is anticipated to include 63 new residential units (156 new
residents) which would require 7,8000 additional gallons of water per day; and 52,000 SF of new
commercial/industrial development which will require 4,000 gallons of water per day. In total all new
development proposed for the inland area will result in 12,000 additional gallons of demand, a 1.9
percent increase in water demand. The City currently has sufficient water supply and storage to meet
an 8% increase in water demand, and so could accommodate the additional growth in the Inland Area
without developing additional water storage. If the City constructs new 45 acre foot water storage
3 – Public Facilities Element                 3-1                                           November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

facility, the City would be able to accommodate upwards of 20% growth in water demand. New
development in the City will be required to pay its fair share of new water system improvements.
C.       Sewer System
                                       Sewage treatment and disposal are provided by the Fort Bragg
                                       Municipal Improvement District No. 1. The District is larger
                                       than the City; it includes the City’s Sphere of Influence. The
                                       District accepts septage from residences and businesses
                                       outside the City boundaries but within the District boundaries.
                                       Currently, the District facility serves residences and businesses
                                       within the City plus 102 septic tanks spread throughout the
                                       District.
                                       The treatment and disposal facility currently disposes of about
                                       640,000 gallons of treated wastewater per day (Average Dry
Weather Flow - ADWF). The projected increase in residential population in the Inland Area of about
63 residences will increase wastewater flows to the plant by about 9,500 gallons per day. The plant
has a rated capacity of 1,000,000 gallons per day ADWF which is sufficient to meet the demand of
the projected population increase. However, due to spikes in the inflow to the facility during wet
weather (caused by infiltration and inflow into the collection lines), the plant's wet weather capacity is
sometimes exceeded. The City has installed a new secondary digester at the plant and has made
additional improvements to the collection system to address infiltration and inflow problems. In 2011
the City closed down the primary digester for cleaning and maintenance. Until the necessary
improvements to the plant are fully funded and constructed, wet weather capacity at the plant will
continue to be limited. The District is able to meet projected wastewater treatment and disposal
demands.
Future development will pay its fair share of any additional improvements that are needed.
D.       Storm Drain System
The City’s "Drainage Facility Improvements and Drainage Fees" chapter (Chapter 12.14) of the City's
Municipal Code allows the City to review new development proposals and condition those proposals
to ensure that adequate on-site and off-site drainage is included in the development.
The priority storm drain improvements in the 2004 Master Plan have been implemented; although
there are additional problems identified in that report that still need to be addressed. In addition,
much of the area north of Pudding Creek, and south of the Noyo River generally do not have
improved drainage systems in place. Drainage in these areas is generally provided by natural
channels. New development will be required to pay for improvements necessary to ensure adequate
capacity within the storm drain system.
3 – Public Facilities Element                  3-2                                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

E.       Schools
Education in the area is provided by the Fort Bragg Unified School District. Within the Fort Bragg
Planning Area, the District operates two elementary schools (Dana Gray Elementary School and
Redwood Elementary School), one middle school (Fort Bragg Middle School), one high school (Fort
Bragg High School), one continuation high school (Noyo High School), and one adult school (Coastal
Adult School). The student capacity of the District's schools is 2,460 students. The history of student
enrollment is shown in Table PF-1 below.
                                                  TABLE PF-1
            ENROLLMENT AT FORT BRAGG UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT FACILITIES, 2010
            Type of          2002   2003    2004     2005  2006     2007     2008  2009 2010
            School
            Elementary       899    909     871      889     871     895      908   867   855
            Schools
            Middle            513    494     456      419    444     413      426   437   441
            School
            High              672    672     648      643    619     618      573   582   589
            School
            TOTAL           2,084  2,075   1,975    1,951  1,934   1,926    1,907 1,886 1,885
 Source: California Department of Education Educational Demographics Unit, 2011
Development through 2022 from throughout the City would generate approximately 84 additional
students. Given declining enrollment, the District believes it will have capacity for these students
within existing school buildings. The 84 additional students would result in fewer students than
District schools housed in 1992. In addition, there is no guarantee that District enrollment would
actually increase by 562 students, as predicted in the 2002 General Plan EIR. Given recent declines
in enrollment, it is possible that the student enrollment from existing residences in the District would
continue to decline so that the student population in 2011 may be less than 84 new students. The
District currently receives developer mitigation fees of $2.24 per square foot for new residential
construction and $0.36 per square foot for new nonresidential construction. These fees are used to
develop additional classrooms and to repair or renovate existing schools.
F.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goal PF-1            Ensure that new development is served by adequate public services and
                     infrastructure.
Policy PF-1.1 Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for New Development: Review new
development proposals to ensure that the development can be served with adequate potable water;
wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical
response; police protection; transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal.
Policy PF-1.2: All new development proposals shall be reviewed and conditioned to ensure that
adequate public services and infrastructure can be provided to the development without substantially
reducing the services provided to existing residents and businesses.
3 – Public Facilities Element                        3-3                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program PF-1.2.1: New development shall be responsible for any improvements or
         extensions of infrastructure or the service capacity necessary to serve the development.
Policy PF-1.3 Ensure Adequate Services and Infrastructure for Annexations: Review annexation
requests to ensure that the area can be served with adequate potable water; wastewater collection,
treatment, and disposal; storm drainage; fire and emergency medical response; police protection;
transportation; schools; and solid waste collection and disposal. See also Policy LU-2.4 regarding
annexations.
Goal PF-2            Assure that the City's infrastructure is maintained and expanded to meet the
                     needs of the City's residents and growing population.
Policy PF-2.1 Development Pays its Share: Require that new development pay its share of capital
improvements and the cost of public services to maintain adequate levels of service.
         Program PF-2.1.1: Maintain development impact and mitigation fees at a level adequate to
         finance development’s proportional share of infrastructure costs. Periodically review the City’s
         Development Impact Fee structure to ensure that development pays its fair share of
         infrastructure and capital improvement costs.
         Program PF-2.1.2: Consider requiring property owners seeking annexation approval to enter
         into a pre-annexation agreement stating that they will not oppose assessment districts,
         including lighting and street maintenance districts.
Policy PF-2.2 Potable Water Capacity: Develop long-term solutions regarding the supply, storage,
and distribution of potable water and develop additional supplies.
         Program PF-2.2.1: Maintain and update a Water System Master Plan and identify capital
         improvements required to meet anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.2: Monitor, on an ongoing basis, the capacity of the potable water system in
         relation to the anticipated demand.
         Program PF-2.2.3: Evaluate, and periodically adjust as appropriate, water capital
         improvement installation and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing water service and
         increasing capacity.
         Program PF-2.2.4: Pursue all available sources of revenue to fund the maintenance and
         expansion of the City’s water system.
         Program PF-2.2.5: Continue to encourage water conservation techniques and water
         conserving fixtures in all new development projects.
         Program PF-2.2.6: Develop a program to encourage and allow the safe use of graywater and
         rainwater capture and reuse.
         Program PF-2.2.7: Obtain a permanent license for the water rights initially permitted to the
         City by the State Division of Water Rights in 1956.
         Program PF-2.2.8: Improve the pressure in the water system lines to meet State standards.
3 – Public Facilities Element                   3-4                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Policy PF-2.3 Emergency Water Supply:            Develop an emergency water supply for disaster
preparedness.
         Program PF-2.3.1: Provide a means for obtaining and treating water from Pudding Creek or
         the Noyo River for emergency disaster situations only, if allowed by the State and if deemed
         feasible.
Policy PF-2.4: Potable Water Quality: Maintain the safety of the water supply.
         Program PF-2.4.1: Continue to maintain the water collection, treatment, and distribution
         system to ensure compliance with all State requirements for a public drinking water system.
         Program PF-2.4.2: Provide security and protection for the watersheds and water storage and
         treatment facilities with monitoring, appropriate notices, physical barriers, and protective
         devices as well as land use policies and controls.
         Program PF-2.4.3: Develop long range management and improvement programs for the
         watersheds. These plans should include management practices and methods of protecting
         the water source from degradation.
Policy PF-2.5 Wastewater: Review wastewater capacity and expansion plans as needed when
regulations change and as the treatment and disposal facility nears capacity.
         Program PF-2.5.1: Periodically update the City’s Wastewater System Master Plan.
         Program PF-2.5.2: Continue to improve the wastewater treatment and disposal facility to
         comply with changing State requirements.
         Program PF-2.5.3: Upgrade wastewater collector lines in areas where there is inadequate
         capacity or where lines are subject to substantial infiltration and inflow.
         Program PF-2.5.4: Evaluate and periodically adjust, as appropriate, wastewater capital
         improvement, installation, and user fees to reflect the actual cost of providing wastewater
         collection, treatment, and disposal service and increasing capacity.
Policy PF-2.6 Storm Drainage: Annually review storm drain system capacity and expansion plans.
See Policies OS-6.1 through OS-6.5 for Low Impact Design requirements for new development.
         Program PF-2.6.1: Continue to implement, and update as needed, the Storm Drain Master
         Plan and the improvements itemized in the Capital Improvement Plan.
         Program PF-2.6.2:       Periodically adjust, as appropriate, drainage capital improvement
         installation fees to reflect the actual cost of providing drainage service and increasing
         capacity.
Policy PF-2.7 Public Buildings: Ensure that public buildings in the City are adequate to provide
services for the community.
3 – Public Facilities Element                  3-5                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program PF-2.7.1:      Provide for relocation or upgrading of essential public buildings as
         necessary.
Policy PF-2.8 Capital Improvement Plan: Continually update the Capital Improvement Plan to
ensure that it identifies capital projects necessary to maintain adequate levels of performance as well
as funding sources for all phases of intended projects.
Policy PF-2.9 Schools: Work with the Fort Bragg Unified School District to ensure that the District
has the means to provide a high quality education to City students.
         Program PF-2.9.1: Work with the School District to address anticipated deficits between the
         cost of constructing necessary new schools or renovating existing schools and the revenues
         generated by developer fees. Where a clear nexus can be shown between the impacts of a
         new development and the need for new school facilities, the City shall consider the need for
         additional project mitigation to be provided by project developers to the degree allowed by
         State law.
                                                 City Hall
3 – Public Facilities Element                  3-6                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

4.       CONSERVATION, OPEN SPACE, AND PARKS ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element of the Inland General Plan combines two
State-mandated elements, Conservation and Open Space. It also includes policies and
programs addressing water quality, public access, and recreation.
Open space is defined by Government Code Section 65561 as “any area of land or water which
is essentially unimproved and devoted to open space use and which is designated on local,
regional or a State open space plan for the preservation of natural resources, the managed
production of resources, outdoor recreation, or for public health and safety." Fort Bragg’s open
space includes lands which are publicly-owned and operated for active or passive recreational
use and land which is in private ownership but is either undeveloped or managed for the
protection and enhancement of natural resources. Open space in Fort Bragg provides for
recreational uses, scenic and aesthetic resources, and habitat preservation.
The City wishes to preserve as much open space as feasible to provide habitat for native species
of plants and wildlife, reduce sprawl, and maintain the aesthetic benefits of undeveloped land.
The City also wishes to conserve natural resources and provide its residents with a full range of
recreational opportunities. The goals, policies, and programs of this Element address these aims
by establishing the framework for the protection and enhancement of natural resources, the
environment, and open space and for the provision of recreational opportunities for Fort Bragg
residents and visitors.
The EIR for the General Plan contains a full description of the natural resources, parks, trails,
and recreational facilities existing within the Planning Area. The EIR also contains a full
description of natural resources occurring within the Planning Area. See Map OS-2 for a
depiction of rivers, creeks, riparian habitats and land which can contribute to groundwater
recharge and stormwater management. Map OS-2 is illustrative, as most areas of the City can
accommodate ground water recharge and assist in storm water management. Please see Map
OS-1 for a depiction of existing parks and recreational facilities.
B.       Goals, Policies and Programs
C.       Conservation & Natural Resources
Goal OS-1          Preserve areas with important biotic resources.
Policy OS-1.1 Special Review Areas: Areas in the City containing watercourses, wetlands,
sensitive plant and wildlife habitat, and forested land shall be designated as Special Review
Areas.
Sensitive plant and wildlife habitat include: all species that appear on Federal lists of
endangered, threatened, rare, and candidate species and plant and animal species designated
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element 4-1                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife as species of special concern or their current
equivalent (G1, G2, S1 and S2 listed plants).
Policy OS-1.2 Preserve Natural Resources: Require that sensitive natural resources in Special
Review Areas be preserved and protected to the maximum degree feasible.
         Program OS-1.2.1: Review projects requesting discretionary approvals to determine
         whether the project is located in an area with potentially sensitive natural resources.
Policy OS-1.3 Biological Report Required for Special Review Areas: Permit applications for
development within or adjacent to Special Review Areas which have the possibility of containing
sensitive habitat shall include a biological report prepared by a qualified biologist which identifies
the resources and provides recommended measures to ensure that the requirements of CEQA,
the Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the City of Fort Bragg’s Inland General Plan are fully
met. The required content of the biological report is specified in the Inland Land Use and
Development Code.
Policy OS-1.4 Maintain Open Space: Require site planning and construction to maintain
adequate open space to permit effective wildlife corridors for animal movement between open
spaces.
Goal OS-2:        Encourage Native Plants and Discourage Non-Native Invasive Plants &
Trees
Policy OS-2.1 Native Landscaping: All development shall be conditioned to require that 50% of
all plantings are native plants and shall prohibit the planting of any plant species that is (a) listed
as problematic and/or invasive by the California Invasive Plant Council, and/or by the State of
California, or (b) listed as a ‘noxious weed’ by the State of California or the U.S. Federal
Government.
                                              Native Landscaping
Policy OS-2.2 Prohibit Invasive Species: Condition development projects requiring discretionary
approval to prohibit the planting of any species of broom, pampas grass, gorse, or other species
of invasive non-native plants deemed undesirable by the City.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element  4-2                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Map OS-1
                                                                                     Y1
                                                                                    HW
                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                            ROAD
     N
                                                              Pudding
                                                                                                                     Cr   ee
                                                                                                                                k
                                                               ELM ST.
                                                               SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK          RD.
                                                                                                                                BUSH ST.
                                                                                                                                FIR STREET
                                                                                                                                PINE STREET
                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LN.
                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                  McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                                                 LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DENNISON LANE
                                                                           STREET
  Oce
                                                                                                                            REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                                    FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                                                ALDER STREET
      an
                                                                           MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K TERR                                                    SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CT.
                                                                                                                                MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                                     HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                                          MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                                    WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                                                  CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                                                HAZEL ST.
                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                                     FRANKLIN
                                                                                                 WALNUT                             ST.
                                                                        MAIN ST.
   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Map OS-1
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                           HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                              EXISTING AND PROPOSED
                                                                                                                                                                                         PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                              OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                                                           HWY.
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Existing School Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                                                                       Y.
                                                                                                                                                                                          2   0                                                      Existing Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Parks Under Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proposed Parks (1)
                                                   HWY 1                                                                                                                                                            (1) identifies the general area where new parks
Source: City of Fort Bragg
        July, 2012                                                                                                                                                                                                  should be located.
                                                               SIMPSON LANE
Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
For Schematic purposes only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Map OS -2
                                                                 Y1
                                                                HW
                                                                                                            AIRPORT                            ROAD
  N
                                          Pudding
                                                                                                 Cr   ee
                                                                                                            k
                                           ELM ST.
                                           SPRUCE ST.                                                                                                                                       PUDDING                   CREEK         RD.
                                                                                                            BUSH ST.
                                                                                                            FIR STREET
                                                                                                            PINE STREET
                                                                                                 STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PETERSON LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LN.
                                                                STREET
                                                                              McPHERSON STREET
                                                                                                             LAUREL STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DENNISON LANE
                                                       STREET
Oce
                                                                                                        REDWOOD AVENUE
                                                                FRANKLIN                         HARRISON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CEDAR ST.
                                                                                                            ALDER STREET
    an
                                                       MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            K TERR                                                   SHERWOOD RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CT.
                                                                                                            MADRONE                            ST.
                                                                                                                                                 HAROLD STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                        WILLOW ST.
                                                                                                                                                                              LINCOLN ST.
                                                                                                      MAPLE STREET
                                                                                                                WHIPPLE ST.
                                                                                                                              CORRY ST.                                                         WALL ST.
                                                                            HAZEL ST.
                                                                 STREET
                                                                            CHESTNUT ST.
                                                                 FRANKLIN
                                                                             WALNUT                             ST.
                                                    MAIN ST.
Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OS -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rivers, Streams, Flood Corridors,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Riparian Habitats, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 areas for Water Recharge
                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                            VE
                                                                                                                                          RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Boundary
                                                                                                                 YO
                                       HWY 1                                                                NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coastal Zone Boundary
          OCEAN VIEW   DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Open Space
                                       HWY.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wetlands, Rivers Streams
                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Areas for Water Recharge
                                                                                                                                                                 HW
                                                                                                                                                                   Y.
                                                                                                                                                                      2   0
                               HWY 1
                                           SIMPSON LANE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Source: City of Fort Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             July, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scale 1" = 2300' (approximate )
                                                                                                                                                                                                             For Schematic purposes only
         Program OS-2.2.1: Require that Caltrans, PG&E, the County of Mendocino, and private
         property owners remove pampas grass and broom from their properties and rights-of-
         way. The City shall strive to remove these plants from City-owned property and rights-of-
         way.
         Program OS-2.2.2: Encourage the removal of non-native invasive trees where feasible,
         such as Monterey Cypress, Monterey Pine and Eucalyptus, and prohibit planting of non-
         native invasive tree species in new development.
Policy OS-2.3 Preserve Native Vegetation and Trees: To the maximum extent feasible and
balanced with permitted use, require that site planning, construction, and maintenance of
development preserve existing healthy trees and native vegetation on the site.
Policy OS-2.4 Forested Areas: Maintain existing forested areas and reforest parks and
streetscapes with new trees as needed. Projects proposed in forested areas are required to
meet the requirements of the Special Review Areas.
         Program OS-2.4.1: Establish a tree planting and replacement program to assure
         continuing stands of trees throughout the City.
         Program OS-2.4.2: Consider adopting a street tree program.
Goal OS-3          Protect and preserve soil as a natural resource.
Policy OS-3.1 Soil Erosion: Minimize soil erosion to prevent loss of productive soils, prevent
flooding and landslides, and maintain infiltration capacity and soil structure.
Goal OS-4          Protect and Preserve Cultural Resources.
Policy OS-4.1 Preserve Archaeological Resources: New development shall be located and/or
designed to avoid archaeological and paleontological resources where feasible, and where new
development would adversely affect archaeological or paleontological resources, reasonable
mitigation measures shall be required.
D.       Water Quality
Goal OS-5          Protect, enhance, and restore riparian areas and wetlands.
Policy OS-5.1 Streams and Creeks: To the maximum extent feasible, preserve, protect, and
restore streams and creeks to their natural state.
         Program OS-5.1.1: Work with organizations and private property owners to enhance the
         City’s watercourses for habitat preservation and recreation.
         Program OS-5.1.2: Develop additional guidelines for the maintenance of watercourses to
         further assure that native vegetation is not unnecessarily removed and that maintenance
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element  4-3                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         minimizes disruption of wildlife breeding activities and wildlife movement. Incorporate
         these guidelines, where appropriate, into the City's maintenance procedures.
         Program OS-5.1.3: Seek Federal and State funding for the repair of streambank erosion,
         planting of riparian vegetation to stabilize creek banks, and removal of debris obstructing
         waterflow.
Policy OS-5.2 Riparian Habitat: Prevent development from destroying riparian habitat to the
maximum feasible extent. Preserve, enhance, and restore existing riparian habitat in new
development unless the preservation will prevent the establishment of all permitted uses on the
property.
Policy OS-5.3 No Net Loss of Wetlands: Ensure no net loss of wetlands, as defined by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
Policy OS-5.4 Protect Aquifers: Protect groundwater aquifers.
                                                                             Otis Johnson Park Creek
Goal OS-6          Improve water quality.
Policy OS-6.1 Pollution in Runoff: Ensure protection of water
resources from pollution and sedimentation.
Policy OS-6.2 Minimize Introduction of Pollutants: Development
shall be designed and managed to minimize the introduction of
pollutants into estuaries, wetlands, rivers and streams to the
extent feasible.
Policy OS-6.3 Minimize Increases in Stormwater Runoff:
Development shall be designed and managed to minimize post-
project increases in stormwater runoff volume and peak runoff
rate, to the extent feasible.
         Program OS-6.3.1: Develop and implement Low Impact
         Development requirements in the Inland Land Use and Development Code. Remove
         regulatory barriers to Low Impact Development from the Inland LUDC where feasible.
Policy OS-6.4 Maintain and Restore Biological Productivity and Water Quality: Development
shall maintain and, where feasible, restore the biological productivity and the quality of streams
and wetlands to maintain optimum populations of aquatic organisms and for the protection of
human health.
Policy OS-6.5 Municipal Activities to Protect and Restore Water Quality: The City shall promote
both the protection and restoration of water quality. Water quality degradation can result from a
variety of factors, including but not limited to the introduction of pollutants, increases in runoff
volume and rate, generation of non-stormwater runoff, and alteration of physical, chemical, or
biological features of the landscape.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4-4                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program OS-6.5.1: Water Quality Public Education and Outreach. The City shall
         continue to encourage public outreach and education about the water quality impacts of
         development.
         Program OS-6.5.2: BMPS for Municipal Maintenance Activities. The City shall ensure
         that municipal maintenance activities and other public projects integrate appropriate
         BMPs to protect water quality.
Goal OS-7          Improve air quality.
Policy OS-7.1 Participate in Regional Planning to Improve Air Quality: Continue to cooperate
with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District (MCAQMD) in implementing the
Regional Clean Air Plan.
         Program OS-7.1.1: Add a City representative to the Board of MCAQMD.
Policy OS-7.2 Air Quality Standards: Seek to comply with State and Federal standards for air
quality.
         Program OS-7.2.1: Review new project proposals for consistency with MCAQMD
         regulations and guidelines.
         Program OS-7.2.2: Work with the Mendocino County Air Quality Management District to
         ensure that all new industrial projects include Best Available Control Technologies
         (BACTs) to control emissions of air pollutants to the maximum extent permitted by law.
         Program OS-7.2.3: Require that proposed new asphalt plants undergo an air quality
         analysis that includes analysis of emissions, dispersion modeling, risk analysis, and
         mitigation required to reduce pollution and risk.
         Program OS-7.2.4: Prohibit unpaved driveways of more than 50 feet and unpaved roads
         in all new development.
F.       Open Space
There are three categories of open space in the Fort Bragg Planning Area: 1) publicly-owned
land, such as Noyo Headlands Park, Pomo Bluffs Park, and MacKerricher State Park; 2)
dedicated land, which is privately-owned and maintained and has a recorded open space or
conservation easement; and 3) land which has a prescriptive easement permitting public use.
Goal OS-8          Conserve and enhance a variety of open space features including creeks,
                   wildlife habitats, scenic view corridors, and other amenities.
Policy OS-8.1 Open Space: Plan for and condition new development to implement the City’s
priorities for open space.
         Program OS-8.1.1: Use conservation easements wherever possible to protect
         environmentally sensitive open space areas.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4-5                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program OS-8.1.2: Continue to work with local and regional agencies and interest
         groups, in conjunction with the Mendocino Coast Recreation and Park District Master
         Plan, to develop an open space preservation strategy.
         Program OS-8.1.3:         Develop additional standards in the Inland Land Use and
         Development Code for public access to open space areas.
         Program OS-8.1.4: Revise the LUDC to make public open space and public access ways
         and trails to public parklands a permitted use in all land use and zoning designations.
         Program OS-8.1.5: Facilitate the acceptance of Offers to Dedicate (OTDs) as a means of
         obtaining additional public access.
         Program OS-8.1.6 City Circuit and Coastal Trails: Develop a continuous trail system
         throughout the City which connects to the California Coastal Trail system.
Policy OS-8.2 Protect and Restore Open Space: During the development review process, protect
and restore open space areas such as wildlife habitats, view corridors, and watercourses as
open and natural.
         Program OS-8.2.1: Require that projects on parcels five acres or larger requesting a
         rezoning to a higher density include dedications for open space or parkland.
         Program OS-8.2.2: Maintain an inventory of vacant parcels that could potentially be
         purchased and developed as public open space (parks, community gardens, trails, etc.)
Policy OS-8.3 Trails in Open Space: Wherever feasible, plan and construct trails through the
greenbelts and open space that connect to the City’s trail system with those of State Parks and
MCRPD.
                                              Pomo Bluffs Park
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element    4-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

G.       PARKS AND RECREATION
Goal OS- 9         Provide an attractive system of parks and recreation facilities throughout
                   the City to meet the needs of all age groups and capabilities.
Policy OS-9.1 Parkland Standard: Use the standard of three acres of parkland per 1,000
residents for the acquisition of additional parkland pursuant to the provisions of the Quimby Act
(Government Code Section 66477).
         Program OS-9.1.1: Establish and update periodically a Park and Open Space
         Development Impact Fee.
Policy OS-9.2 Neighborhood Parks: Acquire and develop new neighborhood parks, in concert
with other local recreation agencies, to meet the needs of the existing population and consistent
with growth of the City's population.
         Program OS-9.2.1: Acquire and develop additional neighborhood parks as shown on
         Map OS-1.
Policy OS-9.3 Recreational Facilities: Provide recreational facilities to meet the needs of all Fort
Bragg citizens, especially children and teenagers.
         Program OS-9.3.1: Consider teen recreation needs when planning new or redesigned
         parks.
         Program OS-9.3.2: Work with other agencies to develop an inventory of recreational
         facilities and programs available to young people. Seek to implement joint programs and
         identify additional facilities that are necessary to meet the recreational needs of youth.
Policy OS-9.4 Playground Facilities:             Add or upgrade playground facilities at existing
neighborhood parks.
         Program OS-9.4.1: Provide additional playground facilities and basketball courts at
         appropriate locations within neighborhoods.
Policy OS-9.5 Ballfields: Develop additional baseball, softball, and other ballfields.
         Program OS-9.5.1: Include in the proposed new east Fort Bragg neighborhood park
         shown on Map OS-1 baseball, softball, and possibly other ballfields, and consider
         building additional fields wherever feasible.
         Program OS-9.5.2: Work with the School District and other agencies to develop
         additional sports field facilities.
Policy OS-9.6 Prioritize Park Acquisitions: Use the following criteria to prioritize acquisition of
parkland and open space:
         a)       distribution of neighborhood parks/playground facilities and ballfields on a
                  neighborhood basis;
         b)       scenic beauty;
         c)       relationship to the existing and proposed trail systems and parks;
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element      4-7                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         d)       natural resource protection; and
         e)       appropriateness (physical characteristics) of the site to meet specific recreational
                  needs.
         Program OS-9.6.1: Consider the acquisition of strategically located vacant lots for the
         development of neighborhood parks using the criteria listed in Policy OS-9.6.
         Program OS-9.6.2: Adopt a management plan that analyzes geoseismic and other
         related potential hazards before City acceptance of dedications of land for park or open
         space. Identified hazards shall be fully repaired and/or financial protection provided to
         the City for liability before acceptance of land. The management plan shall also specify
         funding for ongoing maintenance.
Policy OS-9.7 Financing Parks: Consider methods of increasing revenues for the acquisition
and development of parkland and open space areas and supporting recreational facilities.
         Program OS-9.7.1: Consider the following potential funding sources for the acquisition of
         park and trails and development of recreation facilities:
         a)       Establish a Park Improvement Fee pursuant to Government Code Section 66000;
         b)       Place an advisory measure on the ballot for a tax proposal or assessment; and/or
         c)       Pursue available grants.
         Unlike the Quimby Act that is limited to subdivisions, the Park Improvement Fee could be
         applied to a larger variety of residential development applications.
         Program OS-9.7.2: Include in the Capital Improvement Program the schedule and costs
         of expanding and improving the City’s parks and recreation facilities as deemed
         appropriate by the City Council.
Goal OS-10         Develop park and recreation facilities with the coordination of other
                   agencies and the public.
Policy OS-10.1 Coordinate with Other Agencies: Coordinate with other governmental entities to
procure and develop additional park and recreational facilities.
         Program OS-10.1.1: Consider establishing joint powers agreements with the Mendocino
         Coast Recreation and Parks District (MCRPD), Fort Bragg Unified School District
         (FBUSD), and Mendocino County to coordinate planning and development of recreation
         facilities.
Policy OS-10.2 MacKerricher State Park: Continue to coordinate with State Department of Parks
and Recreation regarding development adjacent to MacKerricher State Park.
         Program OS-10.2.1: Require that new development east of the Old Haul Road minimizes
         access to the Old Haul Road, establishes a minimum 30-foot setback from the Old Haul
         Road, and, if approved by State Parks, closes any unofficial trails leading from the
         project's frontage across MacKerricher State Park.
         Program OS-10.2.2: In reviewing development applications adjacent to MacKerricher
         State Park, the City shall confer with the State Department of Parks and Recreation to
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element    4-8                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         determine if additional mitigation measures regarding access to the park, or protection of
         park resources, are warranted. If feasible, these additional measures will be required.
Policy OS-10.3 City/School/Recreation District Cooperation:                  Continue to encourage
City/School/Recreation District cooperation in developing and maintaining park and recreation
facilities.
         Program OS-10.3.1: Develop joint use agreements with the School District.
         Program OS-10.3.2: Continue to cooperate with the FBUSD, MCRPD, and Timberwolf
         Stadium to develop playfield improvements and maintenance programs.
Policy OS-10.4 Public Participation: Actively solicit public participation in the selection, design,
and facilities planning for existing and future park sites.
         Program OS-10.4.1: Utilize local volunteer efforts and fund-raising to cover the "match"
         costs needed to secure rehabilitation or purchase grants for public parks.
Goal OS-11         Provide a comprehensive trail system in Fort Bragg.
Policy OS-11.1 Multiple Use Trail System: Develop a multiple use trail system.
         Program OS-11.1.1: Identify potential additions to the trail system which increase access
         to rivers with cross linkages through to the eastern parts of Fort Bragg. Work with the
         MCRPD to seek funding and to acquire rights-of-way.
         Program OS-11.1.2: Establish an integrated trail system serving inland hiking and trail
         needs utilizing existing rights-of-way, City streets, and river front property.
         Program OS-11.1.3: Review development applications and require a trail easement
         dedication, where an appropriate nexus is established.
         Program OS-11.1.4: Require new development to provide direct pedestrian connections,
         such as sidewalks, trails, and other rights-of-way to the existing and planned network of
         parks and trails wherever feasible.
         Program OS-11.1.5: Review development applications to ensure that new development
         does not block proposed trail easements shown on Map OS-1.
         Program OS-11.1.6: Consider the access needs of a variety of users, including school-
         age children, the elderly, and those with handicaps or disabilities when developing trails
         and recreation facilities.
         Program OS-11.1.7: Pursue development of a trail through east Fort Bragg.
         Program OS-11.1.8: Consider completing a feasibility study for the development of a
         pedestrian bridge over Pudding Creek.
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4-9                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                    Otis R. Johnson Wilderness Park
4 – Conservation, Open Space, & Parks Element   4 - 10              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

5.       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
Government Code Section 65302[b] requires that every General Plan include a Circulation
Element which consists of "the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all
correlated with the Land Use Element of the Plan."
Government Code Section 65302[b] also requires all jurisdictions to plan for an integrated multi-
modal transportation network of complete streets in their General Plan. Complete streets are
designed for the needs of all users regardless of age or ability or whether they are driving,
walking, bicycling, or taking transit. Complete streets are designed and operated to enable safe
access for all users. Pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and transit riders of all ages and abilities
must be able to safely move along and across a complete street.
The Circulation Element discusses multi-modal transportation issues for the Fort Bragg
Planning Area; it briefly describes the existing multi-modal circulation system and travel
characteristics and projects future traffic and multi-modal transportation challenges based on
the land uses and growth projections described in the Land Use Element. Policies and
programs contained in this element provide a guide for decisions regarding multi-modal
transportation system improvements to accommodate Fort Bragg's anticipated growth. Detailed
description and analysis of Fort Bragg’s transportation system are contained in the Draft EIR.
The main objectives of the Circulation Element are to:
     •   Support the efficient and safe circulation of people, goods, energy, water, sewage, storm
         drainage and communications;
     •   Plan for the balanced multi-modal transportation network that meets the needs of all
         users of the circulation system, including: bicyclists, children, persons with disabilities,
         motorists, movers of commercial goods, pedestrians, public transit users, and seniors;
     •   Ensure that Fort Bragg’s circulation network accommodates anticipated development;
     •   Minimize the intrusion of through-traffic onto local streets; and
     •   Provide improvements to the transportation system which complement and support the
         other goals of this General Plan.
B.       Existing Conditions
1.       Roadway Classifications
The street system in Fort Bragg is laid out in a grid pattern with Main Street (Highway One)
functioning as the primary north-south roadway. Franklin Street is located one block east of
Main Street and provides access along the main commercial corridor. A number of streets,
including Cypress Street, Chestnut Street, Oak Street, Redwood Avenue, Pine Street, and Elm
Street provide east-west connections. Streets in Fort Bragg are classified according to their
function as defined and shown in Table C-1 and Map C-1: Existing Roadway System.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 -1                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                   The Roadway Classification System
Highway:               A high-speed, limited access roadway serving primarily regional and county-wide
                      travel. California State Department of Transportation (Caltrans) controls the design,
                      operation, and maintenance of highways. Fort Bragg does not have any limited
                      access roadways.
Arterial:              A medium-speed, medium capacity roadway that provides travel and access within
                      the City and access to highways. Main Street (Highway One) and Highway 20 are
                      considered arterial roadways.
Major Collector:      A relatively low-speed, street that provides access within and between
                      neighborhoods. Major Collectors usually serve short trips and are intended for
                      collecting trips from local streets and distributing them to Arterial streets.
Minor Collector:      A relatively low-speed street that provides a connection between Arterials and Major
                      Collectors and direct access to parcels. They handle a lower volume of traffic than
                      Major Collectors.
Local Street:          A low-speed, low-volume street that provides access to adjacent land. Local streets
                      are designed for trips within neighborhoods and to Collector and Arterial streets, and
                      not to serve through-traffic.
                                              Table C-1
                              Fort Bragg Roadway Classification
           Roadway Classification                             Location
           Arterials
           Main Street (Highway 1)                            Full Length
           Highway 20                                         Full Length
           Major Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Main Street to Franklin Street
           Franklin Street                                    Full Length
           Redwood Avenue                                     Main Street to Harold Street
           Oak Street                                         Alley West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Minor Collectors
           Chestnut Street                                    Franklin Street to Dana Street
           Maple Street                                       Main Street to Lincoln Street
           Alder Street                                       Main Street to Harold Street
           Laurel Street                                      Block West of Main Street to Harold Street
           Pine Street                                        Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Fir Street                                         Stewart Street to Harold Street
           Elm Street                                         Glass Beach Drive to Franklin Street
           McPherson Street                                   Chestnut Street to Bush Street
           Harrison Street                                    Walnut Street to Bush Street
           Harold Street                                      Maple Street to Fir Street
           Lincoln Street                                     Chestnut Street to Willow Street
           Sanderson Way                                      Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Dana Street                                        Chestnut Street to Oak Street
           Cypress Street                                     Full Length
           South Harbor Drive                                 Full Length
           South Street                                       Main Street to River Drive
           Local Streets
           All remaining streets will be considered local streets.
5 – Circulation Element                              5 -2                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                             Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                 Neptun
                                                                                                                                                                   p e                 Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                          Ocean
                                                                                                                                             Pacific                                   Drive
                                        S
                                             r
                                          ho                                               Bayview Avenue
                                                                                                   Ave                                                                    View
                                              e lin
                                                      n.                                                                                                                          Monterey Av .
                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                   eL
                       Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                          Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                  Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                       Ro
                   Coas t          H ig h w                     ad
          O ld                                ay
                                                                                 Ha
                                                                                      re                                                                                          Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                                                                  Harbo                      Avenu
                                                                                                                                                                                                              venu
                                                                                                                                                                                                               e ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S t ew
                                       Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rn                                                                       Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ce               Elm St
Simpson                                                                                        Creekk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                       Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o   ad
                                                                                                                                             V ie w Boat Yard r .                 an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                              D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Myr                                                                                                                                St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tl e St            S ou                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .      th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in                                                               Airpor t
e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bush St                                                                              dd
             Hare Creek Terrac                 e                                                                                                                                                                                   Haz       dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d St                     S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                   Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t                                      C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cr
                                                                          Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                         re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                  Highway
                                                                                                                    g   y 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Highway   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            John
                       e
                       ek   C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hyman
                                                                                       Babcock Lan                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                          Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ota Avenu e                                                                                                                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Petaluma                                A             v                                            Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Johnson
                                                                         Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                   Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                    Cr
                                                                                                                      re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                 Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Johnson   Ln   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Map C-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lane
          Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stree t
                                                   Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Denniso n
          Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                        Benson
                                                                                                                                                        Benso                                                       W i n d in g
                                                                Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                              Camille
          Sears Lan     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                         Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                             W ay
                                                                                                                                                             Hanso n                                        Roa d
                                                                                                                                                       Lan
                                                                                                                                                        a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Puddin g
          A nd r e a               W ay
          Lahmon Lan           e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Monsen Wa y
          Tex-Mon t                                                                               Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                              Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d
                                                                           Benson                           Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EXISTING ROADWAY SYSTEM
                                                                Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Road
                                               S ummers
                                                                                                                               Ro
                                                                                                                                    ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Arterial                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Minor Collector   Major Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Coastal Zone Boundary
 2.        Roadway Level of Service Standards
 Level of Service (LOS) standards provide a qualitative indicator based on a quantitative analysis
 of the functional capacity of a roadway or intersection. LOS standards describe the relative
 ease or congestion of traffic movement on a roadway or at an intersection. LOS "A" represents
 free flow conditions and LOS "F" represents jammed conditions where traffic flow is at or over
 the capacity of the roadway and consequently moves very slowly. Table C-2 below explains in
 more detail the LOS concept. LOS is normally used to describe peak-hour conditions.
                                                  Table C-2
                                        Level of Service Definitions
 Level of Service         Description                                                            V/C Ratio*
 Free Flowing             Relatively free-flow. No restrictions to vehicle maneuverability or     0.00-0.60
 LOS A                    speed. Very slight delay.
 Minimal Delays           Stable Flow. Some slight reduction in maneuverability and speed.        0.61-0.70
 LOS B                    Vehicle platoons form. This is a suitable level of operation for rural
                          design. Slight delay
 Acceptable Delays        Stable flow operation. Higher volumes. More restrictions on             0.71-0.80
 LOS C                    maneuverability and speed. Acceptable delay.
 Tolerable Delays         Approaching unstable flow operation. Queues develop. Little freedom     0.81-0.90
 LOS D                    to maneuver. Tolerable delays for short periods.
 Significant Delays       Unstable flow or operation. Low operating speed; momentary              0.91-1.00
 LOS E                    stoppages.     This condition is not uncommon in peak hours.
                          Congestion and intolerable delays.
 Excessive Delays         Forced flow or operation. There are many stoppages. The highway           1.00+
 LOS F                    acts as a vehicle storage area. Jammed. Gridlock.
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, HRB Special Report 87.
 C.        Existing and Projected Traffic Patterns
 Fort Bragg is built along Highway One which is also called Main Street within the City. Highway
 One is the only continuous north-south road serving the north coast of Mendocino County,
 providing a local transportation corridor for many communities and the primary access route for
 visitors. Traffic volumes on this roadway have increased steadily over the years.
 Traffic into and out of Fort Bragg is constrained by the capacity of two bridges: Hare Creek and
 Pudding Creek, and by the two-lane (i.e., one through lane in each direction) roadway sections
 along Highway One. The Hare Creek and Pudding Creek bridges are limited to one lane of
 traffic in each direction.
 The most congested street in the City is Main Street between the northbound merge area
 located just south of Laurel Street through Elm Street. The northbound section of this road
 currently operates at LOS D to LOS E during peak hours.
 The Noyo River Bridge is a four lane bridge with a center lane for emergency vehicles and a
 sidewalk on both sides. The bridge provides access at the south end of the City and to
 Highway 20 and operates at LOS A.
 Although the volume of traffic on Main Street has increased over the past few years,
 intersections with traffic signals – Highway 20, Ocean View Drive, Cypress Street, Chestnut
 5 – Circulation Element                            5 -3                                      November 2012
 Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Street, Oak Street, Laurel Street, Elm Street, and Redwood Avenue - are operating at LOS B or
better. The side street stop sign controlled intersections with Main Street are also operating at
LOS B or better for traffic traveling on Main Street, although traffic turning onto Main Street from
some side streets can experience LOS D, E, or F during peak hours.
D.       Projected Traffic Volumes
Land use and transportation must be coordinated so that the capacity of the transportation
system will accommodate the traffic generated by the development of the community. To
understand the relationship between land use and transportation, the new traffic that would be
generated by the 10-year buildout projections (2022) listed in Table C-3 below and was added
to existing traffic volumes on major streets.
The traffic projections take into account the type and intensity of existing and future
development, areas of vacant developable land, and the policies established by the General
Plan. The traffic projections estimate how much traffic will be generated by new development,
what traffic problems will occur, and what roadway improvements would relieve traffic
congestion. This projected traffic increase would be generated by development within the City
and its Sphere of Influence, new development in the County, and tourist traffic which will
continue to increase in Fort Bragg and the coastal areas of Mendocino County.
The traffic projections include the existing roadway network as shown in Map C-1.
Tables C-4 summarizes the Levels of Service for roadway segments and intersections for a
summer Friday mid-day peak hour when traffic is generally the most congested. This table
shows the projected LOS with and without the development proposed through the Draft 2012
Mill Site Specific Plan.
E.       Roadway Deficiencies
Traffic projections in Tables C-4 a indicate that Levels of Service will remain virtually identical to
current Levels of Service taking into consideration anticipated development in the Inland
General Plan area. If all potential future development is taken into consideration throughout the
City, including anticipated development on the Mill Site all intersections and roadway segments
will conform with the standards established by the Inland General Plan.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 -4                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

In fact, all intersections are operating acceptably under Existing Conditions and are expected to
continue operating acceptably under Future conditions without or with projected ten year traffic
volumes from development on the Mill Site and the Coastal General Plan Area. Although the
approach Level of Service for the westbound Pine Street approach of SR1/Pine Street is
expected to operate at LOS E, it is considered acceptable as the intersection as a whole is
operating acceptably at LOS A and the Caltrans rural peak hour signal warrants are not met.
Westbound approach volumes at SR1/Pine Street are currently low at approximately 36
vehicles per hour. It should be noted that with the addition of project-related traffic volumes,
average delay at the SR1/Elm Street and SR1/Laurel Drive decreases during the p.m. peak
hour. While this is counter-intuitive, this condition occurs when traffic volumes increase on
movements that are currently underutilized or have delays that are below the intersection
average, resulting in a better balance between approaches and lower overall average delay.
Future traffic volume increases are expected predominantly on the through or right-turn
movements, which has an average delay that is lower than the average for the intersection as a
whole, resulting in a slight reduction in the overall average delay. The conclusion could
incorrectly be drawn that operation actually improves over time based on this data alone;
however, it is more appropriate to conclude that future traffic increases are expected to make
use of excess capacity, so drivers will experience little, if any, change in future conditions.
                                             Table C-4
5 – Circulation Element                        5 -5                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Notes & Assumptions:
     x   Existing conditions Level of Service calculations completed assuming current
         lane geometry.
     x   Existing counts are based on past counts from various studies conducted
         between July and August, 2008.
     x   Future conditions Level of Service calculations completed assuming lane
         geometry from the Main Street Merge Analysis.
     x   Future turning movement volumes were developed using list of approved
         projects as provided by the City. Refer to map provided for projected land use of
         approved projects.
     x   Mill Site consists of the four projects noted on the provided map that are west of
         State Route (SR) 1, south of Spruce Street, and north of South Street. They
         consist of 25 single family housing units, 10,000 square foot of industrial
         development, 55,000 square foot of commercial development, and a motel
         development with 70 lodging rooms.
     x   No growth rates were applied for SR1 through traffic past Pudding Creek Bridge
         due to low levels of traffic growth seen in historic observations.
     x   Synchro software was used to determine Level of Service on signalized
         intersections. Level of Service calculations for unsignalized, stop-sign controlled
         intersections were conducted using TRAFFIX software.
F. Existing Conditions Sidewalks & Bicycle Facilities
Fort Bragg sidewalk widths vary, primarily on the basis of the street type and sometimes based
on the width of the ROW. Some streets have discontinuous sidewalks, sidewalks on one side
of the street or substandard sidewalks. The City has Class I, II, and III bicycle facilities. The
City intends to further improve its bicycle, pedestrian, and transit facilities as follows:
•    Facilitate better public transit, transit stops, and transit convenience;
•    Increase number, extent and types of bicycle routes;
•    Provide safe and complete sidewalks throughout the City; and
•    Provide a mix of land use designations which reduce the need to drive from home to work,
     schools, and/or commercial outlets.
By improving and providing alternatives to the car, the City serves all residents by: 1) reducing
automobile traffic; 2) providing equitable transportation facilities for those without an automobile;
and 3) providing transportation alternatives that improve citizen health and enjoyment while
conserving energy and reducing air and noise pollution.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 -6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

G.       Goals, Policies and Programs
Goal C-1           Complete Street Planning.
Policy C-1.1: Balance the need of all users. The City shall balance the need to increase
motor vehicle capacity with the need for complete streets that provide facilities for
bicycle and pedestrian circulation and commercial viability.
Policy C-1.2: Walking and bicycling shall be considered an essential and integral part of
the city's circulation network.
Policy C-1.3 Complete Streets: New development, that includes new streets or street
segments, shall build multi-modal “complete streets” that are designed for the safety and
comfort of cyclists and pedestrians, including children, the elderly, and people with
disabilities, consistent with US Department of Transportation complete streets
guidelines.
         Program C.1.3.1: City street construction and re-construction projects shall
         provide facilities for all modes of transportation, where feasible.
         Program C1.3.2: Through the Capital Improvement Plan and related impact
         fees, the City shall ensure that adequate funds are provided to maintain the
         existing circulation network, and where feasible upgrade it to “complete street”
         design.
                             Complete streets in Central Business District
5 – Circulation Element                            5 -7                             November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

     1.       Automobile and Delivery Vehicle Planning
     Goal C-2            Coordinate land use and transportation planning.
Policy C-2.1 Level of Service Standards: Establish the following Level of Service (LOS) standards:
          Signalized and All-Way-Stop                     LOS D
          Intersections Along Highway One
          Side Street Stop Sign Controlled                LOS D, or LOS F if there are less than 15
          Intersections Along Highway One (Side           vehicles/hour left turns plus through
          Street Approach)                                movements from the side street and the
                                                          volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                          hour signal warrant criteria levels.
          Signalized and All-Way Stop                     LOS C
          Intersections
          Not Along Highway One
          Side Street Stop Sign Controlled                LOS C, or LOS E if there are less than 15
          Intersections Not Along Highway One             vehicles/hour left turns plus through
          (Side Street Approach)                          movements from the side street and the
                                                          volumes do not exceed Caltrans rural peak
                                                          hour signal warrant criteria levels.
              •         If volumes at an unsignalized intersection are increased to meet or exceed
                        Caltrans rural peak hour signal Warrant #11 criteria levels and the intersection is
                        operating at an unacceptable level of service, then signalization of the
                        intersection is warranted.
              •         LOS E for Main Street (Highway One) between the northbound lane merge area
                        and Manzanita Street.
              •         LOS D for Main Street south of the northbound merge lane and north of
                        Manzanita Street and other City-designated arterials and collectors.
              •         LOS C on all City-designated local streets.
              •         The maximum allowable LOS standards for Main Street apply to the p.m. peak
                        hour weekdays during the summer and to the p.m. peak hour on weekdays and
                        weekends during the remainder of the year. They do not apply to p.m. peak
                        hours on weekends and holidays during the summer. During the p.m. peak
                        hours on summer weekends and holidays, Main Street can operate at LOS F.
     Policy C-2.2 Coordinate Land Use and Transportation: Ensure that the amount and phasing
     of development can be adequately served by transportation facilities.
              Program C-2.2.1: Review development proposals for their direct and cumulative effects
              on roadway Level of Service standards. During the development review process, City
              staff will determine whether traffic studies need to be carried out and the scope of such
              studies.
     Policy C-2.3: Do not permit new development that would result in the exceedance of roadway
     and intersection Levels of Service standards unless one of the following conditions is met:
     5 – Circulation Element                         5 -8                                      November 2012
     Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         a)        Revisions are incorporated in the proposed development project which prevent
                   the Level of Service from deteriorating below the adopted Level of Service
                   standards; or
         b)        Funding of prorata share of the cost of circulation improvements and/or the
                   construction of roadway improvements needed to maintain the established Level
                   of Service is included as a condition or development standard of project
                   approval.
Policy C-2.4: Include specific time frames for the funding and completion of roadway
improvements for projects which cause adopted roadway and intersection Level of Service
standards to be exceeded. Require security, bonding or other means acceptable to the City to
ensure the timely implementation of roadway mitigations.
Policy C-2.5: When traffic impact fees are collected, establish a schedule from the date of
collection of said fee for the expenditure of funds to construct roadway improvements that meets
project needs. Where a project would cause a roadway or intersection to operate below the
adopted traffic Level of Service standards, the roadway or intersection improvements should be
completed in a timely manner but no later than five years after project completion.
2.       Recommended Roadway Improvements
Goal C-3            Develop and manage a roadway system that accommodates future growth
                    and maintains acceptable Levels of Service while considering the other
                    policies and programs of the General Plan.
Policy C-3.1 Roadway Improvements: In coordination with Caltrans and Mendocino County,
plan for and seek funding for on-going improvements to the local and regional road system to
ensure that the roadway system operates safely and efficiently. Project applicants are fiscally
responsible for their fair share of roadway improvements necessary to serve their projects.
         Program C-3.1.1: When a traffic analysis of levels of service and/or safety hazards
         indicates the need, construct the following roadway improvements:
                   a)     Signalize the Main Street/Pudding Creek Road intersection;
                   b)     Signalize the Franklin Street/Oak Street intersection;
                   c)     Widen the section of Main Street from the Pudding Creek Bridge to the
                          northern City Limits to three lanes, adding a center turn lane;
                   d)     Signalize the Main Street/Pine Street intersection; and
                   e)     Consider extending Harrison Street south from Walnut Street to Cypress
                          Street.
Policy C-3.2 Roadway Standards: Continue to provide consistent standards for the City's
street system.
         Program C-3.2.1: Establish standards for public streets, which allow for the following:
                   a)     Traffic "calming" measures;
5 – Circulation Element                          5 -9                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                    b)      Sidewalks with curbs, gutters, and a planting strip between the sidewalk
                            and the roadway;
                    c)      Rounded street corners with "bulb-outs" at key intersections;
                    d)      Continuation of the grid street system; and
                    e)      Standards for radius returns for local, collector, and arterial streets.
         Program C-3.2.2 Intersection Design: Intersections shall be designed at the tightest turn
         radii to accommodate the design vehicle, to slow turning vehicles as they cross the
         pedestrian realm. The “control vehicle” – larger vehicles such as delivery trucks and fire
         engines that only occasionally use the street – may cross the center line to make turns.
         Program C-3.2.3: Continue to prohibit the establishment of private roads.
         Program C-3.2.4: Adopt standards for alleyways which address parking restrictions,
         shared access, lighting, and maintenance.
Policy C-3.3 High Trip Generating Uses: Traffic studies shall be required for all major
development proposals that require a conditional approval, including but not limited to, drive-
through facilities, fast food outlets, convenience markets, major tourist accommodations,
shopping centers, commercial development, residential subdivisions, and other generators of
high traffic volumes that would affect a Level of Service. Traffic studies shall identify, at a
minimum:
                 a) The amount of traffic to be added to the street system by the proposed
                      development;
                 b) Other known and foreseeable projects and their effects on the street system;
                 c) The direct, indirect, and cumulative adverse impacts of project traffic on street
                      system operations, safety, and public access to the coast;
                 d) Mitigation measures necessary to provide for project traffic while maintaining
                      City Level of Service standards;
                 e) The responsibility of the developer to provide improvements; and
                 f)   The timing of all improvements.
         Program C-3.3.1: Adopt standards to consolidate commercial driveway accesses onto
         arterials and Main Street.
Policy C-3.4 Continuation and Connectivity of Streets: Require the continuation of streets,
bicycle and pedestrian paths through new developments wherever possible, and require
connectivity to the street grid at as many points as feasible.
         Program C-3.4.1: Review site plans for new development to facilitate the continuation of
         streets to improve local circulation. Where streets are not feasible, priority shall be given
         to providing pedestrian and bicycle trails that establish bicycle and pedestrian
         connections to streets wherever possible.
Policy C-3.5 Right-of-Way Acquisition: Require right-of-way dedications for new development to
meet the City’s roadway width standards.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 - 10                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                            Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                Neptun
                                                                                                                                                                  p e                 Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                         Ocean
                                                                                                                                            Pacific                                   Drive
                                        S
                                             r
                                          ho                                               Bay ew Av
                                                                                                  Avenue
                                                                                                  Ave                                                                    View
                                              e lin
                                                      n.                                                                                                                         Monterey Av .
                                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                   eL
                       Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                         Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                 Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                       Ro
                   Coas t          H ig h w                     ad
          O ld                                ay
                                                                                 Ha
                                                                                      re                                                                                         Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                                                                 Harbo                      Avenu
                                                                                                                                                                                                             venu
                                                                                                                                                                                                              e ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S t ew
                                       Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rn                                                                       Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ce               Elm St
Simpson                                                                                       Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                      Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o   ad
                                                                                                                                            V ie w Boat Yard r .                 an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                             D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Myr                                                                                                                                St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tl e St            S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Airpor t
e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bush St                                                                              dd
             Hare Creek Terrac                 e                                                                                                                                                                                  Haz       dwar                                                                                                         Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d St                     S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                                                          Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t                                      C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cr
                                                                          Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                                                                  Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                         re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                 Highway
                                                                                                                   g   y 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Highway   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           John
                       e
                       ek   C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hyman
                                                                                       Babcock Lan                                      e                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                                                                 Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ota Avenu e                                                                                                                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Petaluma                                A             v                                                                Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Map C-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Johnson
                                                                         Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                  Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                     re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ee
                                                                                                                               s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Johnson   Ln        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lane
          Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stree t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bicycle Paths
                                                   Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Denniso n
          Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                       Benso                                                       W i n d in g
                                                                Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                             Camille
          Sears Lan     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                         Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                            W ay
                                                                                                                                                            Hanso n                                        Roa d
                                                                                                                                                      Lan
                                                                                                                                                       a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Puddin g
          A nd r e a               W ay
          Lahmon Lan           e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Monsen Wa y
          Tex-Mon t                                                                              Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                             Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                           Benson                          Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Creek
                                                                Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Road
                                               S ummers
                                                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                   ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        = City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                = Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coastal Zone Boundary     = Existing Bicycle Paths   =Proposed Bicycle Paths
Policy C-3.6       Roadway Safety: Improve the safety of the roadway system.
         Program C-3.6.1: Periodically analyze the locations of traffic accidents to identify
         problems and use this information to set priorities for improvements as a part of the
         City's Capital Improvement Program.
Policy C-3.7 Integration of Low Impact Development (LID): Development projects shall
incorporate LID features, and subdivision or development projects that include street
improvements shall incorporate LID features into the public rights-of-way when feasible.
Policy C-3.8 Installation of Conduit in New Roads and Road Reconstruction Projects. Conduit
shall be installed in all new roads and road reconstruction projects and dedicated to the City of
Fort Bragg. Conduit shall be sized to accommodate fiber optic and other telecom technologies.
3.       Residential Areas
The City's residential neighborhoods need to be protected from excessive through-traffic. When
Main Street and other arterial streets become congested, drivers may seek alternate routes to
their destination, often taking local streets through residential areas. Excessive traffic on local
streets has an impact on the quality of life. Through-traffic can generate excessive noise and
present potential safety hazards to children. The goals, policies, and programs below are
intended to address this issue.
Goal C-4            Preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
Policy C-4.1 Reduce Through-Traffic on Local Streets: Reduce through-traffic on local streets
to preserve the peace and quiet of residential areas.
         Program C-4.1.1: Develop measures to limit through-traffic on residential streets when
         traffic studies indicate that traffic volumes on such streets exceed the adopted Levels of
         Service and/or safety concerns warrant such measures.
         Program C-4.1.2: Consider the following measures, as appropriate, to reduce through-
         traffic from using local streets in residential areas:
                   a)     Narrow and landscape the street entrances to residential areas that
                          experience heavy traffic;
                   b)     Restrict turning movements into residential areas; and
                   c)     Use traffic calming measures such as permitting wider sidewalks,
                          additional on-street parking, and landscape strips between the sidewalk
                          and the road.
Policy C-4.2 Additional Connector Streets:                Establish additional connectors between
residential streets to improve emergency access, particularly on dead-end streets south of
Chestnut Street.
4.       Main Street Corridor
Transportation improvements to Main Street and principal streets in the Central Business
District will enhance the character, sense of place and economic well-being of this area.
However, the need to accommodate traffic flow through the City should be considered in the
context of the community's desire to preserve and enhance the historic character of Fort Bragg's
Central Business District.
5 – Circulation Element                            5 - 11                              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                   South Main Street                          Central Business District
Goal C-5            Regard the quality of life in Fort Bragg and maintaining community identity
                    as more important than accommodating through-traffic.
Policy C-5.1 Community Priorities for Transportation Improvements: Place a higher priority on
maintaining a sense of place and enhancing the attractiveness of the Central Business District
than on efficient traffic flow and movement.
The adopted Level of Service Standards make an exception for Main Street between the
northbound lane merge area, currently located just south of Laurel Street, to Manzanita Streets,
to prevent street widening and/or elimination of on-street parking which would require
acquisition of the right-of-way, and consequently change the character of the City’s historic
downtown. Widening this segment of Main Street would require acquisition of right-of-way and
reduction in on-street parking, thereby changing the intimate, pedestrian-oriented downtown the
City wishes to preserve and enhance.
         Program C-5.1.1: Consider traffic safety, the ease and safety of pedestrian movement
         across Main Street, and adequacy of on-street parking as key factors in evaluation of
         proposed roadway improvements along Main Street.
         Program C-5.1.2: Ensure that property and business owners in the Central Business
         District are informed and actively involved in planning future improvements to Main
         Street and other nearby streets.
         Program C-5.1.3: Consider signalizing the intersection of Pine Street and Main Street to
         provide adequate pedestrian safety.
         Program C-5.1.4: Consider options for increasing the capacity of Main Street north of
         the northbound lane merge area south of Laurel Street that do not require elimination of
         parking.
Policy C-5.2 Franklin Street: Ensure that Franklin Street in the Central Business District is
maintained as a pedestrian-oriented corridor with safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic patterns.
         Program C-5.2.1: Continue to monitor traffic volumes and accidents on Franklin Street
         and Main Street and make necessary safety improvements as warranted.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 12                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

5.       Parking
Adequate off-street parking is essential for Central Business District businesses1. Fort Bragg
has implemented an in-lieu fee to build additional off-street parking facilities. Providing
additional off-street parking facilities in the Central Business District will have a community-wide
benefit.
Goal C-6            Provide additional parking in the Central Business District.
Policy C-6.1 Additional Off-Street Parking: Continue to construct additional off-street parking
spaces in the Central Business District.
         Program C-6.1.1: Continue, and update, as needed, the City's parking in-lieu fee
         program for the Central Business District.
         Program C-6.1.2: Define priorities for the acquisition of property and the construction of
         additional parking facilities.
         Program C-6.1.3: Encourage the use of reciprocal access agreements and
         interconnecting off-street parking and circulation between adjacent commercial uses.
         Program C-6.1.4: Develop a comprehensive signage program within the Central
         Business District to direct vehicles to off-street parking areas.
         Program C-6.1.5: Develop incentives for employers and employees to park off-street in
         the Central Business District.
         Program C-6.1.6: Continue enforcing parking restrictions in alleyways to ensure access
         for emergency and delivery vehicles.
Goal C-7            Improve the Design of Parking Lots in Accordance with Smart Growth
                    Principles.
Policy C-7.1: Improve and update parking regulations in accordance with best practices and
smart growth principles.
         Program C-7.1.1: Revise the Inland Land Use and Development Code to reduce parking
         requirements for: 1) affordable and senior housing developments; 2) commercial and
         mixed-use projects within a reasonable walking distance of downtown; and 3) small infill
         projects in areas with an abundance on on-street parking.
         Program C-7.1.2: Continue to encourage developers to locate parking facilities behind
         buildings and landscaped areas to reduce the visual impacts to the street and improve
         pedestrian access.
6.       Emergency Routes
The City needs to establish an emergency route to the east for emergency vehicles and for
evacuation in the event bridges are blocked or destroyed.
1
         Refer to the Downtown Parking Study, City of Fort Bragg, 1999.
5 – Circulation Element                              5 - 13                             November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal C-8           Improve emergency access to the City.
Policy C-8.1 Emergency Access: Establish an access route out of Fort Bragg that could be
used in the event of damage to the Noyo River and Pudding Creek Bridges.
         Program C-8.1.1: Work with the property owners to obtain temporary use, in the event
         of an emergency, of the logging road that begins on Cypress Street and provides access
         to Highway 20 (aka the A&W Haul Road), east of Fort Bragg.
         Program C-8.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments and Mendocino
         County to upgrade Sherwood Road to Willits to provide a year-round emergency access
         route.
         Program C-8.1.3: Prepare an emergency evacuation route plan for the City.
7.       Improving East-West Access
As Fort Bragg continues to grow, additional vacant and underdeveloped land east and west of
Main Street will be developed. The City's annexation policies discussed in the Inland Land Use
Element establish priorities for expansion of City boundaries in an orderly and planned manner.
Annexation and development in these areas will require development of and/or improvement to
east-west access routes. In some areas new roads will be required, while in other areas
extensions to existing roads would be the best solution.
Goal C-9           Improve east-west access routes that are sensitive to the environment and
                   preserve Fort Bragg's unique identity and sense of place.
Policy C-9.1 Eastern Areas: Identify the location of extensions to City streets and new streets
in anticipation of future annexation and development east of City limits.
         Program C-9.1.1: Work with the County to review proposed development in the Sphere
         of Influence to ensure that connecting rights-of-way are identified and preserved.
         Program C-9.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments to identify needed
         east-west streets in the Regional Transportation Plan.
         Program C-9.1.3: Use traditional grid patterns for roadways where feasible.
         Program C-9.1.4: Request that the County maintain access and rights-of-way from Oak
         Street/Sherwood Road to Monson Way.
Policy C-9.2 Improve East-West Arterials:             Improve Oak Street, Chestnut Street, and
Redwood Avenue to provide safe and efficient circulation between Main Street and east Fort
Bragg.
         Program C-9.2.1: Maintain and improve Oak Street and Redwood Avenue to ensure
         sufficient lane width.
         Program C-9.2.2:       Consider improving pedestrian and bicycle facilities on Chestnut
         Street.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 14                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

8.       Public Transit
Fort Bragg is served by the Mendocino Transit Authority (MTA). MTA provides bus service
between Fort Bragg, Willits, Ukiah, and Santa Rosa. A separate bus route provides service
between Fort Bragg, Mendocino, and the Navarro River.
MTA has a fixed-route bus service in Fort Bragg with fixed stops that connect the College of the
Redwoods, shopping centers, the Central Business District, and the hospital. Local trips within
the Fort Bragg area are also provided by MTA's dial-a-ride service where riders can call to be
picked up and delivered to their destination Monday through Saturday. In addition, the
Redwood Senior Center provides transportation services for seniors in the community.
Goal C-10           Provide better public transportation.
Policy C-10.1 Encourage Transit Use:
         Program C-10.1.1: Continue to support the expansion of transit services provided by
         MTA and other public transit providers.
Policy C-10.2 Bus Shelters: Encourage attractive, well-lighted, and comfortable bus shelters
placed in convenient locations.
         Program C-10.2.1: Continue to require the provision of bus stops, bus shelters,
         benches, turnouts, and related facilities in all major new commercial, industrial,
         residential, and institutional developments, and identify, in collaboration with MTA,
         additional locations for bus stops and shelters.
9.       Pedestrian Facilities
Most areas of Fort Bragg have sidewalks for pedestrians. There are, however, a number of
residential streets which lack sidewalks, and substandard sidewalk facilities exist throughout the
City. Better pedestrian access across Fort Bragg's bridges and along Main Street from the
Noyo Bridge to the southern City limits and from Elm Street north is needed. New development
must be served by adequate pedestrian facilities. In addition to the policies and programs listed
below, see the Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element regarding policies and programs
recommended for increasing and improving the trail system within the Planning Area.
Goal C-11           Make it easier and safer for people to walk in Fort Bragg.
Policy C-11.1 Continuous Sidewalks: Require an uninterrupted pedestrian network of
sidewalks, with continuous sidewalks along both sides of streets. New development shall
provide sidewalks along project frontages to close gaps in the City's sidewalk network.
         Program C-11.1.1: Consider implementing the following funding sources for the purpose
         of installing sidewalks in existing developed areas of the City:
                   a)     special benefit assessment districts; and/or
                   b)     a low-interest revolving loan fund.
         Program C-11.1.2: Work with the Mendocino Council of Governments and Caltrans to
         construct pedestrian walkways over the Hare Creek and Pudding Creek Bridges. These
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 15                               November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         facilities may qualify for Transportation Enhancement Activities (TEA) funding available
         through Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG).
Policy C-11.2: Where feasible, incorporate pedestrian and bicycle facilities into the design and
construction of all road improvements.
Policy C-11.3 Sidewalk Maintenance: Ensure that property owners maintain safe sidewalks.
         Program C-11.3.1: Continue to implement City regulations that require sidewalks to be
         maintained by property owners. Carry out regular inspections, notification, and
         enforcement of this requirement.
Policy C-11.4 Sidewalk Design: Sidewalks should be designed, constructed and re-
constructed to enhance the safety, comfort, aesthetic appeal, and interest of the pedestrian
environment. Sidewalks should conform with the following principles:
     x   Sidewalks shall have the appropriate width for their use, consistent with City standards.
     x   Where it is not possible to provide wide sidewalks continuously along a street,
         sidewalks shall be widened at their most congested locations such as crosswalks,
         building entrances and resting areas. Widening shall be achieved by using curb
         extensions or requiring development to set back building frontages.
     x   Ample crossing opportunities shall be provided. In addition to marked crosswalks at all
         intersections, mid-block crossings provide crossing opportunities where intersections are
         too widely spaced for reasonable pedestrian access. Mid-block crossings are particularly
         useful to connect pedestrian desire lines between generators separated by streets.
     x   Where roadways are reconstructed, efforts should be made to provide for wider
         sidewalks that conform with City standards, possibly by reducing the road width.
         Program C-11.4.1: Require applicants to implement the South Fort Bragg Pedestrian
         Access and Beautification Plan as feasible, in conjunction with new development
         projects.
         Program C-11.4.2: Seek available funding from grants and other funding sources for the
         construction of sidewalks in existing developed areas.
Policy C-11.5 Pedestrian Paths: Develop a series of continuous pedestrian and multi-use
walkways throughout the commercial districts and residential neighborhoods.
         Program C-11.5.1: Allow asphalt or other approved surface pedestrian/multi-use paths
         in single-family residential areas. Factors to consider in applying this measure include
         compatibility with the neighborhood, connection with the existing sidewalk system,
         safety, and aesthetics.
Policy C-11.6 Improve Pedestrian Safety:
         Program C-11.6.1: Continue to provide traffic controls and well-lit intersections in areas
         with a high volume of pedestrian movement.
         Program C-11.6.2: Upgrade and widen sidewalks on Chestnut Street.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 16                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

10.      Bikeways
With better facilities and trails, bicycling can become a more significant part of the transportation
system and an alternative to automobile use. Fort Bragg has few constraints to bicycling: most
of the City is flat, the weather is mild, and the City is compact with relatively short distances
between residential areas, schools, parks, and commercial centers.
The California Street and Highway Code has established three categories of bicycle trails based
on the physical conditions of the right-of-way.
     Class 1 Bikeway - Bike Path or Bike Trail: These facilities are constructed on a separate
     right-of-way, are completely separated from street traffic, and have minimal cross flows of
     automobile traffic. The State standard for minimum paved width of a two-way bike trail is
     eight feet.
     Class 2 Bikeway - Bike Lane: A restricted right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles with
     vehicle parking and cross flow by pedestrians and motorists permitted. Bike lanes are
     normally striped within paved areas of highways and are one-directional with a minimum
     standard width of five feet.
     Class 3 Bikeway - Bike Route: A route for bicyclists designated by signs or other markings
     and shared with pedestrians and motorists. Bike routes are typically designated to provide
     linkages to the bikeway system where Class 1 or 2 Bikeways cannot be provided.
     The City’s Bicycle Master Plan identifies high priority bicycle improvement projects within the
     City.
Goal C-12          Make it easier and safer for people to travel by bicycle.
Policy C-12.1 Comprehensive Bikeway System: Establish a comprehensive and safe system
of bikeways connecting all parts of Fort Bragg.
Policy C-12.2: Improve and expand bicycle facilities and infrastructure according to the City’s
Bicycle Master Plan and the Residential Streets Safety Plan recommendations.
         Program C-12.2.1: Implement the improvement projects enumerated in the City’s Bicycle
         Master Plan with school projects as the first priority.
         Program C-12.2.2: Implement the recommendations of the Residential Streets Safety
         Plan.
         Program C-12.2.3: Complete the bikeway system as indicated in Map C-2: Bicycle Paths
         with parking-in-lieu funds, dedications, grant funding, traffic impact fees, and other
         means, as appropriate.
         Program C-12.2.4: Work to achieve designation as a Bicycle Friendly Community from
         the League of American Bicyclists by 2015.
         Program C-12.2.5: Maintain and improve bicycle facilities to be free of debris and other
         obstacles.
         Program C-12.2.6: Improve the safety of bicyclists and promote bicycling skills through
         education, enforcement, encouragement, and community outreach.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 17                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-12.2.7: Promote and encourage bicycling as a method to reduce the City’s
         impact on climate change.
         Program C-12.2.8: Utilize dedications, grant funding, traffic impact fees, and other
         means, as appropriate, to acquire rights-of-way needed for a comprehensive bikeway
         system as described in the Bicycle Master Plan.
                                              Bicycle use at school
Policy C-12.3: Require new development to provide on-site connections to existing and
proposed bikeways, as appropriate.
Policy C-12.4: Require new development, redevelopment, and significant renovation projects to
provide superior bicycle/bicyclist support infrastructure.
         Program 12.4.1: Consider revising the Inland Land Use and Development Code to
         reduce parking requirements for projects that facilitate employee/customer bicycle use
         beyond current code requirements by providing: indoor or covered bike storage, lockers
         for personal belongings, changing rooms and showers, and/or bicycles for employee
         use.
         Program 12.4.2: Update the bicycle parking guidelines in the Citywide Design
         Guidelines. Consider requiring larger “vehicle prints” for bike parking and bikeways that
         accommodate bike trailers for carrying children, dogs, parcels, groceries, freight, etc.
Policy C-12.5: Bicycle Parking: Provide adequate and secure bicycle parking at bus stops,
schools, the library, parks, City offices, and commercial areas.
Policy C-12.6: Require that streets linking residential areas with school facilities be designed to
include bikeways.
Policy C-12.7: Consider bicycle operating characteristics in the design of intersections and
traffic control systems. Incorporate bicycle and pedestrian facilities into the design and
construction of all road improvements as feasible.
Policy C-12.8: Improve continuity and connections between the City’s bike facilities and those
of the County and State.
         Program C-12.8.1: Produce and distribute a map illustrating all local and regional
         bicycle routes, facilities, and important destinations.
5 – Circulation Element                          5 - 18                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-12.8.2: Continue working with County, regional, and State transportation
         agencies on development and implementation of regional bicycle plans and facilities.
         Work with Mendocino Transit Authority to accommodate more bicycles on transit buses.
         Continue to participate in MCOG's Regional Bikeway Plan to qualify for State Bicycle
         Lane Account funds.
12.      Access for the Mobility Impaired
Providing transportation facilities accessible to persons who are mobility-impaired is essential.
Approximately three percent of the population in Fort Bragg cannot use conventional public
transit due to a disability. The Federal Americans with Disabilities Act contains many
requirements regarding removal of barriers for persons with disabilities.
Goal C-13          Provide mobility-impaired persons with access to transportation.
Policy C-13.1 Regulations for Disabled Persons:          Enforce Federal and State regulations
regarding access for persons with disabilities.
Policy C-13.2 Conformance with State and Federal ADA regulations: Continue to review all
projects for handicapped access and require the installation of curb cuts, ramps, and other
improvements facilitating handicapped access.
Policy C-13.3 Support Improved Access: Support improved access to public transportation
and pedestrian facilities for people with disabilities.
         Program C-13.3.1: Continue to apply for grants for ADA-related projects from MCOG
         and other sources.
13.      Coordinate Regional Transportation Planning
Traffic congestion along Fort Bragg's Main Street is connected to development in
unincorporated areas to the north and south of the City. Fort Bragg’s Main Street is also
Highway One, the primary north-south route for all communities on the coast. Land use
decisions made by the County of Mendocino have a significant impact on transportation in the
Fort Bragg area. The City works closely with the regional agencies described below:
     x   County of Mendocino: maintains and plans the county road system.
     x   Mendocino Council of Governments (MCOG): prepares and carries out a Regional
         Transportation Plan, establishes priorities for Federal and State funding, and funds
         studies of transportation corridors.
     x   Mendocino Transit Authority (MTA): operates several transit routes serving the City and
         the region. It is a county-wide authority created through a joint powers agreement
         among cities and the County.
     x   Caltrans: Maintains, plans and completes improvements on Hwy. 1 and Hwy 20.
Goal C-14          Coordinate regional traffic planning.
Policy C-14.1 Regional Transportation Efforts: Participate in regional transportation planning
efforts.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 19                              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-14.1.1: Continue to provide City Council and staff representation on regional
         transportation planning agencies.
         Program C-14.1.2: Work with the MCOG and Caltrans to coordinate transportation
         planning and to identify funding for necessary transportation improvements.
         Program C-14.1.3: Continue to ensure that MCOG's Regional Transportation Plan
         (RTP), the State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) and the State Highway
         Systems Operation and Protection Plan (SHOPP) include needed improvements to
         Highway One and Highway 20 in the Fort Bragg area.
14.      Funding Transportation Improvements
Funding transportation improvements is predominantly a Federal, State, and regional
responsibility. For many years the road system has received the largest proportion of public
expenditures for transportation.         Although increased funding for alternative modes of
transportation has significant environmental and social benefits, roadway funding will continue
to receive the highest priority. Fort Bragg remains a relatively isolated coastal community and
depends on the road system for the majority of its transportation needs.
A significant amount of the traffic in Fort Bragg is through-traffic (trips that originate or have
destinations outside of the City). The logging industry, tourist travel, and people coming to Fort
Bragg from around the region for shopping, educational, medical, and other services generate
much of the traffic.
It is necessary that funding mechanisms be expanded to ensure effective coordination among
different government jurisdictions. The goals, policies, and programs below complement those
in the Land Use and Public Facilities Elements requiring new development to pay for its fair
share of maintaining the City's infrastructure and service levels.
Goal C-15          Promote balanced funding for transportation.
Policy C-15.1 Development to Pay its Fair Share: Require new development to pay its fair
share of transportation improvements to maintain levels of service and traffic safety in the City.
         Program C-15.1.1: Develop a City-wide Traffic Mitigation Fee Program.
         Program C-15.1.2: Work with the County of Mendocino and MCOG to develop traffic
         mitigation fees for the Fort Bragg Sphere of Influence.            Consider adopting a
         memorandum of understanding between the City of Fort Bragg and the County
         regarding traffic mitigation fees.
         Program C-15.1.3: Work with MCOG to ensure that the standards and requirements
         contained in the joint City and County Traffic Mitigation Program between Fort Bragg
         and the County are incorporated into the Regional Transportation Plan.
         A substantial amount of the traffic passing through Fort Bragg originates in the County.
         New development in the County will increase traffic volumes and congestion of Highway
         One. Establishing County-wide traffic impact fees would provide a way to finance
         needed roadway improvements. Two areas where fair-share improvements or in-lieu
         impact fees are needed is from development that impacts Highway 20 as well as
         Highway One north and south of the City.
5 – Circulation Element                         5 - 20                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program C-15.1.4: Include in the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program mitigation fees for new
         development with primary access to Highway One and Highway 20. Utilize the funds
         collected as a local match to encourage Caltrans to raise the priority of Highway One
         and Highway 20 improvements.
         Program C-15.1.5: Ensure that the City's Pavement Management System obtains
         funding from the Traffic Mitigation Fee Program, as deemed appropriate by the traffic
         impact fee nexus study and applicable State law.
         Program C-15.1.6: Carry out an ongoing inventory of transportation system needs to be
         included in the City's Capital Improvement Plan.
5 – Circulation Element                        5 - 21                              November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                               Noyo River Bridge
5 – Circulation Element            5 - 22        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

6.       COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Community Design Element establishes goals, policies, and programs to preserve and
enhance Fort Bragg’s authentic, small town character. The community is defined in part by its
isolated location on the magnificent coastline of Mendocino County. Its sense of place derives
from its heritage as a regional center for the timber and fishing industries. As the economy
evolves to a more tourism and service-based economy, the community has acknowledged the
importance of maintaining the historic identify of downtown and the integrity of the residential
neighborhoods, while enhancing views and access to the coastline and planning for continued
growth and development.
The Community Design Element is concerned primarily with the visual quality of the City, or
what residents and visitors see. The City’s appearance is essential to the quality of life in Fort
Bragg. Visual quality and amenities go hand-in-hand with long-term economic development
strategies, and strengthen the stability and desirability of the community. To be attractive to
residents, visitors, and businesses, the City must be concerned about its appearance, physical
character, and livability. Existing residential real estate values and the desirability of businesses
that depend on tourism are closely tied to the visual character of the community.
This element contains sections addressing Design Review, the Central Business District,
historic preservation, and public art and spaces.
B.       Citywide Design Guidelines
Most new development in the City is subject to a design review process which is intended to
ensure that it preserves and enhances the aesthetic character of its setting. Compliance with
the Citywide Design Guidelines is the basis for Design Review approval. While the Guidelines
are flexible in order to encourage innovative and creative designs, they do include many
requirements that are qualitative statements rather than quantitative standards. There are many
acceptable ways to meet each of the Guidelines.
C.       Historic Preservation
Much of Fort Bragg was built during the first half of the twentieth century, and the built
environment in the Central Business District and many of the neighborhoods reflects the
architectural heritage of the community. Fort Bragg’s architecturally significant buildings and
structures convey a sense of the community’s history, providing a link to the past and
strengthening the City’s identity. From the Sherwood Pomo who lived in the area for over 5,000
years to the more recent European settlers seeking lumber, fish, and fur, the landscape has
seen remarkable transformations.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-1                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

The City has a Historic Building Inventory that identifies buildings, sites, structures, and objects
of cultural and historical importance. The purpose of the Inventory is to preserve the
community’s heritage by facilitating use of the State of California’s Historic Building Code. To
be included in the Historic Building Inventory, a structure must be at least 40 years old and meet
other criteria related to its design and history. The Inventory is not a comprehensive description
of all historically or culturally significant buildings or sites in the community, and a property is
listed at the owner’s request.
D.       The Central Business District
The Central Business District (CBD) is the heart of the community’s commercial, civic, historic,
and cultural life. It is the area with the largest concentration of historic buildings such as the
Skunk Train Depot, the Guest House Museum, the Old Fort Building, Town Hall, City Hall, and
numerous commercial and residential structures. The combined efforts of government and
property owners will ensure that the attractiveness of the downtown will be preserved and
enhanced. Increasing pedestrian activity, improving street lighting, parking, and amenities, and
ensuring that renovations and new construction maintain the historic scale and character of this
area will foster the continued vitality of the CBD.
                             Old Fort Building, 430 North Franklin Street
E.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goal CD-1          Ensure that new development demonstrates excellence of design and
                   sensitivity to the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Policy CD-1.1 Citywide Design Guidelines: Ensure that new development and remodels are
constructed in a manner consistent with the Citywide Design Guidelines.
6 – Community Design Element                       6-2                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program CD-1.1.1: Periodically update the Citywide Design Guidelines.
         Program CD-1.1.2 Commercial and Multi-Family Development: Continue to complete
         Design Review of commercial and multi-family development to ensure that they fit
         harmoniously with the scale and design of existing buildings and streetscape of the City.
Policy CD-1.2 Discourage Sameness and Repetitive Residential Designs.
Policy CD-1.3 Scenic Views and Resource Areas: Ensure that development does not
adversely impact scenic views and resources as seen from public rights-of-way.
Policy CD-1.4 Property Maintenance and Nuisances: Ensure that properties are well
maintained and nuisances are abated.
         Program CD-1.4.1: Continue to implement and enforce the City’s nuisance abatement
         ordinance, and update it, as necessary, to ensure that property values are maintained
         throughout the City.
         Program CD-1.4.2: Provide Code enforcement for immediate health and safety
         violations in conjunction with the building inspection process.
Policy CD-1.5 Strip Development: Discourage strip development along Main Street.
Strip development is typically characterized by street frontage parking lots serving individual or
strips of stores or restaurants. It differs from central business districts and shopping centers in
that typically there are no provisions for pedestrian access between individual uses, the uses
are only one-store deep, the buildings are arranged linearly rather than clustered, and there is
no design integration among individual uses.
Goal CD-2          Preserve the Central Business District as the commercial, civic, historic,
                   and cultural center of the community.
Policy CD-2.1 Adaptive Reuse: Facilitate the adaptive reuse of existing older buildings in the
Central Business District.
         Program CD-2.1.1: Consider establishing a low-interest revolving loan fund for the
         renovation and upgrading of older buildings in the Central Business District, with
         incentives for the reuse of vacant or underutilized upper floors for housing.
Policy CD-2.2 Pedestrian Activity: Encourage increased pedestrian movement and activity in
the Central Business District.
         Program CD-2.2.1: Continue to support the operation of a Farmer’s Market and a
         multitude of street fairs and promotional activities in the Central Business District.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-3                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                              New Streetscape in Downtown Fort Bragg
Policy CD-2.3 Economic Vitality:        Continue to support the economic diversity and vitality of
downtown businesses.
         Program CD-2.3.1: Consider establishing a Business Improvement District (BID) to
         stimulate increased business activity and revenues by helping to fund public
         improvements and loans and/or grants for private improvements in the Central Business
         District.
         Program CD-2.3.2: Continue to periodically update the City’s Economic Development
         Strategy.
Policy CD-2.4 Parking: Improve the availability of public parking facilities in the Central
Business District and other commercial areas.
         Program CD-2.4.1: Implement shared parking agreements wherever feasible. Utilize,
         as appropriate, development agreements, conditions of approval, easements, and other
         means to assure shared parking arrangements.
         Program CD-2.4.2: Consider establishing a parking assessment district for the Central
         Business District to help finance the acquisition of property for additional off-street
         parking lots.
         Program CD-2.4.3: Periodically update the Central Business District parking in-lieu fee
         program to ensure that it presents a fair and equitable alternative to the provision of on-
         site parking.
Policy CD-2.5 Strengthen the Distinctive Identity of the Central Business District: Strengthen
the distinctive identity and unique sense of place of the Central Business District.
         Program CD-2.5.1: Consider establishing a sign program for the Central Business
         District, with distinctive signs at the entryways to and within the Central Business District.
6 – Community Design Element                      6-4                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program CD-2.5.2: Locate an area where a pocket park or a small plaza could be
         established for public gatherings, street fairs, concerts, and similar outdoor public
         events.
Goal CD-3          Create attractive entryways to the City.
Policy CD-3.1 Entryways: Clearly define the points of entry to the City through the use of
distinctive signs, lighting, and landscaping.
         Program CD-3.1.1: Maintain distinctive signs placed in a landscaped area at the south
         entryway at Highway 20/Highway One and at the north entryway on Highway One at the
         City Limits.
Policy CD-3.2 Gateway Development: Encourage a higher quality of development at the City’s
gateways.
         Program CD-3.2.1: Consider adopting the                following   standards  for  Gateway
         Developments in the Citywide Design Standards:
              •   Define gateway development as development located South of the Noyo Harbor
                  Bridge or North of the Pudding Creek Bridge.
              •   Gateway development should not detract from views to the ocean.
              •   Signage should be modest in scale and should not block the viewshed.
              •   Significant landscaping shall be installed to reinforce the transition from a
                  wilderness environment to an urban environment in gateway development.
                  Landscaping should include trees and drought tolerant plants. Lawns are
                  discouraged.
              •   Site design should include open space around the periphery of the gateway
                  development to reinforce the transitional quality of the area.
              •   Site design should include installation of bike lanes and sidewalks.
              •   Gateway development should model Green Building techniques and materials.
                                   Fort Bragg Gateway Welcome Sign
6 – Community Design Element                    6-5                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal CD-4          Improve the appearance and effectiveness of parking facilities.
Policy CD-4.1 Parking Location: Wherever feasible, locate parking facilities to the rear of the
development so that the building facade is contiguous with the street frontage, and parking
areas are hidden from the street.
Goal CD-5          Use lighting to create a sense of security and to provide cohesion to the
                   physical structure of the community.
Policy CD-5.1 Security: Establish standards to ensure that on-site lighting is adequate to
provide security while not producing excessive glare.
Policy CD-5.2 Lighting Design Review Guidelines: Apply lighting design guidelines in the
Citywide Design Guidelines and the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
Policy CD-5.3: Exterior lighting (except traffic lights, navigational lights, and other similar safety
lighting) shall be minimized, restricted to low intensity fixtures, and shielded so that no light
shines beyond the boundary of the property.
Goal CD-6          Preserve cultural and historic resources.
Policy CD-6.1 Protect and Preserve Buildings and Sites with Historic and Cultural Significance
to the Community:
                 124 Laurel Street: A historically significant structure in the Central Business District
         Program CD-6.1.1:       Encourage property owners to list their buildings in the Historic
         Building Inventory.
         Program CD-6.1.2: Approve building permits using the State Historic Building Code, as
         appropriate.
6 – Community Design Element                        6-6                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program CD-6.1.3: Establish incentives for the preservation and restoration of historic
         buildings and sites.       Consider the following incentives: low interest loans for
         rehabilitation consistent with the original character of historic buildings, tax incentives for
         the preservation of historic structures, including the use of Mills Act preservation
         contracts, and awards or grants for the preservation and protection of historic buildings
         and those with cultural significance.
         Program CD-6.1.4: Consider adopting an “Affirmative Maintenance” ordinance for
         buildings in commercial land use designations.
         Program CD-6.1.5: Establish a procedure whereby property owners may initiate a
         program for preservation of historic structures within their neighborhood.
Policy CD-6.2 Discourage Demolitions: Discourage the demolition of historic buildings.
         Program CD-6.2.1: Require archival research to determine the cultural and historic
         significance of buildings proposed for demolition, paid for by the project proponent.
Policy CD-6.3 Public Awareness: Increase public awareness and appreciation of the City’s
cultural and historic resources.
         Program CD-6.3.1: Work with the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical Society to
         increase public awareness concerning the importance of historic preservation and the
         location of significant and protected structures in the City.
         Program CD-6.3.2: Prepare a public information package describing available programs
         for property owners to restore and rehabilitate historic structures, including information
         on tax incentives.
         Program CD-6.3.3: Support the activities of the Fort Bragg-Mendocino Coast Historical
         Society.
                                  Guest House Museum, Main Street
6 – Community Design Element                     6-7                                      November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal CD-7          Support Public Art and Open Space.
Policy CD-7.1 Public Art: Encourage the provision of murals, fountains, sculptures, and other
forms of public art in public spaces and parks.
         Program CD-7.1.1: Consider adopting a One-Percent for Art Program which would
         require one percent of the cost of construction of new public buildings and facilities to be
         allocated for public art.
         Program CD-7.1.2: Consider implementing an ongoing outdoor sculpture exhibit
         adjacent to City Hall and/or in other locations, with an emphasis on supporting and
         showcasing local artists and reflecting the cultural life of the community.
                                           Mural at Company Store
Policy CD-7.2 Provide Public Open Spaces: Encourage the development of public open
spaces for gatherings and fairs in commercial areas of the City.
         Program CD-7.2.1: Consider the purchase of appropriate locations for public open
         space and the enhancement of existing public spaces to accommodate community
         gatherings.
         Program CD-7.2.2: Encourage the inclusion of public open spaces in new commercial
         development that is sufficiently large to accommodate such uses.
6 – Community Design Element                    6-8                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

7.       SAFETY ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The Safety Element, pursuant to Government Code Section 65302(g), deals with the protection
of the community from unreasonable risks associated with the effects of earthquakes,
landslides, slope instability, subsidence, other geologic hazards, flood, and fire. Maps
identifying earthquake hazards, unstable soil hazards, landslide hazards, and flood zones are
included in this element.
The geology, topography, soils, hydrology, and fire risk of Fort Bragg pose numerous
constraints on future development. This element guides land use planning and policy decisions
in order to achieve an acceptable level of public protection.
B.       Seismic Safety and Geologic Hazards
There are no active earthquake faults in the City. However, the San Andreas fault is located
approximately 9 miles to the west, and the Mayacama fault is 22 miles to the east. Major
earthquakes can occur on these faults. Seismic activities can cause major disruptions of the
City's transportation and emergency services network. Should the Pudding Creek, Noyo River,
and/or Hare Creek Bridges become unusable following a seismic event, people may not be able
to evacuate, and emergency access would be blocked. Potential hazards associated with
earthquakes include: rupture of the ground surface by displacement along faults, shaking of the
ground caused by the passage of seismic waves through the earth, ground failure induced by
shaking, such as landslides, liquefaction and subsidence of unstable ground, and tsunamis.
Non-seismic geologic hazards include the presence of unstable soils on steep slopes and
expansive soils which, in the presence of moisture, will swell and shrink when returning to a dry
condition. Map SF-1: Geologic Hazards identifies areas of potential landslides.
C.       Flooding
Portions of the City have areas subject to potential flooding during severe storms. Because of
the generally flat terrain in the Fort Bragg area, a 100-year storm could exceed the ability of the
City's infrastructure to move runoff water from the City to outfalls into natural drainages and the
ocean. This drainage overload may result in standing water in low areas. High tides and
severe storms may also cause flooding in low-lying areas near creeks and drainages.
Map SF-2: Flood Hazards shows areas within the 100-year floodplain. Within floodplains
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), property owners may be
required to obtain flood insurance as a condition of mortgage approval. The areas subject to
flooding are shown on maps called the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) that are prepared by
FEMA. The City participates in the FEMA flood insurance program, which allows property
owners to obtain subsidized insurance rates.
7 – Safety Element                             7-1                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

FEMA also requires the City to establish development standards for construction in the 100-year
floodplain. Typically the standards developed by a city or county can range from limits on the
intensity of development to requirements to raise the "habitable floor" of the structure to at least
one foot above the 100-year flood peak elevation. Most of the City, over 99% of the land area,
is situated above both the 100-year and the 500-year floodplains. The only areas in the Inland
Area located within the 100 year flood plain are along the Noyo River and Pudding Creek. The
presence of riparian habitat and excessive slopes in this area prohibits development within the
100 year flood plain.
D.       Fire Protection
                                                In 1991, the City of Fort Bragg and the Fort Bragg
                                                Rural Fire District entered into an agreement creating
                                                the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority.         The
                                                Authority has primary fire protection responsibility
                                                within the City limits and/or developed lands within
                                                the District (the District includes all of the City's
                                                Sphere of Influence). In addition to normal fire calls,
                                                the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority has
                                                increasingly been called to assist with accidents,
                                                hazardous material spills, medical calls, and to
                                                provide personnel and equipment for large wildfires
                                                outside of the area. The California Department of
                                                Forestry and Fire Protection (CDFFP) has
                                                responsibility for wildland fires within the Planning
Area. The Draft EIR presents a complete description of staffing, response time, calls for
assistance, and other factors related to the Fire Protection Authority. The primary constraints or
issues involving the Fire Protection Authority concern adequate staffing, adequate equipment,
and adequate fireflow to structures.
E.       Police Protection
                           Within the City, the Fort Bragg Police Department has primary
                           responsibility for police response. The constraint to providing adequate
                           police response involves the need to ensure that the City hires sufficient
                           staff to meet the response needs of both the existing and future
                           population.
F.       Emergency Preparedness
California State Law requires that all cities and counties adopt an Emergency Plan. The
purpose of this plan is to outline policies and procedures with respect to significant events
occurring within or threatening the community which would require the deployment of
extraordinary resources for the protection of life and property.
7 – Safety Element                                 7-2                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cliff Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                      Neptun
                                                                                                                                                                                        p e                 Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                               Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                  Pacific                                   Drive
                                                              S
                                                                   r
                                                                ho                                               Bay ew Av
                                                                                                                        Avenue
                                                                                                                        Ave                                                                    View
                                                                    e lin
                                                                            n.                                                                                                                         Monterey Av .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                         eL
                              Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                               Drive
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                             Ro
                   Coas t                                H ig h w                     ad
          O ld                                                      ay
                                                                                                       Ha
                                                                                                            re                                                                                         Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Harbo                      Avenu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   venu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S t ew
                                                             Highway                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W                                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rn                                                                       Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ce               Elm St
Simpson                                                                                                             Creek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAIN STREE                                     T                                                                                ilr
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oc e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o   ad
                                                                                                                                                                  V ie w Boat Yard r .                 an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oa k                                                                    Pine                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                   D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hazel                                                                                                  Alder                         Laurel                                              Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma ple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut                                                                      Madr one                                                               Redwood                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Franklin             S         t                                                                                   Tr
Lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a in                                                              Manzanita                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Myr                                                                                                                                             St                        St                   St                             St                             St                  St                            St                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fir St                                                                                                                          dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tl e St                        S o ut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airpor t
e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 McPherson S t                                                                                                                                                                                                  i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Woo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bush St                                                                              dd
             Hare Creek Terrac                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                  Haz       dwar                                                                                                                      Walnut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d St                                  S E QU                                                                                  S. Harriso n       Stree t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           elwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Harrison S t                                                                                                                       Winnifred                                                                                                                                                                                                    Roa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                                                   C IR C L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          River D r                                 Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e t                                                                                           S. Whippl e        S tr ee t                                                                                                 Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                                Ha                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k    ee                                                                                                                                                                 Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                               re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Grove S t          S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Street                                              S tr ee t                                                                         Corry          S           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                                       Highway
                                                                                                                                         g   y 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ha r ol d               S tr ee t                                                                         Ha r ol d            St                               Har old Street                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Highway         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              John
                                e
                                ek       C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park St .                                Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hyman
                                                                                                             Babcock Lan                                      e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lincoln St .                                                                                                                                                                      Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Willow       Florence St .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roa d                                                                                                           Airpor t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ota Avenu e                                                                                                                             Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R iv e                                                                  Alley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r                                                                                                            Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v ie w                                                                                                                                                     Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pudding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terrace C t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Petaluma                                A             v                                                                   Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S. Sanderson Wa                    y                                                                             Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lonne                                                                                                                                                 Ave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Map SF-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woodlan d                                                                                      Stree t                                                                                                                                                            Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Johnson
                                                                                               Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ebbin g                           Dana St .
                                                                                                                                        Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln.                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                           re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wa y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                                                                                     s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Taubold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                      Driv e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Johnson   Ln     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Howlan d                                                                                                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acorn Dr .                             Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nurnberger Lan         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lane
          Veronic a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stree t
                                                                         Highway 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Denniso n
                       For Schematic
                            ch       purposes
                                            s only
          Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                             Benson
                                                                                                                                                                             Benso                                                       W i n d in g
                                                                                      Pine Tree Lan       e                                                                                             Camille
          Sears Lan                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lyta Wa                        y                                                                               Mall Lan e
                                                                               Gorstrom Lan                 e                                                                                                                            W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
                                                                                                                                                                                  Hanso n                                        Roa d
                                                                                                                                                                            Lan
                                                                                                                                                                             a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Puddin g
          A nd r e a                                     W ay
          Lahmon Lan                                 e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Monsen Wa y
          Tex-Mon t                                                                                                    Lane        Tozer                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                 Benson                          Lan                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Huckleberry Lan        e                                                                                            Countr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Creek
                                                                                      Olsen Lan e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sourc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ce: Department of Conservation Division
                                                                     S ummers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        All ocean bluffs contain potentially
                                                                                                                                                    Ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Slide   Fault
                                                                                                                                                         ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Slopes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of Mines & Geology Geologic & Geomorphic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Inner Gorge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Gradational Contact                                 Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Coastal Zone Boundary   unstable slopes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Features, Fort Bragg 7.5' Quadrangle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Scale 1Ó = 2300Õ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mendocino County, California, 1983

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Map SF-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Flood Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E R WA                        = Waterway
                                                                                                                                                                           Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ft Bragg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WAT       Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Special Flood Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Areas Inundated by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100-Year Flood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ZONE A                 = No base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rgi n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZONE AE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = Base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZONE V                 = Coastal flood with velocity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             hazard (wave action); no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr                              Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     base flood elevations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       determined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Coastal Zone Boundary
         OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Airpor t                                        Roa                     d
               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Airpor t                                 Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Johnson
                                                                                                                                                       a d
                                                                                                                                                                                              Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Johnson              Ln.
                                                                                                                                                      l Ro
                                                                                                                                               Hau
                                                                                                                                           Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Roa d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pu
  P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                         S t ew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                               ar                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                       t                                   Manzanita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                           k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ln.                                                                                                                                                                                              Creek                               Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Puddin g
                                                                                                                                                                            Elm St
                                                                                                                                                                            Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                                ce                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ro          ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pu                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Countr y                    Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dd                                                                                                    Pudding                                                Creek                                     Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i                                                                                             Zone A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                      Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                          ilr o
                                                                                                                                                                                                ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fir St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           eek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Har old Street
                                                                                                                                                                                     rn
                                                                                                                                                                                te                 Pine                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                            es
                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Laurel                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nurnberger Lan                         Denniso n                                                                                                                                         Huckleberry Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mall Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Redwood                                       Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Monsen Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          McPherson S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Harrison S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Alder                           S           St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S                                                                                                                                                                                          Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Howlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Corry                     Ha r ol d                                                                           Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Terrace C t                                                                            Cour t
                                                                                                           Zone V                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oa k                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Florence St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                           MAIN STREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Acorn Dr .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jewet t                                                                                      Hocke r                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Park St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Stree t         Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Madr one                                    St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lane          Stree t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Willow                        St                                                           Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyta Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ma ple                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S tr ee t                S tr ee t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dana St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S. Sanderson Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Hazel                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Susie Ct .                                                                                                                                         Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Stree t                               S tr ee t                                 S. Corr y                       Ha r ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chestnut                                   St                                                                                                                                                                                                              Chestnut                                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Woodlan d
                   Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ebbin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S. Harriso n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ota Avenu e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S. Whippl e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Grove S t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Driv e          Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Walnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ois
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ri
                                Zone V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R iv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v ie w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          River D r
                                           Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C IR C L                                Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S o ut                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h                             S E QU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zone A
                                                                                                                                                      Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tl e St                   Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Haz
                                                                                                                                                       A                                                                                       Myr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        elwo        d St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             od St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                 Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oyo
                                                                                                                                                             Zone
                                                                                                                                                               n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W i n d in g                           W ay
                                                                                                                                           Avenu
                                                                                                                                            venu
                                                                                                                                             e ue
                                                                            Monterey Av .
                                                                            M                           Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                              AE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Roa d
Zone V             Cliff Wa y
                   Cliff
                                  Avenue           Drive
                                                                                                                                           Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                           Harbo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                          Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Camille
                                                                                                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                                                                                                        V ie w Boat Yard r .
                                           Ocean             View                           Drive
                                  Neptun
                                    p e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hanso n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Benso                                                                    Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a                             e
                                                   Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s                                                                                                                                                                                                              e                                                                ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Babcock Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          g   y 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lan
                                            Bayview
                                                 ew Avenue
                                                    Ave                                                                                                                           Creekk
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                H ar e
                                                                                                                                           re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e                               e
                                                                                                                                          Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pine Tree Lan                   Gorstrom Lan                                                                                              Olsen Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Zone A                                                                                                                                                                                          Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     re
 Zone V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S ummers
                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               ad
                                                                                   n.                                     Ro
                                                                                                                                                             Highway
                                                                                eL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway 20
                                                                    r   e lin                                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                             S   ho
                                                                                                                               H ig h w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hare Creek Terrac
                                                                                            Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                eek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                                                                                                 Source: FIRM, Flood Insurance Rate Map
                                                                                                                           Coas t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lahmon Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Chinquapi n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mendocino County, California.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Veronic a                                          Sears Lan                                        A nd r e a   Tex-Mon t
                                                                                                                                 O ld                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Panel 1015, 1005, 1010. Date: 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                Simpson                                            Lan                      e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scale 1Ó
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ó = 2300Õ (approximate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         For Sche
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ematic purposes only

The City has an adopted Emergency Operations Plan. The purpose of this plan is to ensure
that the City will be prepared to respond effectively in the event of emergencies to save lives,
restore and protect property, repair and restore essential public services, and provide for the
storage and distribution of medical, food, water, shelter sites, and other vital supplies to
maintain the continuity of government.
The Mendocino Emergency Services Authority (MESA), a joint powers organization that
includes the County of Mendocino and the incorporated cities within the county, serves as the
coordinating agency for mutual aid services provided by fire departments, law enforcement
agencies, and emergency medical service providers throughout the county. In addition, MESA
reviews and makes recommendations regarding emergency operation plans for public and
private institutions where pre-planning for emergency procedures is advisable. Coordination of
emergency services and planning guidelines is provided for situations including flood, wildland
fires, structure fires, explosions, hazardous material spills, severe weather, and earthquakes.
G.       Other Hazards
1.       Hazardous Materials
Various types of chemicals and other potentially hazardous materials are used by Fort Bragg
industries and businesses. Other hazardous substances are transported to and through Fort
Bragg. Finally, residents use various hazardous materials for landscaping, cleaning, and other
residential uses. Improper transport, storage, or use of these substances can result in releases
to the environment with consequent impacts on human health and the environment.
The Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority operates a hazmobile that serves the City.
The Fire Protection Authority maintains a hazardous materials unit behind the main fire station.
This unit is used to respond to hazardous waste spills.
2.       Electromagnetic Radiation
The potentially adverse health effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF) from electrical
transmission lines, substations, and appliances have been documented in many studies. It is
not known what levels of exposure to EMFs are safe, however most sources indicate that an
EMF exposure level of less than 1mG is preferred. The approach taken to this potential health
hazard is one of prudent avoidance – establishing reasonable regulation before electrical
transmission lines are built and discouraging sensitive development from encroaching in or near
electrical transmission line rights-of-way.
3.       Air Quality
Emissions of pollutants from motor vehicles, industrial uses, and other sources can be injurious
to people's health. Policies and programs to protect the City's air quality are included in the
Conservation, Open Space, and Parks Element.
7 – Safety Element                            7-3                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

H.       Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goal SF-1          Reduce seismic and geologic-related hazards.
Policy SF-1.1 Minimize Hazards: New development shall: (a) Minimize risks to life and property
in areas of high geologic, flood, and fire hazard; and (b) Assure stability and structural integrity,
and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of
the site or surrounding area or in any way require the construction of protective devices that
would substantially alter natural landforms along bluffs and cliffs.
         Program SF-1.1.1: Continue to comply with the provisions of the State Alquist-Priolo
         Act.
         Program SF-1.1.2: Require professional inspection of foundations and excavations,
         earthwork, and other geotechnical aspects of site development during construction on
         those sites specified in soils, geologic, and geotechnical studies as being prone to
         moderate or high levels of seismic hazard.
         Program SF-1.1.3: Monitor and review existing critical, high priority buildings to ensure
         structural compliance with seismic safety standards.
         Program SF-1.1.4: Provide information to the public on ways to reinforce buildings to
         reduce damage from earthquakes and what to do in the event of an earthquake.
         Program SF-1.1.5: Provide information to educate the public about the availability and
         the benefits of obtaining earthquake insurance.
         Program SF-1.1.6: Encourage residents to consider earthquake insurance for their
         homes and businesses.
         Program SF-1.1.7: Continue to comply with State law regarding reinforcement of
         unreinforced masonry structures.
Policy SF-1.2 Geotechnical report required: Applications for development located in or near an
area subject to geologic hazards, including but not limited to areas of geologic hazard shown on
Map SF-1, shall be required to submit a geologic/soils/geotechnical study that identifies all
potential geologic hazards affecting the proposed project site, all necessary mitigation
measures, and demonstrates that the project site is suitable for the proposed development and
that the development will be safe from geologic hazard. Such study shall be conducted by a
licensed Certified Engineering Geologist (CEG) or Geotechnical Engineer (GE). Refer to Map
SF-1: Geologic Hazards. Refer to the General Plan Glossary for definitions of these terms.
Policy SF-1.3 Alterations to Landforms: Minimize, to the maximum feasible extent, alterations to
cliffs, bluff tops, faces or bases, and other natural land forms. Permit alteration in landforms
only if erosion/runoff is controlled and either there exists no other feasible environmentally
superior alternative or where such alterations re-establish natural landforms and drainage
patterns that have been eliminated by previous development activities.
Policy SF-1.4 Identify Potential Hazards: Identify potential hazards relating to geologic and
soils conditions during review of development applications.
7 – Safety Element                             7-4                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Program SF-1.4.1: Evaluate slopes over 15 percent, unstable land, and areas
         susceptible to liquefaction, settlement, and/or soil expansion for safety hazards prior to
         issuance of any discretionary approvals and require appropriate measures to reduce any
         identified hazards.
         Program SF-1.4.2: Require that development in areas with identified slope stability
         constraints as shown on Map SF-1 or other areas where City staff determines there is
         potential slope stability issues be supervised and certified by a geologist, geotechnical
         engineer, or engineering geologist.
         Program SF-1.4.3: Require repair, stabilization, or avoidance of active or potentially
         active landslides, areas of soil creep, or areas with possible debris flow as a condition of
         project approval.
Policy SF-1.5 Tsunami: Minimize development in areas subject to tsunami.
         Program SF-1.5.1: Utilize map SF-3 to identify areas within the City that are subject to
         tsunamis.
         Program SF-1.5.2: Review development proposals to ensure that new development is
         not in an area subject to tsunami damage or, if such development is allowed, that it is
         designed to withstand tsunami damage.
                                 Map SF-3 Tsunami Inundation Map
7 – Safety Element                              7-5                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-2          Reduce the risks from flooding.
Policy SF-2.1 Flood Hazards: Ensure adequate standards for development in the 100-year
floodplain.
         Program SF-2.1.1: Maintain and update as necessary the zoning and building code
         standards and restrictions for development in identified floodplains and areas subject to
         inundation by a 100-year flood. Use the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
         Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in the review of development proposals.
         Program SF-2.1.2: Ensure all development in flood prone areas meet Federal, State,
         and local requirements.
Policy SF-2.2 Storm Drainage: Continue to maintain effective flood drainage systems and
regulate construction to minimize flood hazards.
         Program SF-2.2.1: Continue to update the City’s Storm Drain Master Plan.
Policy SF-2.3: Require development to pay for the costs of drainage facilities needed to drain
project-generated runoff.
         Program SF-2.3.1 Update and utilize the City’s Drainage Development Impact Fees to
         ensure that development pays for its proportional share of drainage facilities.
Policy SF-2.4: Require, where necessary, the construction of siltation/detention basins to be
incorporated into the design of development projects.
Policy SF-2.5: Require, as determined by City staff, analysis of the cumulative effects of
development upon runoff, discharge into natural watercourses, and increased volumes and
velocities in watercourses and their impacts on downstream properties. Include clear and
comprehensive mitigation measures as part of project approvals to ensure that new
development does not cause downstream flooding of other properties.
Policy SF-2.6: Analyze the impacts of and potential flooding issues resulting from Climate
Change and rising sea levels on proposed projects located within the 100-year Sea-Level Rise
Inundation Area (see Map SF-4).
Goal SF-3          Ensure emergency preparedness.
Policy SF-3.1 Coordinate with County: Continue coordination with the Mendocino County
Emergency Services Authority.
Policy SF-3.2 Maintain an Updated Emergency Plan: Update the City’s Emergency Operations
Plan as needed to take into account the requirements of the California Emergency Management
Systems (SEMS).
         Program SF-3.2.1: Establish an emergency evacuation route system that includes
         standards for street identification, street widths, and grade standards for the evacuation
         route system.
7 – Safety Element                               7-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                     Map SF-4: 100-Year Sea Level Rise Inundation Area
7 – Safety Element                        7-7                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-4          Reduce fire hazards.
Policy SF-4.1 Minimize Fire Risk in New Development: Review all development proposals for
fire risk and require mitigation measures to reduce the probability of fire.
         Program SF-4.1.1: Continue to consult the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority in the
         review of development proposals to identify the projected demand for fire protection
         services and implement measures to maintain adequate fire protection services.
         Mitigation measures may include levying fire protection impact fees for capital facilities, if
         warranted.
Policy SF-4.2 Maintain a High Level of Fire Protection: Work with the Fire Protection Authority
to ensure a continued high level of fire protection.
         Program SF-4.2.1: Increase water main sizes or loop existing water mains where
         necessary to provide adequate flows for fire protection. The standard for water flow for
         fire protection purposes in commercial uses should be a minimum of 1,000 gallons per
         minute for 2 hours with 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.
         Program SF-4.2.2: Develop a plan to provide sprinklers for commercial structures in the
         Central Business District. The plan shall include consideration of City funding to
         construct risers for this area.
         Program SF-4.2.3: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to establish a
         regular schedule for periodic inspections of commercial and industrial premises by the
         Fire Prevention Officer.
Policy SF-4.3 Mutual Aid Agreements: Continue to maintain mutual aid agreements.
         Program SF-4.3.1: Coordinate equipment use and purchase and inter-agency
         communications.
         Program SF-4.3.2: Continue to coordinate with the Incident Command System (ICS) of
         Mendocino County.
Policy SF-4.4 Fire Protection Authority Needs: Anticipate the needs of the Fort Bragg Fire
Protection Authority.
         Program SF-4.4.1: Work with the Fort Bragg Fire Protection Authority to review its long-
         term fire plan on an annual basis to identify needed capital equipment and staff.
Policy SF-4.5 Vegetation Management: Continue to implement an effective                           and
environmentally sound vegetation management and weed abatement program.
         Program SF-4.5.1: Require a landscaping zone system for defensible space around
         buildings in high fire risk areas.
         Program SF-4.5.2: Continue to require weed abatement to reduce the risk of fire. Use
         mechanical rather than chemical methods wherever possible.
7 – Safety Element                             7-8                                    November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-5          Maintain effective police services.
Policy SF-5.1 Demand for Police Services: Review development proposals for their demand
for police services and implement measures to maintain adequate police services.
         Program SF-5.1.1: Consider the impacts on the level of police services of large
         development proposals in the environmental review and planning process.
         If warranted, mitigation measures may be required that may include the levying of police
         impact fees for capital facilities, purchasing equipment, and dedication of land for new
         facilities.
Policy SF-5.2 Shared Resources: Utilize shared resources to improve police response.
         Program SF-5.2.1: Periodically review shared use of resources such as communication
         facilities and joint use of personnel where feasible with the County Sheriff’s Department.
Goal SF-6          Maintain an effective medical emergency response system.
Policy SF-6.1 Emergency Medical Response: Ensure that the Fire Protection Authority and the
Mendocino Coast District Hospital continue to maintain a high level of emergency medical
response.
         Program SF-6.1.1: Periodically review the emergency medical response system.
Policy SF-6.2 Support Maintenance of Mendocino Coast District Hospital’s Emergency
Facilities: Continue to encourage the Mendocino Coast District Hospital to maintain its
emergency department and acute care facilities.
         Program SF-6.2.1: Maintain ongoing communication with Mendocino Coast District
         Hospital to identify actions the City can implement to support the Hospital’s Emergency
         Department.
Goal SF-7          Reduce hazards of transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous
                   materials and wastes.
Policy SF-7.1 Protection from Hazardous Waste and Materials: Provide measures to protect
the public health from the hazards associated with the transportation, storage, and disposal of
hazardous wastes (TSD Facilities).
         Program SF-7.1.1: Continue to ensure that use, transportation, and disposal of
         hazardous materials are in accordance with the local, State, and Federal safety
         standards.
         Implementation of this program is the responsibility of the Fire Protection Authority.
         Program SF-7.1.2: Continue to support and participate in Mendocino County’s
         Hazardous Materials Business Plan which requires all businesses using hazardous
         materials to list the types, quantities, and locations of hazardous materials with the
         County’s Department of Environmental Health.
7 – Safety Element                              7-9                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code requires businesses with more
         than 50 gallons, 500 pounds or 200 cubic feet of hazardous materials to maintain a
         current Hazardous Materials Business Plan (HMBP). The law provides for the collection
         of fees to fund the program.
         Program SF-7.1.3: Require, as a condition of City approvals of non-residential projects,
         that the Fire Protection Authority be notified of all hazardous substances that are
         transported, stored, treated, or could be released accidentally into the environment.
         Program SF-7.1.4: Require that applications for discretionary development projects that
         will generate hazardous waste or utilize hazardous materials include detailed information
         on hazardous waste reduction, recycling, transportation, and storage, and prepare a
         plan for emergency response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material.
         Program SF-7.1.5: Revise the Zoning Ordinance to require secondary containment
         facilities and a buffer zone adequate to protect public health and safety on properties
         with hazardous materials storage and/or processing activities.
Policy SF-7.2 Support Environmental Review of Hazardous Waste Transportation, Storage and
Disposal Facilities: Support a thorough environmental review for Hazardous Waste
Transportation, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities, including waste to energy projects,
proposed in the Fort Bragg area.
         Program SF-7.2.1: Require that the environmental review of proposed Hazardous
         Waste TSD facilities shall, at a minimum, contain the following analysis and information:
                  a)      A worst-case generic description, estimating the number, type, scale,
                          scope, location, and operating characteristics of proposed TSD
                          Facility(ies) based on the projected volumes and types of hazardous
                          waste. Data from existing facilities regarding the probability of accidents,
                          spills, and explosions should be documented and included;
                  b)      An assessment of risk resulting from the accidental release, fire, and
                          explosion of hazardous waste. This assessment should take into account
                          all phases of operation including transport, storage, and treatment. The
                          assessment of risk should include the probability of occurrence and
                          magnitude of impact;
                  c)      Quantify estimates of air emissions, by applying emissions rates of
                          existing facilities to the future volumes of hazardous waste and identifying
                          emissions for incinerator facilities under worst case circumstances;
                  d)      An assessment of non-incineration alternatives for hazardous waste
                          treatment such as chemical dechlorination for the detoxification of PCBs,
                          dioxins, solvents, and pesticides; photolysis; and biological treatment;
                  e)      Review of the operating characteristics of proposed TSD facilities, taking
                          into account maintenance and operating procedures, emissions
                          monitoring, and safety devices to assure the ongoing enforceability of the
                          mitigating measures that are required.
7 – Safety Element                                  7 - 10                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Goal SF-8          Minimize community exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs).
Policy SF-8.1 Consider EMFs in Land Use Decisions: Consider information regarding EMF
radiation from existing and new electrical transmission lines and substations in making land use
decisions.
         Program SF-8.1.1: Request that PG&E or other electrical energy distributors provide
         information on renovation to existing and proposed new electrical transmission lines and
         substations. Request that information on the EMF radiation levels for proposed new
         facilities be provided.
         Program SF-8.1.2: Request that PG&E or any other electrical energy distributor provide
         a full and public disclosure of existing electrical transmission lines and existing and
         proposed facilities with their anticipated EMF levels within the Fort Bragg Planning Area.
         Program SF-8.1.3: Require that all new electrical transmission projects and facilities
         have an EMF mitigation plan as part of the project’s environmental review.
Policy SF-8.2 Siting of Schools and Other Sensitive Uses: Minimize and reduce EMF radiation
levels near sensitive uses such as schools, hospitals, and playgrounds.
         Program SF-8.2.1: Work with the School District to continue enforcement of California
         State Board of Education regulations requiring that new schools be sited at least 100
         feet from the edge of the right-of-way of 100-110 kV lines; 150 feet from 220-230 kV
         lines; and 250 feet away from 345 kV lines.
7 – Safety Element                               7 - 11                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

7 – Safety Element             7 - 12 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

8.       NOISE ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
The purpose of the Noise Element is to protect the health and welfare of the community by promoting
development which is compatible with established noise standards. This element has been prepared
in conformance with Government Code Section 65302(f) and the guidelines adopted by the State
Office of Noise Control, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 46050.1. Existing and future
noise problems in the Planning Area are identified. Policies and implementation programs are
provided to reduce the community's exposure to excessive noise levels. Accomplishing this task
requires an evaluation of the noise generation from sources such as roads, highways, and stationary
sources such as industrial facilities.
B.       Noise Characteristics
Noise is defined as unwanted sound. Airborne sound is a rapid fluctuation of air pressure above and
below atmospheric pressure. Sound levels are usually measured and expressed in decibels (dB) with
0 dB corresponding roughly to the threshold of hearing. Decibels and other technical terms are
defined in Table N-1.
Most of the sounds which we hear in the environment do not consist of a single frequency, but rather
a broad band of frequencies, with each frequency differing in sound level. The intensities of each
frequency add together to generate a sound. The method commonly used to quantify environmental
sounds consists of evaluating all of the frequencies of a sound in accordance with a weighting that
reflects the fact that human hearing is less sensitive at low frequencies and extreme high frequencies
than in the mid-range frequency. This method is called weighting, and the decibel level so measured
is called the A-weighted sound level (dBA). In practice, the level of a sound source is conveniently
measured using a sound level meter that includes an electrical filter corresponding to the A-weighting
curve.
Although the A-weighted noise level may adequately indicate the level of environmental noise at any
instant in time, community noise levels vary continuously. Most environmental noise includes a
conglomeration of noise from distant sources which create a relatively steady background noise,
often called ambient noise, in which no particular source is identifiable. To describe the time-varying
character of environmental noise, the statistical noise descriptors, L10, L50, and L90, are commonly
used. They are the A-weighted noise levels equaled or exceeded during 10 percent, 50 percent, and
90 percent of a stated time period. A single number descriptor called the Leq is now also widely used.
The Leq is the average A-weighted noise level during a stated period of time.
In determining the daily level of environmental noise, it is important to account for the difference in
response of people to daytime and nighttime noises. During the nighttime, exterior background
noises are generally lower than the daytime levels. However, most household noise also decreases
at night and exterior noise becomes very noticeable. Further, sensitivity to noise increases when
people sleep at night. To account for human sensitivity to nighttime noise levels, a descriptor, the Ldn
(day/night average sound level) was developed. The Ldn divides the 24-hour day into the daytime of
8 – Noise Element                                     8-1                                 November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and the nighttime of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM. The nighttime noise level is
weighted 10 dB higher than the daytime noise level.
                                                  TABLE N-1
                                   DEFINITION OF ACOUSTICAL TERMS
Term                           Definition
Decibel (dB)                   A unit describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the
                               logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
                               measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
                               micronewtons per square meter).
Frequency (Hz)                 The number of complete pressure fluctuations per second above and
                               below the atmospheric pressure.
A-Weighed Sound Level          The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level
(dBA)                          meter using the A-weighting filter network. The A-weighting filter de-
                               emphasizes the very low and very high frequency components of the
                               sound in a manner similar to the frequency response of the human ear
                               and correlates well with subjective reactions to noise.
L01, L10, L50, L90             The A-weighted noise levels that are exceeded by 1%, 10%, 50% and
                               90% of the time during the measurement period.
Equivalent Noise Level         The average A-weighted noise level during the measurement period.
(Leq)
Ldn                            The average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained
                               after addition of 10 decibels to levels measured in the night between
                               10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Lmax, Lmin                     The maximum and minimum A-weighted noise level during the
                               measurement period.
Ambient Noise Level            The composite of noise from all sources near and far. The normal or
                               existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
Intrusive                      That noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at
                               a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon
                               its amplitude, duration, frequency, and time of occurrence and tonal or
                               informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
8 – Noise Element                                         8-2                                     November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

C.       The Existing and Future Noise Environment
Fort Bragg experiences noise from autos and trucks on Highway One, Highway 20, local arterials, the
railroad, and several industrial uses, such as the Baxman aggregate processing facility. Year 2002
and 2022 traffic noise ( Ldn) contour distances from major thoroughfares are shown on Tables N-2
and N-3.
                                                   TABLE N-2
                                2002 TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                   Noise Level
                                                    50 ft. from         Contour Distances
                                                   Centerline        (in feet from Centerline)
Roadway                                               (Ldn)     70 Ldn          65 Ldn     60 Ldn
 Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                72         65             140        305
 Hwy One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)               73         75             165        350
 Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                70         50             110        240
 Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                    69         45             100        215
 Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                    69         45              95        205
 Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                 69         40              90        190
 Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                     68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                        68         40              80        175
 Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)               68         35              75        160
 Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                  60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                61         ---             ---        55
 Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                60         ---             ---        50
 Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)             60         ---             ---        50
 Hwy. (at Hwy. One)                                    62         ---             40         70
 Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                   60         ---             ---        50
 Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                        59         ---             ---        45
 Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                    58         ---             ---        35
 Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                            61         ---        ---             60
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
8 – Noise Element                                           8-3                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                        TABLE N-3
                               2022 TRAFFIC NOISE (Ldn) CONTOUR DISTANCES
                                                          Noise Level
                                                           50 ft. from    Contour Distances
                                                          Centerline   (in feet from Centerline)
      Roadway                                                 (Ldn)     70 Ldn 65 Ldn 60 Ldn
       Hwy. One (Ocean View Drive to Hwy. 20)                   73       80        175     380
       Hwy. One (Cypress St. to Ocean View Dr.)                 74     100         205     450
       Hwy. One (Chestnut St. to Cypress St.)                   71       55        125     270
       Hwy. One (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                       70       50        115     245
       Hwy. One (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                       70       50        105     225
       Hwy. One (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                    69       45         90     205
       Hwy. One (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                        69       45         90     200
       Hwy. One (Elm St. to Pine St.)                           69       45         95     195
       Hwy. One (Pudding Creek Rd. to Elm St.)                  69       45         95     195
       Franklin St. (South of Chestnut St.)                     61       ---        ---      55
       Franklin St. (Oak St. to Chestnut St.)                   62       ---        ---      60
       Franklin St. (Redwood Ave. to Oak St.)                   60       ---        ---      55
       Franklin St. (Laurel St. to Redwood Ave.)                60       ---        ---      50
       Franklin St. (Pine St. to Laurel St.)                    61       ---        ---      55
       Hwy. 20 (at Hwy. One)                                    63       ---        40       85
       Ocean View Drive (East of Hwy. One)                      61       ---        ---      55
       Ocean View Drive (West of Hwy. One)                      61       ---        ---      55
       Chestnut St.(East of Hwy. One)                           60       ---        ---      50
       Chestnut St.(East of Franklin St.)                       61       ---        ---      60
       Oak St. (East of Hwy. One)                               61       ---        ---      60
       Oak St. (East of Franklin St.)                           60       ---        ---      50
       Redwood Ave. (West of Hwy. One)                          64       ---        45     100
       Laurel St. (West of Hwy. One)                            61       ---        ---      55
       Elm St. (West of Hwy. One)                               64       ---        45       95
      Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., February, 2002
Noise from traffic on local roadways, distant industrial activities, and neighborhood activities are the
most significant sources of community noise in the majority of the City.
Noise from industrial uses was audible during the evening and nighttime hours at most noise sites
that were monitored. Background noise levels in the areas of Fort Bragg which generally contain
noise sensitive land uses would be considered to be moderately quiet and compatible with the City’s
noise exposure standards.
The principal areas that are affected by excessive noise are along both sides on Highway One
throughout the City (ranging from 160-350 feet on either side of the highway) and along Franklin
Street and several east-west arterials (ranging from 35-70 feet from the road edge). See the 2002
Draft EIR for a more detailed discussion of the existing and projected noise environment in the City.
8 – Noise Element                                             8-4                                November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

   D.         Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards
   The standards listed in Table N-4 shall be used to evaluate the compatibility between land uses and
   future noise in Fort Bragg.
                                                         TABLE N-4
                                  NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
                                                               Exterior Noise Exposure
                                                                         Ldn dB
 Land Use Category                                    55      60        65      70        75     80
 Residential, Hotels and Motels
 Outdoor Sports and Recreation,
 Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds
 "Noise Sensitive" - Schools, Libraries,
 Museums, Hospitals, Personal Care,
 Meeting Halls, Churches
 Office Buildings, Business
 Commercial and Professional
 Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
 Amphitheaters
             Normally Acceptable
             Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved
             are of normal, conventional construction, without any special insulation requirements.
             Conditionally Acceptable
             Specified land use may be permitted only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
             requirements and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
             Unacceptable
             New construction or development should generally not be undertaken because mitigation
             is usually not feasible to comply with noise element policies.
Source: Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc., March, 2002
   8 – Noise Element                                            8-5                                    November 2012
   Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

E.       Explanation of Table N-4: Land Use Compatibility for Community
Noise
1.       Noise Source Characteristics
Table N-4 shows the ranges of exterior noise exposure which are considered acceptable,
conditionally acceptable, or unacceptable for the specified land use. Table N-4 is used to determine
whether the noise exposure requires mitigation in order to achieve a compatible noise environment.
Where the noise exposure is acceptable for the intended land use, new development may occur
without requiring an evaluation of the noise environment.
Where the noise exposure would be conditionally acceptable, a specified land use may be permitted
only after a detailed analysis is made of the noise impacts, and the needed noise insulation features
are included in the design to protect people from exposure to excessive noise. Such noise insulation
features may include measures to protect noise sensitive outdoor activity areas (e.g. at residences,
schools, or parks) or may include building sound insulation treatments such as sound-rated windows
to protect interior spaces in residences, schools, hospitals, or other buildings which are sensitive to
noise. Noise reduction measures should be focused on reducing noise where it would have an
adverse effect for the specified land use, outdoors and/or indoors depending upon the land use.
For areas where the existing noise environment is unacceptable, new development should generally
not be undertaken, because there may not be sufficient noise reduction measures to bring the
development into compliance with the noise policies of this Element.
Sensitive receptors are land uses which are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
homes, schools, and libraries.
2.       Acceptable Noise Environments
Another consideration, which in some communities is an overriding factor, is the desire for an
acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, more restrictive standards for land use
compatibility, typically below the maximum considered normally acceptable for that land use category,
may be appropriate.
The following are the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards for noise exposure:
1.       The standard for maximum outdoor noise level permitted in residential areas is an Ldn of 60
         dB. This standard is applied where outdoor use is a major consideration, such as backyards
         in single-family housing developments and recreation areas in multi-family developments.
         This standard should not be applied to outdoor areas such as small decks and balconies
         typically associated with multi-family residential developments, which can have a higher
         exposure of 65 dB Ldn.
2.       The maximum acceptable interior noise level in new multi-family residential development
         required by the State of California Noise Insulation Standards is an Ldn of 45 dB. This
         standard is also applied to single-family and all other residential development.
3.       For projects occurring within noise environments that are conditionally acceptable, studies
         must be conducted to show how noise levels will be reduced in the areas that people use
         (which is generally the interior of offices, stores, industrial buildings, auditoriums, etc.). For
8 – Noise Element                                       8-6                                   November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Map N-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sensitive Noise Receptors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SENSITIVE NOISE RECEPTORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.. Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.  County Public Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ft Bragg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.  Guest House Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4.  Town Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.  City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.  Cotton Auditorium & Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bragg Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7. Senior Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8. Mendocino County Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9. Veterans Building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10. Lions Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Vir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11. Eagles Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12. Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Burrows Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13. Convalescent Home
       OC E A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14. Noyo High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Airpor t                                        Roa                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15. Redwood School
             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Airpor t                                 Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hemlock L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16. Dana Gray School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17. Fort Bragg High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18. County Courthouse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19. Mobile Home Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20.College of the Redwoods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Johnson
                                                                                                                                                   a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Johnson              Ln.
                                                                                                                                                  l Ro
                                                                                                                                           Hau                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                       Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Roa d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coastal Zone Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i ng C r e         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BaldHill R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pu
P AC I F I C
                                                                                                                                                     S t ew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Petaluma
                                                                                                                                                           ar                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           John                   Hyman
                                                                                                                                                                   t                                   Manzanita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                                                                       St                                                                                                                                                                           k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ln.                                                                                                                                                                                              Creek                              Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Forste r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Puddin g
                                                                                                                                                                        Elm St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ro          ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Countr y                   Road
                                                                                                                                                                        Spruce
                                                                                                                                                                            ce                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pudding                                                Creek                                     Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Winnifred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a in         Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 un
                                                                                                                                                               2                  Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                      ilr o
                                                                                                                                                                                            ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fir St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Har old Street
                                                                                                                                                                                 rn
                                                                                                                                                                            te                 Pine                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7                                 Alger S t
                                                                                                                                                                        es
                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                      4 59 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                               Laurel                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nurnberger Lan                                                                                                                                                                           Huckleberry Lan
                                                                                                                                                                   3                         Redwood                                       Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Denniso n                                           Mall Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                         10 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Monsen Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      McPherson S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Morrow S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Whipple S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Harrison S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oa k
                                                                                                                                                                                               Alder                           S           St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S                                                                                                                                                                                          Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Howlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Franklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Halsey
                                                                                                                                                                                       T                                                                                                                                                                             Corry                     Ha r ol d                                                                           Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Terrace C t                                                                            Cour t
                                                                                                                                                                                                Oa k                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                       MAIN STREE
                                                                                                                                                                                               Madr one                                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                 Park St .                                Florence St .                                      Li vingsto n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jewet t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stree t         Taubold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Acorn Dr .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S wingTre e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hocke r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stree t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sherwood R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Willow                        St                                                           Azalea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lyta Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma ple                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Alley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S tr ee t                S tr ee t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Penitenti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dana St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S. Sanderson Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                               Hazel                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                Chestnut                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stree t                               S tr ee t                                 S. Corr y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Susie Ct .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ha r ol d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15                        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wall St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16 Woodlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lincoln St .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ebbin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S. Harriso n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ota Avenu e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S. Whippl e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Olsen L n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Grove S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Driv e          Wa y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Walnut                                                                                        Street                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Espe y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DuBo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ois                                                                                                                                          R iv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v ie w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cypress Street
                                                                                                                                                                                      18                                                                                                                              River D r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C IR C L                                Kemppe Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S o ut                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h                             S E QU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .                                                            Stre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tl e St                   Woo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dwar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Myr                   Haz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Granny's Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    elwo        d St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         od St        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                            19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W i n d in g                           W ay
                                                                                                                                       Avenu
                                                                                                                                        venu
                                                                                                                                         e ue
                                                                        Monterey Av .
                                                                        M                           Del Ma r Driv e
                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Roa d
                 Cliff Wa y
                              Avenue           Drive
                                                                                                                                       Haa bo r
                                                                                                                                       Harbo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thomas Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                      Oc e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Camille
                                                                                                                                                                                                    an
                                                                                                                                                                                                    V ie w Boat Yard r .
                                       Ocean             View                           Drive
                              Neptun
                                p e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Driv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hanso n
                                                                                        20                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Benso                                                                    Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a                             e
                                               Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s                                                                                                                                                                                                              e                                                              ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Babcock Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g   y 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tozer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lan
                                        Bayview Avenue
                                                Ave                                                                                                                           Creekk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lane
                                                                                                                                       re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e                               e
                                                                                                                                      Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pine Tree Lan                   Gorstrom Lan                                                                                             Olsen Lan e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Noy o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S ummers
                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                           ad
                                                                               n.                                     Ro
                                                                                                                                                         Highway
                                                                            eL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highway 20
                                                                r   e lin                                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                             ho
                                                                                                                           H ig h w
                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hare Creek Terrac
                                                                                        Cy pres s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                       Coas t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lahmon Lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Veronic a                 Chinquapi n              Sears Lan                                        A nd r e a
                                                                                                                             O ld                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tex-Mon t
                                                                                                                                                                            Simpson                                            Lan                      e
         non-residential projects, no maximum outdoor standard is established other than the exterior
         environment cannot exceed the lower limit of the unacceptable range, since noise mitigation is
         not feasible at these noise exposure levels. Building construction will incorporate noise
         reduction measures recommended by an acoustic engineer to reduce interior noise levels to
         an acceptable level. For non-residential projects, the interior noise level is what is important.
         The conditionally acceptable noise levels indicate that interior noise levels can be reduced to
         an acceptable level given noise reduction implementation. Non-residential projects may be
         allowed even if the exterior noise environment is within the conditionally acceptable range. No
         standards are established for industrial uses since the exterior noise environment is not
         important for such uses.
4        Sensitive receptors are land uses that are sensitive to noise such as hospitals, convalescent
         homes, schools, and libraries. Exterior noise levels for these types of uses where the uses
         include outdoor use locations (e.g., such as schools) should not exceed those allowed as
         normally acceptable in Table N-4. For those uses where the use areas are within buildings
         (e.g., hospitals, halls, and churches), interior noise levels should be reduced as described
         under No. 3 above, but projects can be permitted with exterior noise levels within the
         conditionally acceptable range. Map N-1: Noise Sensitive Receptors shows the location of
         some noise sensitive uses in the City.
5.       These standards are not intended to be applied reciprocally. In other words, if an area is
         currently below the desired noise standard, a project that causes an increase in noise up to
         the maximum should not necessarily be permitted. The impact of a proposed project on
         existing land use should be evaluated in terms of the potential for adverse community
         response, based on existing community noise levels, regardless of the compatibility
         standards.
6.       The Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards should be reviewed in relation to the
         specific source of noise. These standards are based on measurement systems which
         average noise over a 24-hour period and do not take into account single-event noise sources.
         Different noise sources yielding the same composite noise exposure do not necessarily create
         the same environment. Additional standards may be applied on a case-by-case basis where
         supported by acoustical analysis to assess the effects of single-event noise sources.
F.       Goals, Polices and Programs
Goal N-1           Protect City residents from harmful and annoying effects of exposure to
                   excessive noise.
Policy N-1.1 General Noise Levels: The maximum allowable noise levels are established in this
Element.
Policy N-1.2 Reduce Noise Impacts: Avoid or reduce noise impacts first through site planning and
project design. Barriers and structural changes may be used as mitigation techniques only when
planning and design prove insufficient.
         Program N-1.2.1: Adopt and use a Noise Ordinance in environmental review of all
         development proposals and incorporate project design measures to reduce noise to allowable
         limits. The Noise Ordinance should include the noise standards described in this Element as
         well as consider other noise concerns, including but not limited to, allowable hours for grading
         and construction, allowable noise levels for electronic sound devices (e.g., radios, stereos,
8 – Noise Element                                      8-7                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

         etc.), time restrictions on the use of mechanical devices (e.g., leafblowers and other power
         equipment), and requirements for the placement of fixed equipment (e.g., air conditioners and
         condensers).
         Program N-1.2.2: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for projects
         that would cause a “substantial increase” in noise as defined by the following criteria or would
         generate unusual noise which could cause significant adverse community response:
                  a)      cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 3 dB or more;
                  b)      cause the Ldn in existing residential areas to increase by 2 dB or more if the
                          Ldn would exceed 70 dB; or
                  c)      cause the Ldn resulting exclusively from project-generated traffic to exceed an
                          Ldn of 60 dB at any existing residence.
         Program N-1.2.3: Consider requiring an acoustical study and mitigation measures for
         proposed projects that City staff finds may generate unusual noise that would cause
         significant adverse community response, such as, but not limited to, night-time, single-event
         noise or recurring impulse noise.
Policy N-1.3 Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards: Ensure that all new noise sensitive
development proposals be reviewed with respect to Table N-4: Noise and Land Use Compatibility
Standards. Noise exposure shall be determined through actual on-site noise measurements.
Policy N-1.4 Residential and Noise Sensitive Land Use Standards: Require a standard of 45 Ldn for
indoor noise level for all new residential development including hotels and motels, and a standard of
60 Ldn for outdoor noise at residences. These limits shall be reduced by 5 dB for senior housing and
residential care facilities.
         Program N-1.4.1: Use the standards in Policy N-1.2.2 to determine the need for noise studies
         and require new developments to provide noise attenuation features as a condition of
         approving new projects.
         Program N-1.4.2: Require an acoustical study for all new residential projects with a future Ldn
         noise exposure of 60 Ldn or greater. The study shall describe how the project will comply with
         the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Standards. The studies shall also satisfy the
         requirements set forth in Title 24, part 2 of the California Code of Regulations, Noise
         Insulation Standards, for multi-family attached dwellings, hotels, motels, etc. regulated by Title
         24.
Policy N-1.5 Non-Transportation Noise Generation: For new non-transportation noise generators,
Table N-5 describes the maximum noise level at the nearest residential property line:
8 – Noise Element                                        8-8                                  November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                                         TABLE N-5
   NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NEW PROJECTS AFFECTED BY OR INCLUDING
                                      NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                  Noise Level                         Daytime                             Nighttime
                   Descriptor                  (7 A.M. to 10 P.M.)                  (10 P.M. to 7 A.M.)
       Hourly Leq dB                                     55                                    45
       Maximum level, dB                                 75                                    65
       Note: These noise levels apply to the residential property line nearest the project. Each of the noise
              levels shall be lowered by five dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or
              music, or for recurring impulsive noises. These noise level standards do not apply to residential
              units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings).
Policy N-1.6 Mitigate Noise Impacts: Mitigate noise impacts to the maximum feasible extent.
         Program N-1.6.1: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures, when warranted,
         for new developments and roadway improvements which affect noise sensitive uses such as
         residences, schools, hospitals, libraries, and convalescent homes.
         Program N-1.6.2: Require acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for any project
         that would potentially generate non-transportation noise levels in a residential area such that
         noise levels would exceed the planning standards set forth in Program N-1.2.2 and/or Table
         N-5.
         Program N-1.6.3: Work with Caltrans to ensure that adequate noise studies are prepared and
         alternative noise mitigation measures are considered when State and Federal funds are
         available.
         Program N-1.6.4: Consider and carefully evaluate the noise impacts of all street, highway, and
         other transportation projects.
         Program N-1.6.5: Recommend acoustical studies and noise reduction measures for all
         projects that would be exposed to noise levels in excess of those deemed normally
         acceptable, as defined in Table N-4.
         Program N-1.6.6: Consider developing an ordinance that regulates the allowable hours of
         construction activities.
         Program N-1.6.7: Consider requiring post-construction testing and sign-off by an acoustical
         engineer for residential projects exposed to an Ldn in excess of 65 dB to ensure compliance
         with applicable exterior and interior standards in the Noise and Land Use Compatibility
         Standards.
         Program N-1.6.8: Restrict truck traffic to designated routes.
8 – Noise Element                                                  8-9                                         November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

9.       SUSTAINABILITY ELEMENT
A.       Purpose
This Sustainability Element’s goals, policies, and programs facilitate environmental, social, and
economic well-being for all Fort Bragg residents by encouraging green building, renewable
energy, energy conservation, water conservation, recycling and waste reduction in all new
construction and remodel projects. Element 4 Conservation and Open Space and Element 5
Circulation of this General Plan also address components of sustainability, including: stormwater
management, habitat protection, parks, and bicycle facilities.
Green Building. Green Building consists of utilizing building siting, design, construction
techniques, and building materials to reduce building operating costs and the negative impacts of
buildings on the environment and its occupants. Green building techniques are applied to the
treatment of the building site, to improve water and energy efficiency, in the selection of materials
and resources, and to improve indoor environmental quality. Construction practices, building
technologies, and best practices are likely to evolve, and new practices and technologies are
likely to be developed during the life of the General Plan. Consequently, the General Plan
focuses on performance-based requirements to achieve sustainability by using the US Green
Building Council’s LEED® (Leadership in Environment and Energy Design) rating system.
Energy Conservation. The City has adopted a green house gas (GHG) reduction goal of 20%
by 2020. The City has also prepared a Climate Action Plan to help the City realize this goal. As
nearly 40% percent of the nation's energy is consumed by homes and commercial buildings, the
policies in this General Plan are needed to reach the City’s GHG reduction goal. In addition, by
making buildings more energy efficient, building owners will save on long term operating costs.
Water Conservation. The City of Fort Bragg depends on surface water flows to serve the water
demands of city residents and businesses. Surface flows are highly dependent on annual
weather patterns, and weather patterns are likely to change due to Climate Change. Thus water
use minimization in all development is necessary to ensure that the City can continue to serve
existing and new development. The Sustainability Element uses a multi-pronged approach to
minimize consumption of potable water, including: minimization of water demand indoors and
out; use of potable water for potable purposes; and encouraging reuse of storm water and grey
water on-site for landscaping irrigation. Reducing water also saves energy, since water pumping
and wastewater treatment require significant amounts of energy.
Waste Reduction. Waste reduction is as important as recycling, in that it saves natural
resources, energy, disposal space and costs, and reduces pollution risks. Additionally, the
waste leaving the City of Fort Bragg is hauled long distances and contributes to the City’s GHG
production.
9 - Sustainability Element             9-1                                             November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

B.       Goals, Policies and Programs
Green Building
Goal S-1:           Maximize the use of green building practices and materials in new and
                    existing development.
Policy S-1.1 Building Reuse: Where existing buildings in the Plan Area are structurally sound and
reuse is economically feasible, reuse of buildings in whole or part is preferred.
Policy S-1.2 Encourage Green Techniques: All green building techniques are encouraged, with
preference given to techniques that address local issues, such as use of locally produced natural
materials, water and energy conservation measures, and techniques that respond appropriately
to Fort Bragg’s cool, rainy environment, such as passive solar design and low impact
development (LID) strategies.
         Program S-1.2.1: Require LEED Certification for large projects. Modify the Inland Land
         Use and Development Code to require LEED Certification or equivalent for all new
         development projects of more than 5,000 square feet and LEED-NC silver rating or
         equivalent for all projects of more than 10,000 square feet.
         Program S-1.2.2: Provide incentives for adherence to LEED for smaller residential and
         commercial projects. Review and revise the Inland Land Use and Development Code to
         incorporate planning incentives for development projects that adhere to the relevant
         USGBC LEED standards or Build It Green’s GreenPoint Rated standard for commercial
         and residential development respectively.
         Program S-1.2.3: Promote the use of building materials that maintain healthy indoor air
         quality in an effort to reduce irritation and exposure to toxins and allergens for building
         occupants. Promote the use of building materials, furniture and paint that maintain
         healthy indoor air quality, and discourage the use of materials that degrade indoor air
         quality.
         Program S-1.2.4: Revise the Citywide Design Guidelines to make green building
         practices an important criterion in the development review process.
         Program S-1.2.5: Train City staff with responsibilities in construction project management
         and development permit review, in green building techniques and materials.
         Program S-1.2.6: Foster awareness in Fort Bragg’s business and residential communities
         of the economic and environmental benefits of green building practices.
         Program S-1.2.7: Provide green building technical assistance and referrals as part of
         Planning Counter services.
Policy S-1.3 Municipal Green Building: All new construction of City-owned buildings shall
incorporate sufficient green building methods and techniques to qualify for the equivalent of
9 - Sustainability Element               9-2                                            November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

LEEDTM Certified rating. Renovation of City-owned buildings shall seek to incorporate LEEDTM
pre-requisites and credits, where feasible.
Energy
Goal S-2             Encourage development that minimizes the demand for non-renewable
                     energy and reduces Green House Gas (GHG) emissions.
Policy S-2.1 Passive Solar Design Strategies: All building and site design shall use passive solar
design strategies for space heating and lighting to reduce energy demand to the extent feasible.
Policy S-2.2 Alternative Energy: Encourage the development and use of alternative sources of
energy such as wind, solar, and biomass to meet Fort Bragg's energy needs.
       Program S-2.2.1: Revise the City’s Zoning Ordinance to allow small wind, solar and
       geothermal systems for on-site use as a permitted use in all zones within the City.
Policy S-2.3: Reduce Energy Demand with a goal of Net Zero Energy in New Construction. All
new construction shall minimize energy use. Net zero buildings and homes are encouraged.
These homes produce as much energy (through conservation, photovoltaic panels, solar hot
water, wind, and geothermal) as they consume and have a net zero impact on green house gas
production.
         Program S-2.3.1: Continue to adopt the California Green Building Code with a goal of
         achieving net zero energy performance in new residential buildings by 2020.
         Program S-2.3.2: Review the California Green Building Code in 2018 and if Council
         determines that the California Green Building Code will not achieve net zero energy
         performance in new residential construction by 2018, consider adopting net zero energy
         regulations for residential construction in Fort Bragg by 2020.
         Program S-2.3.3: Develop educational and financing programs that help businesses and
         homeowners improve the energy efficiency of existing and new buildings.
Policy S-2.4: Require passive solar design in new construction, where feasible, as part of
Design Review.
         Program S-2.4.1: Modify the Citywide Design Guidelines to include guidelines that require
         passive solar design for residential and commercial new construction projects.
Policy S-2.5 Use of Local and Renewable Energy: Buildings and infrastructure that create
and/or use locally and renewably generated energy are encouraged. Photovoltaic and wind
energy systems are encouraged. The installation of solar panels or other clean energy power
generation sources over parking areas is preferred.
Policy S-2.6 Climate Action Plan: Prepare and periodically update the City’s greenhouse gas
inventory and Climate Action Plan in order to achieve the City’s GHG emission reduction targets.
9 - Sustainability Element              9-3                                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

Policy S-2.7 Energy Conservation Measures in existing Buildings: Encourage owners of existing
dwellings to retrofit with energy-saving features.
         Program S-2.7.1: Require retrofitting of energy-saving features in existing dwellings as a
         part of the City's Housing Rehabilitation Program by providing information, technical
         assistance, and requiring retrofits as part of any loan or grant program.
         Program S-2.7.2: Develop programs to assist residential and commercial building owners
         with energy efficiency retrofits and the installation of alternative energy.
Water
Goal S-3:           Minimize the use of potable water in new and existing development.
Policy S-3.1 Reduce Water Use: Minimize the use of potable water in new and existing
development.
         Program S-3.1.1: Modify the Inland Land Use and Development Code to require that new
         development achieves at least 60 percent of the possible credits in the Water Efficiency
         category of Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design for New Construction
         (LEED-NC) and LEED for Homes or equivalent.
Policy S-3.2 Rainwater Capture: The installation of cisterns is encouraged to capture rainwater
from roofs for all water needs and for flood control during heavy storms. Cisterns may be located
above or below ground.
Policy S-3.3 Water Conservation Education: Business/property owners shall incorporate
educational programs that promote water conservation habits and practices in all hotel,
restaurant, and multi-family residential development.
Policy S-3.4 Drought Tolerant Landscaping: New development shall include drought tolerant
landscaping for landscaped areas in commercial and multi-family residential uses.
         Program S-3.4.1: Require landscaping for all new commercial and industrial development
         to use drought tolerant plants and no vegetative turf unless recreation needs or other
         area functions specifically requires turf.
         Program S-3.4.2: Develop programs to educate single-family homeowners on water
         conserving landscaping methods and discourage the use of turf.
         Program S-3.4.3: Encourage green roofs, landscape-based treatment measures, and
         pervious materials for hardscape, and other stormwater management practices to reduce
         water pollution are encouraged.
Waste
9 - Sustainability Element               9-4                                          November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
Goal S-4             Reduce, recycle, and reuse solid waste generated in the City.
Policy S-4.1 Recycling: All commercial, office, and multi-family residential developments shall
provide a centralized drop-off location for recyclables and compostable materials.
Policy S-4.2 Recycling and Reuse of Solid Waste: Comply with State requirements to reduce the
volume of solid waste through recycling and reduction of solid waste.
         Program S-4.2.1: Continue to participate in the County’s Integrated Waste Management
         Plan operated by the Mendocino Solid Waste Management Authority.
         Program S-4.2.2: Continue to implement the City’s Construction and Demolition Waste
         Recycling Ordinance. Periodically review the ordinance and consider increasing the
         target diversion amounts.
9 - Sustainability Element              9-5                                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan

                                    Raw Water Pond
                               Raw Water Pond with Hex Tiles
9 - Sustainability Element        9-6                        November 2012
Fort Bragg Inland General Plan
