2         0
GENERAL PLAN
                       3          5
CITY OF MORGAN HILL | ADOPTED JULY 27, 2016

                                                                                  CITY OF MORGAN HILL
                                                                                     ADOPTED JULY 27, 2016
                                                                        CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION NO. 16-128
                          MORGAN HILL 2035 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                Prepared By:
                                                                                                   PlaceWorks
                                                                              1625 Shattuck Avenue, Suite 300
                                                                                    Berkeley, California 94709
                                                                                                 510.848.3815
                                                                                              510.848.4315 (f)
Orange County • Northern California • Los Angeles/Downtown • Los Angeles/West • Inland Empire • San Diego
                                                                                         www.placeworks.com


TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Introduction                                            I-1
   Purpose of This General Plan                            I-1
   Planning Context                                        I-1
   General Plan Big Ideas                                  I-2
   City Profile                                            I-3
   General Plan Organization and Content                   I-6
   How to Use This General Plan                            I-8
   Goals, Policies, and Actions                            I-9
   The Green Leaf Symbol                                 I-10
2. General Plan Vision                                  VIS-1
   Vision Statement                                     VIS-1
3. City and Neighborhood Form                         CNF-1
   Land Use Decisions (Goal CNF-1)                   CNF-23
   Growth Management (Goals CNF-2 through 7)       CNF-24-34
   Urban Form (Goals CNF-8 and 9)                  CNF-35-39
   Residential Neighborhoods (Goals CNF-10 and 11) CNF-39-40
   Neighborhood Centers (Goal CNF-12)                CNF-48
   Mixed Use Flex (Goals CNF-13)                     CNF-49
   Downtown (Goal CNF-14                             CNF-50
   Commercial and Office (Goals CNF-15 and 16)     CNF-52-53
   Industrial (Goal CNF-17)                          CNF-54
   Commercial/Industrial (Goal CNF-18)               CNF-55
   Gateways (Goal CNF-19)                            CNF-56
   Areas of Special Consideration (Goal CNF-20)      CNF-57
   Joint Land Use Planning in the South County
   (Goal CNF-21)                                     CNF-58
                                                               i
M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L P L A N
T A B L E O F  C O N T E N T S
                                                     4. Housing (Certified April 21, 2015)                         HE-1
                                                     5. Economic Development                                       ED-1
                                                        Household Prosperity (Goal ED-1                            ED-4
                                                        Fiscal Sustainability (Goal ED-2)                          ED-6
                                                        Business Retention and Attraction (Goal ED-3)              ED-8
                                                        Tourism (Goal ED-4)                                       ED-11
                                                        Downtown (Goal ED-5)                                      ED-13
                                                        Monterey Corridor (Goal ED-6)                             ED-14
                                                        Commercial Development (Goal ED-7)                        ED-14
                                                        Office and Industrial (Goal ED-8)                         ED-17
                                                        Infrastructure to Support Businesses (Goal ED-9)          ED-18
                                                     6. Healthy Community                                          HC-1
                                                        Schools (Goal HC-1)                                        HC-4
                                                        Youth and Seniors (Goal HC-2)                              HC-6
                                                        Parks, Recreation, and Trails (Goal HC-3)                  HC-7
                                                        Culture and the Arts (Goal HC-4)                         HC-15
                                                        Libraries (Goal HC-5)                                    HC-17
                                                        Healthy Food (Goal HC-6)                                 HC-17
                                                        Access to Health Care (Goal HC-7)                        HC-19
                                                        Cultural and Historic Resources (Goal HC-8)              HC-20
                                                     7. Transportation                                             TR-1
                                                        Circulation Syhstem and Complete Streets
                                                        (Goals TR-1 and 2)                                     TR-14-15
                                                        Local Roadways and Level of Service (Goals TR-3 and 4) TR-16-31
                                                        Parking (Goal TR-5)                                       TR-33
                                                        Transit (Goals TR-6 and 7)                             TR-34-37
                                                        Bikeways (Goal TR-8)                                      TR-38
                                                        Pedestrian Network (Goal TR-9)                            TR-42
                                                        Transportation Demand Management (Goal TR-10)             TR-46
                                                        Regional Coordination (Goal TR-11)                        TR-47
ii
                                                             M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5    G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                  T A B L E   O F  C O N T E N T S
8.   Natural Resources and Environment               NRE-1
     Open Space, Hillsides, and Scenic Features
     (Goals NRE-1 and 2)                         NRE-18-21
     Greenbelts (Goal NRE-3)                        NRE-22
     Agricultural Resources (Goal NRE-4)            NRE-27
     Biological Resources (Goals NRE-5 and 6)    NRE-31-33
     Water Quality and Conservation
     (Goals NRE-7 through 9)                     NRE-35-38
     Air Quality (Goals NRE-10 through 14)       NRE-40-45
     Climate Change (Goal NRE-15)                   NRE-45
     Energy Efficiency (Goal NRE-16)                NRE-47
9.   Safety, Services, and Infrastructure              SSI-1
     Environmental Hazards (Goal SSI-1)              SSI-22
     Geological and Seismic Hazards (Goal SSI-2)     SSI-23
     Fire Hazards (Goal SSI-3)                       SSI-26
     Hazardous Materials (Goal SSI-4)                SSI-28
     Flood Hazards (Goals SSI-5 and 6)            SSI-32-36
     Airport Hazards (Goal SSI-7)                    SSI-37
     Noise (Goals SSI-8 and 9)                    SSI-38-40
     Impacts from Climate Change (Goal SSI-10)       SSI-43
     Police and Fire (Goal SSI-11)                   SSI-44
     Emergency Response (Goal SSI-12)                SSI-45
     Adaptive Infrastructure (Goal SSI-13)           SSI-46
     Water Supply (Goal SSI-14)                      SSI-47
     Wastewater (Goal SSI-15)                        SSI-51
     Stormwater (Goal SSI-16)                        SSI-52
     Solid Waste (Goal SSI-17)                       SSI-54
     Telecommunications (Goal SSI-18)                SSI-56
10.  Regional Coordination                            RCI-1
11.  Glossary                                          GL-1
Appendix A – General Plan Process
Appendix B – Policy Guide
Appendix C – Potential School Sites
                                                                                                                iii

M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L P L A N
T A B L E O F  C O N T E N T S
                                                     LIST OF FIGURES
                                                     Figure I-1     Regional Location ......................................................I-4
                                                     Figure I-2     General Plan Components ........................................I-9
                                                     Figure CNF-1 City Boundaries.................................................. CNF-2
                                                     Figure CNF-2 Downtown .......................................................... CNF-6
                                                     Figure CNF-3 General Plan Land Use Map ............................ CNF-7
                                                     Figure CNF-4 Industrial Subareas ...........................................CNF-15
                                                     Figure CNF-5 Southeast Quadrant ..........................................CNF-19
                                                     Figure CNF-6 Existing Urban Design Types..........................CNF-21
                                                     Figure TR-1    Future Circulation System .................................... TR-3
                                                     Figure TR-2    Bikeways ............................................................... TR-11
                                                     Figure NRE-1 Greenbelts .......................................................... NRE-3
                                                     Figure NRE-2 Important Farmland .......................................... NRE-5
                                                     Figure NRE-3 Natural Communities ....................................... NRE-7
                                                     Figure NRE-4 Fish Habitat......................................................... NRE-8
                                                     Figure NRE-5 Known Occurrences of Special
                                                                    Status Species ................................................... NRE-10
                                                     Figure NRE-6 Sensitive Natural Communities..................... NRE-12
                                                     Figure NRE-7 Groundwater Basins ........................................ NRE-14
                                                     Figure NRE-8 Watersheds ....................................................... NRE-15
                                                     Figure SSI-1   Earthquake Faults ................................................. SSI-3
                                                     Figure SSI-2   Fire Hazard Severity Zones ................................. SSI-4
                                                     Figure SSI-3   General Plan Land Use within State
                                                                    Responsibility Area and Very High Fire
                                                                    Hazard Severity Zone .......................................... SSI-5
                                                     Figure SSI-3   General Plan Land Use within State
                                                                    Responsibility Area and Very High Fire
                                                                    Hazard Severity Zone .......................................... SSI-5
                                                     Figure SSI-4   FEMA Flood Zones ............................................... SSI-7
                                                     Figure SSI-5   Historic Flooding .................................................. SSI-8
                                                     Figure SSI-6   Dam Inundation Areas......................................... SSI-8
                                                     Figure SSI-7   Future Noise Contours....................................... SSI-12
                                                     Figure SSI-8   Water Infrastructure System ............................. SSI-17
                                                     Figure SSI-9   Wastewater Infrastructure System ................... SSI-19
                                                     Figure SSI-10 Stormwater Management Facilities.................. SSI-20
iv
                                                                                          M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5    G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                               T A B L E   O F  C O N T E N T S
LIST OF TABLES
Table CNF-1 Planning Boundaries ......................................... CNF-1
Table CNF-2 Summary of Land Use Designations............. CNF-10
Table NRE-1 Required Stream Setback Distances .............. NRE-32
Table SSI-1    State of California Land Use Compatibility
               Guidelines for Community Noise
               Environments ...................................................... SSI-13
                                                                                                                                              v
M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L P L A N
T A B L E O F  C O N T E N T S
vi
                                                                   1
The General Plan represents the community’s collective vision for
what Morgan Hill will look and feel like through the year 2035.
The overarching goal of this General Plan is to maintain Morgan
Hill’s family-friendly character and strong sense of community
while the community grows and prospers. This overarching goal
is supported by a framework of more detailed goals, policies, and
actions to guide the City’s decisions over the next two decades.
Decisions consistent with the General Plan will grow and preserve
the community consistent with residents’ shared values.
Morgan Hill is proud of its small town character, strong sense of
community, abundant access to open space and recreational
amenities and ever growing participation in the Silicon Valley
economy and seeks to promote these desirable qualities through
thoughtful land use planning. The community takes pride in
being a regional leader in providing affordable housing,
preserving open space and hillsides, and being a leader in
environmental stewardship.
Moving forward, the City seeks to build upon its previous success
by maintaining a steady, well-defined, and responsible rate of
growth, providing housing to support the region, while also
maintaining the City's jobs-housing balance. City policies support
the ongoing revitalization and intensification of the City's
Downtown, including new higher density housing, commercial
and mixed-use projects. At the same time, the General Plan
supports the continued development of new, single-family
residential neighborhoods along with the development of the
City's employment districts.

These “big ideas,” developed and refined throughout the General
Plan Update process, highlight the changes since the previous
General Plan was adopted in 2001 and distill the City’s major
priorities and strategies.
    Provide a mix of housing types and sizes, including
     universal design concepts, while maintaining a majority of
     single-family housing.
    Offer and improve services, amenities, educational
     opportunities, and improvements that encourage an active,
     healthy lifestyle.
    Regulate development through a clear, fair, flexible, and
     streamlined growth management system.
    Preserve viable agricultural land, important habitat areas,
     and recreational open space.
    Support and connect all modes of transportation.
    Support a diverse local economy and an expanded tax base
     by preserving our existing job-generating land.
    Promote high-quality internet connectivity.
    Protect environmental resources for future generations.
    Require high-quality design in all development.
    Allow some residential growth on undeveloped land to fill in
     the gaps in our boundaries.
    Focus more intensive, mixed-use development in and near
     downtown.
    Transform Monterey Road into a revitalized mixed-use
     corridor.
    Provide open space in new developments.
    Preserve a connection with the past through history sites.

Morgan Hill is a City of 13 square miles located in the southern
part of Santa Clara County. The City is located approximately 20
miles south of downtown San José and approximately 10 miles
north of Gilroy, as shown in Figure I-1.
Highway 101 bisects the City and provides north-south access to
San José to the north and Gilroy to the south. Morgan Hill is
served by a Caltrain Station located in its Downtown, and
regional bus systems provide transit connections to destinations
north and south of Morgan Hill.
Morgan Hill’s urban character must be understood in terms of its
natural setting. A large portion of Morgan Hill is within the Santa
Clara Valley, which is surrounded by the Santa Cruz Mountains
to the west and the Diablo Range to the east, and extends from the
San Francisco Bay shoreline to the northern boundary of San
Benito County. The majority of Morgan Hill lies within a valley
characterized by a relatively flat topography that transitions to
steep slopes along the western and eastern foothills.
This location along the valley floor, embraced by grassy and
wooded hillsides to the east and west, defines the City’s friendly
atmosphere and provides a visual connection to the natural world
from almost any vantage point. The strong connections between
Morgan Hill’s developed neighborhoods, natural setting, and
agricultural surroundings establish the feeling of a traditional,
family oriented, high quality, progressive, and active small town
removed, though easily accessible, from the crowded, fast-paced
Silicon Valley communities to the north.
The area has a Mediterranean climate, which is characterized by
mild air temperatures that rarely drop below freezing in winter.
Summers are typically dry and the majority of the rain falls in the
winter.

Figure I-1 Regional Locatio
The land where the City of Morgan Hill currently exists was first
inhabited by Native Americans known as the Ohlone (Costanoan).
Spanish colonists began arriving in the west central region of
California in 1769, and among the earliest settlements were a
presidio and mission at Monterey (1770) and a mission and
civilian town at Santa Clara (1777). The road connecting these two
missions survives today as Monterey Road. In 1835, the Mexican
government granted 9,000 acres of Mission Santa Clara lands to
Juan Maria Hernandez, as the Rancho Ojo de Agua de la Coche.
Martin Murphy, an Irish-born pioneer, purchased the land in 1845
through a friend, Charles Weber, who had established Mexican
citizenship and could legally own property. Ownership was
conveyed to Murphy in 1846..
The first settlements in the southern Santa Clara Valley were
established in the 1850s along Monterey Road, largely in response
to the Gold Rush in the San Francisco Bay region. Santa Clara
County also ranked as one of the region’s earliest and most
productive agricultural centers, famed for its grains, fruits, and
vegetables. The Santa Clara & Pajaro Valley Railroad opened its
first rail line through the area, from San Jose to Gilroy, in 1869.
In 1882, 4,500 acres of the original Mexican land grant were
passed down to Diana Murphy, granddaughter of Martin Murphy
Sr. That same year, she married Hiram Morgan Hill, a San
Francisco socialite; they entertained lavishly with trains often
stopping at the ranch to let off guests. The stop became known
informally as “Morgan Hill.” In 1892, the Hills disposed of
Morgan Hill Ranch in parcels of 5 to 100 acres. A downtown was
were established as well as a train station named “Huntington
Station.” In 1906, upon reaching the required population of 500
people, the City was incorporated and named, "Morgan Hill".
Following World War II, the Santa Clara Valley sustained rapid
growth as agricultural lands gave way to residential, commercial
and industrial development. Monterey Road continued to be
developed as the City’s major commercial corridor, while
industrial activity continued along the railroad tracks. With the

opening of U.S. Highway 101 in the late 1970s, southern Santa
Clara County became more attractive to suburban commuters.
Although the City’s economy once thrived on the cultivation of
stone fruits, pears, apples, and nuts, the City has since become
urban, diversified, and modern. Manufacturing and health and
educational services are Morgan Hill’s largest employment
sectors, and the leisure and hospitality industry has represented a
growing share of employment in recent years. The industries
located in Morgan Hill are largely similar to those in Santa Clara
County overall, indicating that the economic activity in Morgan
Hill is closely tied to the Silicon Valley economy. Nevertheless,
agriculture is still an important asset to the region, as evidenced
by the surrounding vineyards, orchards, row crops, and
greenhouses, which boost the region’s economy and tourism
industry.
As of 2015, Morgan Hill had 41,779 residents and 13,868 housing
units. Between 2001, when the last General Plan was adopted, and
2015 the City’s population and number of households increased
by approximately 10 percent. This rate of growth was faster than
those reflected by Santa Clara County and the State of California.
Morgan Hill has larger proportions of children under the age of 18
and of adults between the ages of 45 and 64, and smaller
proportions of young adults, in comparison to Santa Clara County
or California. The age cohort of 55- to 64-year-olds has been the
fastest-growing group over the past decade. If these residents age
in place, the 65- to 84-year-old age group may be Morgan Hill’s
most rapidly growing age group in the next two decades, during
the life of this General Plan.
Morgan Hill and Santa Clara County are more affluent than
California overall. In 2013, median household incomes in Morgan
Hill (over $90,000) were over 55 percent higher than the State
median ($58,724).

This General Plan includes the Introduction and seven separate
elements that establish goals, policies, and actions for each given
topic. The elements cover the topics required by California State
Government Code Section 65302 as well as topics of particular
interest to Morgan Hill. Appendix A describes the process to
prepare this General Plan.
A brief explanation of each General Plan element is provided
below.
    City and Neighborhood Form Element. The City and
     Neighborhood        Form     Element      discusses    growth
     management, land use, and urban design. The purpose of the
     element is to ensure that Morgan Hill retains its rural
     atmosphere while accommodating sensible, orderly growth
     that will promote the local economy and fit within the City’s
     ability to provide adequate public services.
    Housing Element. The Housing Element fortifies the
     development, preservation, and improvement of housing for
     all residents, and is updated every eight years, according to
     State law. It analyzes existing housing conditions and
     provides policies and actions to meet projected housing
     needs.
    Economic       Development      Element.     The     Economic
     Development Element establishes policy guidance to support
     the community’s economic well-being. Its strategies include
     diversifying the local economy, increasing the quality and
     quantity of available job opportunities, decreasing the need
     for commuting, creating a thriving Downtown, and
     enhancing Morgan Hill’s appeal as a tourist destination.
    Healthy Community Element. The Healthy Community
     Element addresses the elements of Morgan Hill’s built
     environment that contribute to the overall health and well-
     being of Morgan Hill’s residents. These include access to
     services and recreation, and an urban form that supports
     healthy lifestyles.

    Transportation Element. The Transportation Element offers
     mechanisms to make Morgan Hill a safe and efficient place
     to travel, whether by train, bus, car, bike, or foot. It aims to
     ensure safe and appropriate operation of the transportation
     system, solve existing traffic and parking problems, and
     expand transit and non-motorized travel opportunities.
    Natural Resources and Environment Element. The Natural
     Resources and Environment element advocates preserving
     open space, agricultural uses, hillsides, riparian areas,
     wildlife habitat and other natural features. Policies seek to
     establish a greenbelt around the City, preserve El Toro
     Mountain, conserve resources and protect the City’s cultural
     heritage to help Morgan Hill retain its rural atmosphere as it
     continues to grow.
    Safety, Services, and Infrastructure Element. The Safety,
     Services, and Infrastructure Element intends to protect
     people from detrimental impacts associated with
     development, including noise impacts, by requiring new
     construction to avoid hazardous areas and materials and/or
     provide adequate mitigation.
The General Plan is a document intended to be used by a variety
of people. Some of the key groups that will use the General Plan
include elected and appointed City officials, City staff, City
residents and individuals proposing new development projects.
For all of these users, the policies in this General Plan are intended
to provide clear guidance to the City for its decision-making
processes and how Morgan Hill will grow, change, and stay the
same.
In general, policies that use the words “require,” “prohibit,” or
“shall” are mandatory. Policies that use the words “encourage,”
“promote,” “discourage,” “consider,” or “should” are not
mandatory; these policies provide guidance to the City, but the
City is not required to follow them if they find that the policy is
not appropriate for a particular situation or if there are other

factors, such as budget limitations, that would make it difficult to
follow the policy direction.
Some policies in this General Plan are also required as a means to
mitigate environmental impacts under the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). These policies all use
imperative words and in all cases are mandatory. These policies
are marked with an asterisk (*).
As described in Appendix A, the Morgan Hill 2035 process
involved a wide variety of stakeholders and interests. As a result,
this General Plan is intended to meet multiple, and sometimes
competing, policy objectives. Therefore, the City may not be able
to strictly adhere to every policy in every decision that it makes to
implement the overall goals, policies, and actions of this General
Plan. The City Council will have discretion over prioritizing
overall policy objectives to implement this General Plan in
instances in which there are competing policy objectives affecting
a single decision.
Each element of this General Plan contains background
information and a series of goals, policies, and actions. Figure I-2
illustrates that policies and actions are at the same level of
importance, and are all intended to implement goals. In most
cases, goals have both implementing policies and actions.
However, it is also possible for a goal to be implemented
exclusively through policies or actions. The following provides a
description of goals, policies, and actions and explains the
relationship between them:
     A goal is a description of the general desired result that
      the City seeks to create through the implementation of its      Figure I-2 General Plan Components
      General Plan.
     A policy is a specific statement that sets standards to guide
      decision-making as the City works to achieve a goal. Such
      policies, once adopted, represent statements of City
      regulation. A policy is on-going and is implemented by City
      staff, the Planning Commission, and City Council in their

      review of land development projects and in decision-making
      about City actions.
     An action is an implementation measure, procedure, or
      technique intended to help achieve a specified goal. The City
      must take additional steps to implement each action in the
      General Plan. An action is something that can and will be
      completed in a specific timeframe during the General Plan
      planning period.
These goals, policies, and actions provide guidance to the City on
how to direct change and manage its resources over the next 20
years.
Since the last General Plan Update, the issue of climate change has
gained importance at the local, State, national, and international
level. In an effort to reduce the City’s greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, the City of Morgan Hill participated in a Countywide
Climate Action Plan process that included the County of Santa
Clara and seven jurisdictions within the county. Policies and
actions denoted with the green leaf symbol comprise the City’s
plan to reduce GHG emissions. These policies and actions will
help the City meet its GHG reduction target, in support of similar
State and regional efforts.
Some crucial aspects of Morgan Hill’s future, including
transportation, water supply, and open space preservation, are
affected by the actions and decisions of agencies outside the City.
Policies and actions that support ongoing coordination with
regional agencies are spread throughout the General Plan and are
integrated with other policies and actions addressing the same
topic. Each policy or action that guides regional coordination is
denoted by the circular RC symbol in the margin.
The majority of the policies intended to ensure a regional
approach to growth management in southern Santa Clara County

originated in the South County Joint Area Plan, which was jointly
adopted by Morgan Hill, Gilroy, and Santa Clara County in 1989
with a planning horizon of 2005. Many of those policies remain
relevant today and are incorporated throughout the plan; the
South County Joint Area Plan is listed as the source in
parentheses.
California Government Code Section 65358(b) limits amendments
of mandatory elements of a General Plan to four times per year.
Although the majority of the General Plan represents regulatory
guidance and is subject to this limitation, other items in the
General Plan are for informational purposes only. Items included
for illustrative purposes, such as photographs, figures, and
Appendix A, do not establish General Plan policy and do not
require a formal General Plan amendment to update or revise.
Similarly, typographical corrections and parcel line changes may
be made without a formal General Plan amendment. However,
regulatory guidance such as the goals, policies, actions would
require a General Plan amendment to update or modify. In
addition, modifications to figures that reflect State or City
regulation, such as the General Plan Land Use Map (Figure
CNF-3) or Circulation System map (Figure TR-1) would also
require a General Plan amendment.

                                                                      2
VISION
The General Plan provides a vision for the future and establishes a
framework for how Morgan Hill should grow and change over
the next two decades. While embracing change, this General Plan
also establishes goals, policies, and actions that empower the City
and the community to maintain the goals and values that make
Morgan Hill the thriving and friendly place it is today.
VISION STATEMENT
Morgan Hill is unique among Silicon Valley communities for its
family-friendly character and strong sense of community. The
General Plan envisions Morgan Hill keeping its small-town feel
while offering new opportunities for businesses, jobs, and
amenities for residents and visitors. Agriculture will continue, and
new housing for a range of family sizes, ages, and incomes will be
accommodated in a variety of locations. Incentives will foster infill
development instead of sprawl while accommodating sustainable
change to growth boundaries that are uniform and logical. The
highest-density land uses will be focused around the Downtown.
The General Plan calls for focusing major shopping centers that
attract shoppers from outside Morgan Hill around the freeway
interchanges and expanding Downtown and neighborhood
shopping areas.
New commercial enterprises will be concentrated Downtown, in
neighborhood shopping centers, at key intersections, and at
freeway interchanges, while avoiding isolated, auto-dependent
strip malls and generic big box architecture that detract from an
inviting community character.
The General Plan encourages neighborhood-scale shopping near
residential neighborhoods to foster walking and biking and to
avoid car trips.
                                                                        VIS-1
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
V I S I O N
                                                  The role of Downtown as the heart of the community will be
                                                  strengthened by improving pedestrian and bicycle access through
                                                  a well-maintained bike and pedestrian trail network, roads and
                                                  adequate parking, adding streetscape amenities, encouraging
                                                  restaurants and specialty retail, and adding a mix of uses:
                                                  housing, public events, and other place-making activities and
                                                  amenities that will attract residents and visitors. A new park
                                                  Downtown will reinforce Downtown’s role as a community
                                                  gathering place.
                                                  Morgan Hill accommodates a variety of jobs for local residents. To
                                                  help diversify the local economy, the General Plan will promote
                                                  light industry, business parks, and research and development.
                                                  New businesses will increase employment opportunities and
                                                  generate revenues for the City.
                                                  Employers will be attracted to Morgan Hill as a complete
                                                  community that offers a range of housing for employees at all
                                                  levels and quality of life amenities, including access to recreational
                                                  programs and facilities, and a high-quality local school system.
                                                  Morgan Hill will leverage its rural charm, Silicon Valley location,
                                                  wine industry, restaurants, recreational opportunities, and
                                                  agricultural heritage to delight residents and visitors, and help
                                                  local business thrive and promote Morgan Hill as a great place to
                                                  live and visit. To support business and leisure travelers, the
                                                  General Plan will accommodate a variety of locations for lodging
                                                  opportunities, including locations in the Downtown area.
                                                  The General Plan foresees preserving the structures that tell the
                                                  story of our past, scenic hillsides, and viable, active agricultural
                                                  lands within and around the city to provide a sense of place,
                                                  balancing public access to actively enjoy open spaces while
                                                  respecting the property rights of land owners who chose not to
                                                  develop their land.
                                                  Enhancing landscaping and gateways to the city including the
                                                  Madrone area, south Monterey Street, freeway interchanges, and
                                                  train station is a high priority.
VIS-2

                                                                        M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                                V I S I O N
Unfinished street connections will be completed to improve
circulation, improve emergency response and reduce traffic
congestion. Improvements to roadway landscaping will make
driving, walking, and bicycling more pleasant, and uses along
major transportation corridors – railroad, highway, busy streets –
will be shielded from noise through a combination of innovative
construction measures, landscaping, and/or setbacks.
Commercial design standards will be updated and expanded as
necessary to improve the appearance and connectivity of the city.
High-quality, aesthetically pleasing sustainable architecture/
design will be encouraged.
Residents and visitors will move around Morgan Hill easily on an
interconnected network of safe, landscaped, and well-maintained
streets, sidewalks, bikeways, trails, and transit.
The General Plan anticipates improving regional transportation by
working with regional transportation authorities to relieve traffic
impacts on city streets, and by strongly encouraging alternative
transportation, supporting the commuter rail system, adding
express lanes to the freeway, and widening the freeway if
necessary.
The City will remain actively engaged in discussions regarding
high speed rail through Morgan Hill to ensure that negative
impacts to residents and businesses are minimized and the design
of the project is consistent with the community’s character and
long-range plans.
The City will coordinate a range of additional joint planning
efforts with Santa Clara County, nearby cities, and other agencies
as appropriate to stay informed and involved in anticipated
development that could impact Morgan Hill.
Morgan Hill will be planned as a healthy community that
supports an active lifestyle. Residents of all ages will find
engaging activities and inviting facilities to enjoy. Public facilities
that foster a sense of community, representing history, and make
the city more accessible and vibrant will be encouraged.
Opportunities include new park (active and passive) and
                                                                                                                    VIS-3

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
V I S I O N
                                                  recreational facilities, pedestrian features such as sidewalks and
                                                  walkways, and fully accessible multi-purpose trails connecting
                                                  local and regional systems. Existing facilities will be maintained
                                                  and expanded as needed, including the Community and Cultural
                                                  Center, public library, Villa Mira Monte, Aquatics Center,
                                                  Outdoor Sports Center, Centennial Recreation Center, and senior
                                                  and youth centers.
                                                  Public infrastructure investments will be energy efficient, protect
                                                  the environment, promote public health, keep people and
                                                  property safe from hazards, and maintain services to support
                                                  people with different levels of mobility.
                                                  Families will seek out Morgan Hill for its excellent schools, and
                                                  the City will play an active role in planning and coordinating with
                                                  the School District to maintain a high-quality local educational
                                                  system.
                                                  Residents will have access to health care facilities as well as
                                                  important community health amenities.
                                                  Morgan Hill will be a resilient and adaptive city that has planned
                                                  ahead to reduce the community’s environmental impacts and
                                                  ecological footprint and to respond to a changing climate.
                                                  The overall combination of actions envisioned by the General Plan
                                                  will help Morgan Hill grow and prosper while balancing quality
                                                  of life, economic development, tourism, fiscal sustainability, high-
                                                  quality planned development, and preservation of habitat, the
                                                  natural environment, and viable agriculture, without
                                                  compromising its historic and enduring rural charm.
VIS-4

                                                                            3
CITY AND
NEIGHBORHOOD FORM
CHAPTER PURPOSE
The City and Neighborhood Form Element discusses growth
management, land use, and urban design. It contains goals and
policies intended to ensure that Morgan Hill retains its rural
atmosphere while accommodating sensible, orderly growth that
will promote the local economy and fit within the City’s ability to
provide adequate public services. Such growth will include
increased residential and commercial development, as well as an
influx of new industrial uses, that together will result in a variety
of uses with minimum conflict and maximum protection of the
community's quality of life.
CITY BOUNDARIES
Growth in Morgan Hill is guided by the following planning
boundaries: Sphere of Influence, Urban Growth Boundary, Urban
Service Area, and City limit. The planning boundaries are
described below, summarized in Table CNF-1, and shown in
Figure CNF-1.
TABLE CNF-1            PLANNING BOUNDARIES
                                                                Size
                                                                          a
Planning Boundary                                          (Square Miles)
Sphere of Influence                                              31
Urban Growth Boundary                                            15
Urban Service Area                                               12
City Limit                                                       13
a
  Numbers have been rounded.
Source: City of Morgan Hill and PlaceWorks GIS, June 2015.
                                                                              CNF-1

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
Figure CNF-1           City Boundaries
CNF-2
                                                                                    M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                         C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
C ITY L IMIT
The City limit boundary encompasses the land over which the
City of Morgan Hill has jurisdictional authority. The current City
limit covers approximately 13 square miles. As shown in Figure
CNF-1, Morgan Hill’s northern boundary touches the extreme
southern boundary of San Jose’s City limits. Apart from this, the
remainder of the City limits adjoin land in unincorporated Santa
Clara County.
U RBAN S ERVICE A REA
The Urban Service Area refers to the area within the Urban
Growth Boundary where utilities, such as gas, water, sewer, and
electricity, and public services, such as police, fire, schools, and
parks and recreation, are and will be provided by the City or other
service provider agencies. The extension of urban services beyond
the Urban Service Area is not allowed, except in the event that 1)
the City has entered into a mutual aid or reciprocal emergency
agreement for police, fire, or other emergency services to be
provided by the City on County land; or 2) the extension is to
address the failure of an existing septic system or well that would
have a direct adverse impact on public health and safety without
the expansion of the service.
The Community and Neighborhood Form Element calls for the
City to consider land available for urban development only if it is
within both the Urban Service Area and the Urban Growth
Boundary. 1 In addition to delineating areas that are currently
provided with urban services, facilities, and utilities, the Urban
Service Area includes areas proposed to be annexed into the city
within the next five years in order to be developed and receive
such services. Proposed changes to the Urban Service Area are
subject to LAFCO review and approval. The Urban Service Area
encompasses approximately 12 square miles. It covers a slightly
       1
         City of Morgan Hill General Plan, Community and Neighborhood Form Element,
Development Patterns Policy CNF-1.3.
                                                                                                                                  CNF-3

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       smaller area than the existing City limits since it does not extend
                                                       to the golf course, nor cover the entirety of some hillside parcels.
                                                       U RBAN G ROWTH B OUNDARY
                                                       In 1996, Morgan Hill and Santa Clara County jointly adopted a
                                                       long-term Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) and associated
                                                       policies. The UGB is encompassed within the Sphere of Influence
                                                       (SOI) and is intended to be the ultimate limit to urbanization
                                                       within which all future urban development in Morgan Hill should
                                                       occur. It is designed to encourage compact, efficient infill
                                                       development and discourage more costly development at the edge
                                                       of the City. The UGB also helps to ensure that urban services
                                                       provided by the City to existing neighborhoods will not be
                                                       reduced by service demands of new urban development at the
                                                       City’s fringe.
                                                       S PHERE OF I NFLUENCE
                                                       The SOI is a boundary that identifies land that the City may annex
                                                       in the future, and for which urban services, if available, could be
                                                       provided. Under State law, the SOI is established by the Santa
                                                       Clara County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO)
                                                       with input from the City, and its purpose is to identify areas
                                                       where future urban development can be best accommodated in an
                                                       orderly and efficient manner. The current SOI is approximately 31
                                                       square miles in size.
                                                       EXISTING LAND USE PATTERN
                                                       Morgan Hill is largely comprised of single-family residential
                                                       neighborhoods. In addition, multi-family residential uses, such as
                                                       condominiums and apartments, are dispersed primarily in the
                                                       area west of Butterfield Boulevard between Cochrane Road and
                                                       south of Watsonville Road, and east along Monterey Road. Retail,
                                                       dining, and service uses are located along major transportation
                                                       corridors throughout the City, including in Morgan Hill’s
                                                       Downtown. There are also two main employment centers: the
                                                       business parks north and south of Cochrane Road, and the light
                                                       industrial area west of 101 between Dunne and Tennant Avenues.
CNF-4

                                                                   M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                        C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Land uses surrounding Morgan Hill primarily consist of rural
residential areas, agriculture, and open space. These uses,
including nurseries, orchards, and vineyards, provide a buffer
between urbanized parts of San José to the north and Gilroy to the
south. Areas east and west of Morgan Hill primarily consist of
undeveloped hillsides, open space areas, and reservoirs, including
Anderson Lake, Anderson Lake County Park, and Coyote Lake to
the east and Uvas Reservoir and Chesbro Reservoir to the west.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT
The City of Morgan Hill controls population growth through
implementation of the Residential Development Control System
(RDCS). The RDCS establishes a voter-approved population limit,
which is managed by metering the number of residential units
that can be built on an annual basis. Developers or property
owners who wish to build housing units (and do not meet any of
the RDCS exemptions described below) are required to compete
for housing allocations. This General Plan establishes the broad
policy framework for the RDCS, and the details of the RDCS are
codified in Chapter 18.78 of the Morgan Hill Zoning Code.
Individual single-family homes, replacement of existing homes,
secondary dwelling units, assisted living/nursing homes, and the
conversion of an existing single-family home into a duplex are all
exempt from the RDCS process. In addition, there are two voter-
approved exemptions to the RDCS; both are in the Downtown
area. Measure F, approved by voters in November 2006, allows
100 residential unit allotments for projects up to 25 units within
the Downtown. Measure A, passed in May 2009, allows up to 500
allotments for the 20-block area, as shown on Figure CNF-2.
                                                                                                                 CNF-5

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
               Figure CNF-2           Downtown
CNF-6
                                       M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                            C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Figure CNF-3 General Plan Land Use Map
                                                                                     CNF-7
M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y  A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                        LAND USE MAP AND CATEGORIES
                                                        L AND U SE M AP
                                                        The Land Use Map designates the general distribution of land
                                                        uses, including housing, business, industry, open space, and
                                                        public facilities within the City’s SOI as shown on Figure CNF-3.
                                                        These designations identify the locations in the City where
                                                        specific types of land uses may occur. While the designations are
                                                        implemented (carried out on a day-to-day basis) by the specific
                                                        rules provided for each zoning district in the City's Zoning
                                                        Ordinance, the General Plan provides the overall parameters of
                                                        density and intensity for urban land use designations, as shown in
                                                        Table CNF-2.
                                                        In this General Plan, standards of building intensity for residential
                                                        uses are stated as the allowable range of dwelling units per net
                                                        acre. Net acre is that portion of a site that can actually be built
                                                        upon, which is the land area remaining after dedication of
                                                        ultimate rights-of-way for: exterior boundary streets; flood ways;
                                                        public parks; and utility corridors.
                                                        The number of units permitted will be further modified by the
                                                        zoning district and/or any applicable overlay district.
                                                        Standards of building intensity for non-residential uses are stated
                                                        as maximum floor-area ratios (FAR) based on gross acreage. FAR
                                                        is a ratio of the gross building square footage permitted on a lot to
                                                        the gross square footage of the lot. For example, on a site with
                                                        10,000 square feet of land area, a FAR of 1.0 will allow 10,000
   Examples of floor-area ratio (FAR) and               gross square feet of building floor area to be built. On the same
   building coverage.                                   site, a FAR of 2.0 would allow 20,000 square feet of floor area. This
                                                        could take the form of a two-story building with 100 percent lot
                                                        coverage, or a four-story building with 50 percent lot coverage. A
                                                        FAR of 0.4 would allow 4,000 square feet of floor area.
CNF-8

                                                                       M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                            C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
L AND U SE C ATEGORIES
R URAL D ESIGNATIONS
            Rural County. This designation applies to land outside
            the City limit, but in the SOI. Lots with the Rural County
designation are generally 5 to 20 acres in size with one single-
family home and/or agricultural operation per parcel. The
minimum acceptable lot size for new development is generally 5
acres.
            Open Space. This designation applies to land in the City
            limits and SOI, and includes public parks, private golf
courses, and large parcels of land generally 50 acres or more in
size. Land designated Open Space is generally meant to remain
unimproved and devoted to the preservation of natural resources,
managed production of resources, or public health and safety, as
well as to complement adjacent, higher density residential and
commercial development. Allowed uses include agriculture,
outdoor recreation, and a secondary dwelling unit. One single-
family home per parcel is allowed, with appropriate permit.
            Agriculture. The Agriculture designation identifies lands
            intended for long-term preservation for agricultural use
and intended for a variety of agricultural uses, including grazing,
dairying, raising of livestock, orchards, row crops, nursery stock,
flower growing, ancillary residential uses, ancillary commercial
uses such as fruit stands, agricultural research and the storage an
processing of agricultural products. This designation supports
open space uses such as preservation of natural resources,
outdoor recreation and public health and safety, including
infrastructure (such as infiltration ponds) that is similar to other
open space uses. The designation also supports agricultural
commercial uses such as roadside stands, wineries, farm-based
tourism, u-pick, rodeos, farmers markets and crop-based seasonal
                                                                                                                     CNF-9
M O R G A N      H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L   P L A N
C I T Y  A N D    N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
 TABLE CNF-2             SUMMARY OF L AND USE DESIGNATIONS
 Designation                               Primary Uses                                                   Net Density Range
 Residential Estate                        Detached homes                                                  Up to 1 unit/acre
 Residential Detached Low                  Detached homes                                                  Up to 4 units/acre
 Residential Detached Medium               Detached homes                                                  Up to 7 units/acre
 Residential Detached High                 Detached homes                                                    6-12 units/acre
 Residential Attached Low                  Detached & attached homes                                         6-16 units/acre
 Residential Attached Medium               Attached homes                                                   16-24 units/acre
 Residential Downtown                      Attached homes                                                   24-46 units/acre
 Mixed Use                                 Attached homes mixed with retail, office, services              Per adopted DTSP
 Mixed Use Flex                            Attached homes mixed with retail, office, services                7-24 units/acre
 Commercial                                Retail, office, services                                             0.5 FAR
                                                                                                            Comm. 0.5 FAR
 Commercial General                        Retail, office, services
                                                                                                              Ind. 0.6 FAR
 Commercial/Industrial                     Retail, office, services or warehouses, offices, manufacturing       0.6 FAR
 Industrial                                Warehouse, offices, manufacturing                                    0.2 FAR
 Public Facilities                         Publicly owned                                                       0.5 FAR
                                           Commercial, retail, and public/quasi-public sports-recreation
 Sports Recreation Leisure                                                                                         N/A
                                           leisure themed uses
Notes: R&D = research and development
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2015.
                                                            events. Building intensity in this designation will be greatly
                                                            limited. The minimum parcel size in areas designated as
                                                            Agriculture is generally 20 acres; the designation however
                                                            supports the clustering of existing development potential in order
                                                            to preserve larger agricultural sites. Please note at the time of
                                                            publication of this General Plan, the Agriculture designation had
                                                            not been applied to any parcels.
CNF-10
                                                                     M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                          C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
R ESIDENTIAL D ESIGNATIONS
Definitions of the specific housing types described in these
designations can be found in the Glossary at the back of this
General Plan.
            Residential Estate. This designation is intended to
            promote and encourage a suitable environment for
families living on relatively large parcels of land. Concentrated
along the western and southern City borders, the Residential
Estate designation allows single-family homes, secondary
dwelling units, appropriate agricultural uses, and associated
community services and facilities. The maximum allowable
density is 1 unit per acre.
            Residential Detached Low. The Residential Detached
            Low designation is intended to accommodate families in
suburban single-family homes, including manufactured homes on
medium-sized parcels. Secondary dwelling units are allowed
under this designation. The highest concentrations of the
Residential Detached Low designation are at the eastern City
limit, especially in the hills near the Anderson Reservoir. This
designation allows up to 4 units per net acre.
            Residential Detached Medium. Residential Detached
            Medium areas allow detached homes on smaller lots,
including courtyard homes, manufactured homes, and small-lot
single-family homes. Secondary dwelling units are allowed under
this designation. Up to 25 percent of the total number of units in a
project in the Residential Detached Medium designation may be
duets. The Residential Detached Medium designation is dispersed
throughout the City, often providing a transition from non-
residential areas to lower-density neighborhoods. The largest
areas with this designation are centered around East Dunne
Avenue and West Main Avenue between Highway 101 and the
railroad. This designation allows up to 7 units per net acre.
            Residential Detached High. The Residential Detached
            High designation is intended to accommodate detached
single-family homes on small lots at a density of 6 to 12 dwelling
units per acre. This land use is meant to serve as a transition
between single-family and multi-family land uses. Up to 25
                                                                                                                  CNF-11
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       percent of the total number of units in a project in the Residential
                                                       Detached High designation may be duets.
                                                                   Residential Attached Low. The Residential Attached
                                                                   Low designation is primarily meant to accommodate
                                                       attached homes including duplexes/duets, courtyard homes,
                                                       townhomes, and garden apartments. Up to 25 percent of a
                                                       Residential Attached Low site may include small-lot single family
                                                       detached homes when those units are located adjacent to an
                                                       existing single family detached neighborhood. Residential
                                                       Attached Low areas generally are located in or next to existing
                                                       residential neighborhoods and close to commercial corridors,
                                                       including West Dunne Avenue and Monterey Road. This
                                                       designation allows 6 to 16 units per net acre.
                                                                   Residential Attached Medium. This designation allows
                                                                   attached housing types including townhomes, garden
                                                       apartments, and stacked flats. Pockets of Residential Attached
                                                       Medium are primarily centered around the Downtown.
                                                       Frequently found near commercial areas that in part serve the
                                                       adjacent residents, this designation accommodates 16 to 24 units
                                                       per net acre, most of which are townhomes, apartments, or
                                                       condominiums.
                                                                   Residential Downtown. Small pockets of Residential
                                                                   Downtown, the highest-density residential designation is
                                                       centered around Downtown and the commuter rail station.
                                                       Development within this area must be supportive of transit
                                                       oriented design. This designation allows 24 to 46 units per net
                                                       acre, most of which are apartments or condominiums.
                                                       M IXED U SE D ESIGNATIONS
                                                                   Mixed Use. Applied in accordance with the Downtown
                                                                   Specific Plan, this designation applies to the majority of
                                                       the parcels in and around the core of the Downtown area,
                                                       especially parcels along Monterey Road and all the parcels
                                                       between Monterey Road and Depot Street. It is intended to
                                                       encourage a mixture of retail uses and residences. Consistent with
                                                       the adopted Downtown Specific Plan, the Mixed Use designation
                                                       generally allows a density between 8 to 20 units per net acre,
CNF-12
                                                                    M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                         C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
except for the Central Business District (CBD), where there is no
maximum or minimum density.
           Mixed Use Flex. The Mixed Use Flex designation, which
           is primarily applied to properties along the Monterey
Road corridor north and south of downtown, allows for a mix of
residential, commercial, and office uses applied either vertically
(i.e., one structure with multiple uses) or horizontally (i.e.,
structures with different land uses located adjacent to one
another). Density should transition from higher to lower at the
ends of Monterey corridor. The Mixed Use Flex designation
allows 7 to 24 units per acre and a maximum FAR of 0.5 and a
maximum commercial building height of 35 feet. Prior to
development of Residential or Mixed-Use projects within the
Mixed Use Flex designation a block level master plan is required
to identify how commercial uses will be incorporated within the
development of the block and how individual development
projects will connect with each other. Commercial development
may process without preparation of a block level master plan
consistent with the Commercial designation.
N ON-R ESIDENTIAL D ESIGNATIONS
           Commercial. The Commercial designation is primarily
           located along arterial roadways west of Highway 101
and along the eastern freeway frontage. This designation is
intended to allow a wide range of retail businesses, administrative
and executive office uses, and professional services, either in
stand-alone buildings or as part of shopping centers. The largest
concentrations of this designation are found along Monterey Road
and at the freeway interchanges, where retail stores are
emphasized. The Service Commercial overlay along Monterey
Road north of Wright Avenue allows auto-related uses, except for
sales. The Commercial designation allows a maximum FAR of 0.5
and a maximum building height of 30 feet.
            General Commercial. This designation is applied to
            Cochrane Plaza on the south side of Cochrane Road at
the freeway. The General Commercial designation is intended to
allow a variety of commercial uses. It was established by voter
initiative and cannot be changed without a public vote. This
                                                                                                                 CNF-13
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       designation allows a maximum FAR of 0.5 and a maximum
                                                       building height of 35 feet.
                                                                 Commercial/Industrial. The purpose of the Commercial/
                                                                 Industrial designation is to promote job-generating
                                                       development of lands, generally located along Highway 101, by
                                                       allowing greater flexibility in terms of allowing a varied mix of
                                                       industrial, office, and commercial uses that are compatible with
                                                       existing development. Specifically, this designation would allow
                                                       office, research and development, light industrial uses, and
                                                       similar uses, and would also allow amenities, such as retail
                                                       services, restaurants, and lodging to support the primary job-
                                                       generating uses within business park settings. In order to
                                                       maintain an industrial character, small, suburban strip centers are
                                                       discouraged in this designation, although larger big-box type
                                                       developments may be allowed because they mix elements of retail
                                                       commercial and warehouse forms and uses. This designation
                                                       allows a maximum FAR of 0.5 and a maximum building height of
                                                       30 feet for commercial uses and a maximum FAR of 0.6 and a
                                                       maximum building height of 50 feet for industrial uses.
                                                                Industrial. The Industrial designation allows a variety of
                                                                research, warehouse, manufacturing, service commercial,
                                                       and other job-generating uses. This designation allows a
                                                       maximum FAR of 0.6 and a maximum building height of 50 feet.
                                                       Industrial employment lands are located in four major subareas as
                                                       shown in Figure CNF-4. Subareas 1 and 3 are located south of
                                                       Cochrane Road between Highway 101 and Monterey Road.
                                                       Subarea 2 is located north of Cochrane Road between Highway
                                                       101 and Monterey Road. Subarea 4 is located south of Dunne
                                                       Avenue between Butterfield Boulevard and Monterey Road.
                                                       Subareas 1, 2, and 3 are considered Core Employment Areas,
                                                       which include many of the City’s largest employers and will
                                                       continue to be the strongest location for future employment
                                                       growth with an emphasis on R&D, light manufacturing, office,
                                                       and supporting uses. Subarea 4 is the City’s Established
                                                       Employment Area and contains heavier industrial uses and
                                                       provides future opportunities for a diverse range of industrial
                                                       uses, including manufacturing, materials processing, and indoor
                                                       storage.
CNF-14

                                 M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                      C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Figure CNF-4 Industrial Subareas
                                                                              CNF-15
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                                 Public Facilities. The Public Facilities designation is
                                                                 applied to land used by public or quasi-public agencies
                                                       and organizations including the City, hospitals, utility companies,
                                                       and the Morgan Hill Unified School District. This designation
                                                       allows a maximum FAR of 0.5 and a maximum building height of
                                                       35 feet.
                                                                 Sports Recreation Leisure. The Sports-Recreation
                                                                 Leisure designation allows a wide range of private
                                                       commercial, retail, and public/quasi-public sports-recreation
                                                       leisure themed uses, at a scale that creates a destination area for
                                                       both regional and local users, and offers a high-quality attractive,
                                                       health-oriented, fun destination for regional and local users in a
                                                       manner that supports the City’s economic development, City
                                                       identity, and greenbelt goals. This designation is intended to
                                                       support local agriculture and sustainable economic development
                                                       providing jobs for local residents and markets for locally
                                                       produced goods. This designation allows a maximum FAR of 0.4
                                                       and a maximum building height of 40 feet.
                                                       O VERLAY
                                                                 East of 101 Area Plan Overlay. The East of 101 Area Plan
                                                                 Overlay applies to the area roughly between Half Road
                                                       and Diana Avenue to the north and south and Condit Road and
                                                       Hill Road to the west and east. The purpose of this overlay is to
                                                       require the preparation of a comprehensive master plan when
                                                       new residential development is proposed to create well-planned,
                                                       cohesive neighborhoods. Development within the East of 101 Area
                                                       Plan Overlay shall:
                                                            Employ high-quality site planning, architecture, and design
                                                             that reflects the rural and agricultural history of the area,
                                                             following traditional town design principles, and support
                                                             green building methods that reduce the environmental
                                                             impact of new development.
                                                            Seek to preserve the agricultural heritage of the area and
                                                             integrate ongoing agricultural uses into future development,
                                                             as indicated by the Agriculture/Open Space overlay symbol.
CNF-16

                                                                       M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                            C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
     Include a variety of residential housing types as permitted by
      the underlying General Plan land use designation.
     Include services and amenities to serve new residents so
      daily needs can be met close to home.
     Provide an easily accessible, fully connected street and trail
      network that encourages walking and biking and provides
      access to existing community amenities such as Live Oak
      High School and Nordstrom Elementary School.
L AND U SE M AP S YMBOLS
The General Plan land use map includes three “floating” symbols
that indicate that a certain type of use is desired in the future in a
general area, but that specific site has not yet been identified.
Exact locations for these uses will be determined in the future as
part of site- or project-specific planning.
        School: The circled S indicates the general area where a
  S     future school should be accommodated to serve existing
        and future development. Consistent with policies under
        Goal HC-1 in the Healthy Communities Element, the City
        will coordinate with Morgan Hill Unified School District to
        site future schools. Appendix C, Possible School Sites,
        provides additional detail on elementary, middle, and high
        school boundaries and the corresponding potential sites.
O/A     Open Space/Agriculture: This symbol indicates that open
        space and agricultural uses should be integrated into
        future development in areas with a strong agricultural
        heritage.
        Common Open Space: Future development on land with
        this symbol shall incorporate usable common open space.
        This symbol is used in locations where specific site
        constraints limit development capacity; areas of the site
        that cannot feasibly be urbanized should be preserved as
        usable common open space.
                                                                                                                    CNF-17

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       AREAS OF SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
                                                       This section provides an overview of special planning areas in the
                                                       City. These are areas that anticipate new growth and/or have
                                                       undergone special planning studies.
                                                       D OWNTOWN
                                                       Downtown includes the commercial area around Monterey Road
                                                       from Main Avenue to Dunne Avenue, and from Del Monte
                                                       Avenue to Depot Street, as shown on Figure CNF-2. The 2009
                                                       Downtown Specific Plan, which establishes the City’s vision and
                                                       goals for the land use and the aesthetic character of the area.
                                                       Downtown has been carefully planned as the social and civic
                                                       center of Morgan Hill. The Downtown Specific Plan encourages
                                                       the creation of an urban village by intensifying retail, restaurant,
                                                       and entertainment uses and encouraging high-density residential
                                                       development.
                                                       M ONTEREY C ORRIDOR
                                                       The General Plan envisions that the Monterey Road corridor north
                                                       and south of Downtown will transform from its current
                                                       predominantly strip commercial character to a vibrant mixed use
                                                       corridor that encourages walking and biking. Buildings will front
                                                       onto the street and a range of commercial and office uses will be
                                                       located within close proximity to attached residential units.
                                                       Density will decrease with distance from Downtown.
                                                       S OUTHEAST Q UADRANT
                                                       The Southeast Quadrant (SEQ) is approximately 1,300 acres,
                                                       generally bounded by Condit Road and Highway 101 to the west,
                                                       San Pedro Avenue to the north, Carey Avenue to the east, and
                                                       Maple Avenue to the south, as shown in Figure CNF-5. The City
                                                       has adopted an Agricultural Lands Preservation Program to
                                                       permanently preserve agricultural lands with the SEQ and
                                                       Citywide.
CNF-18

                                M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                     C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Figure CNF-5 Southeast Quadrant
                                                                             CNF-19
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       E AST OF 101 A REA
                                                       The East of 101 Area is roughly between Half Road and Diana
                                                       Avenue to the north and south and Condit Road and Hill Road to
                                                       the west and east. It is covered by the East of 101 Area Plan
                                                       Overlay (described above). The General Plan envisions walkable,
                                                       complete, and livable residential neighborhoods being developed
                                                       in this area under a single cohesive plan based on the principles of
                                                       sustainable development, including a diversity of housing types
                                                       as well as services, parks, trails, and amenities and preserve/
                                                       incorporate/integrate agricultural uses that reflect the history of
                                                       the area.
                                                       Urban FormMorgan Hill’s urban character must be understood in
                                                       terms of its natural setting. The City’s location along the valley
                                                       floor, with views of grassy and wooded hillsides to the east and
                                                       west, defines and embraces the City’s friendly atmosphere and
                                                       provides a visual connection to the natural world from almost any
                                                       vantage point. The strong connections between Morgan Hill’s
                                                       developed neighborhoods, natural setting, and agricultural
                                                       surroundings establish the feeling of a traditional, family oriented,
                                                       high quality, progressive and active small town removed, though
                                                       easily accessible, from the crowded, fast-paced Silicon Valley
                                                       communities to the north.
                                                       Morgan Hill can be divided into areas characterized by broadly
                                                       similar land uses and urban design types. These areas are shown
                                                       on Figure CNF-6 and described as follows:
                                                            Traditional Neighborhood. Traditional neighborhoods are
                                                             characterized by single-family houses one to two stories that
                                                             are setback 20 to 30 feet from the street oriented along
                                                             curvilinear streets with off-shooting cul-de-sacs.
                                                            Hillside Neighborhood. Hillside neighborhoods are
                                                             characterized by one- to two-story single-family houses,
                                                             loosely spaced from one another and from the street, and are
                                                             situated along curvilinear streets occasionally interrupted by
                                                             short cul-de-sac offshoots.
CNF-20

                                                                  M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                       C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Figure CNF-6     Existing Urban Design Types
    Multi-Family Neighborhood. Multi-family neighborhoods
     are characterized by two- and three-story buildings
     surrounded by parking lots and an interior network of
     driveways with a central open space or recreation area.
     Access to the multi-family neighborhood is usually by one or
     two major right-of-ways that bound the site.
    Rural Fringe. Rural fringe areas are characterized by
     working farms and fallow land with one single-family home
     or properties with little to no development abutting
                                                                                                               CNF-21

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                            residential parcels. Houses in these areas are generally
                                                            located near the street-side property line and are situated
                                                            along a larger, grid street network with large blocks and no
                                                            sidewalks or street trees.
                                                           Downtown. Downtown buildings are typically two to three
                                                            stories directly abutting the street. Parking is found at the
                                                            rear of the buildings to allow for an uninterrupted street with
                                                            600-foot blocks that fosters a pedestrian-friendly environ-
                                                            ment. Extensive street and median planting, arcaded
                                                            walkways, and ample street furniture provide for a pleasant
                                                            visual and pedestrian experience.
                                                           Shopping Center. Major shopping centers in Morgan Hill
                                                            typically consist of “big box” style buildings with large
                                                            footprints supported by retail shops of smaller scale.
                                                            Buildings are often oriented to maximize visibility from
                                                            Highway 101 and arterial roads. Circulation within the
                                                            shopping center is via sidewalks and parking lots. Most
                                                            shopping centers have access off of two streets.
                                                           Strip Commercial. Strip commercial buildings are typically
                                                            one-story and face major arterial roads with an ample
                                                            amount of parking between the buildings and sidewalks.
                                                           Business Park. Business parks include single-or multi-story
                                                            buildings with large footprints found at the center of a
                                                            parcel, surrounded by expansive parking. Business parks are
                                                            found along curvilinear streets with lengthy blocks and few
                                                            intersections.
                                                           Industrial. Industrial areas in Morgan Hill are typified by
                                                            one-and two-story buildings with large building footprints.
                                                            Buildings are generally located in the center of the parcel,
                                                            with parking lots surrounding them on all four sides.
                                                            Industrial buildings are located along large blocks with
                                                            minimal street intersections.
                                                       GATEWAYS
                                                       Gateways are the key locations where people enter and leave the
                                                       City and distinct districts and neighborhoods. They act as a point
CNF-22

                                                                     M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                          C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
of distinction between different areas, and contribute to a sense of
arrival to one place from another. As gateways convey a sense of
arrival and provide initial and lasting impressions, they should be
attractive and identifiable. Gateways can express a pleasant
welcome through architectural features, landscaping, and art.
Signage can also help define City gateways uniformly.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
L AND U SE D ECISIONS
GOAL CNF-1 An improved, effective, efficient, fair, equitable,
                 flexible, and user-friendly planning and
                 decision-making process.
Policy CNF-1.1   Coordinated Planning Decisions. Ensure that
                 City decisions regarding planning are reached in
                 a comprehensive, coordinated manner.
Policy CNF-1.2   Annual General Plan Review. Review the
                 General Plan annually to determine what
                 progress is being made toward achieving the
                 General Plan's goals and policies.
Policy CNF-1.3   Regional Coordination. Continue working
                 cooperatively with other governmental agencies
                 to reach a coordinated approach to future
                 community development tasks.
Policy CNF-1.4   Pipeline Provisions. For a period of up to 24
                 months following the adoption date of the
                 Morgan Hill 2035 General Plan, zoning
                 amendment and discretionary development
                 permit applications may be considered for
                 General Plan conformance to the land use
                 designations shown on the final adopted version
                 of the 2001 General Plan Land Use Map. All of the
                 “Pipeline” applications benefitting from this
                 policy must have been submitted to the City,
                                                                                                                  CNF-23

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                                      including full payment of fees, prior to adoption
                                                                      of this General Plan and their review must be
                                                                      completed within this same 24-month period.
                                                       G ROWTH M ANAGEMENT
                                                       GOAL CNF-2 An improved, orderly, and efficient pattern of
                                                                      urban development.
                                                       Policy CNF-2.1 Orderly Development. Promote the orderly
                                                                      development of the City, with concentric growth
                                                                      and infill of existing developed areas.
                                                       Policy CNF-2.2 A Balanced Community. Plan for the needs of all
                                                                      socioeconomic segments of the community,
                                                                      encouraging a balance and match in jobs and
                                                                      housing within the City.
                                                       Policy CNF-2.3 Quality of Life. Maintain Morgan Hill’s high
                                                                      quality of life for existing and future residents.
                                                       Policy CNF-2.4 Changing Demographics. When considering
                                                                      future urban development, look at least five to ten
                                                                      years into the future to take into account changing
                                                                      local and regional demographics.
                                                       Policy CNF-2.5 Morgan Hill 2035 EIR Projections. Monitor the
                                                                      projected growth as analyzed in the Morgan Hill
                                                                      2035 Environmental Impact Report (EIR). When
                                                                      approved development within the city reaches the
                                                                      maximum number of residential units or any of
                                                                      the non-residential square footages projected in
                                                                      the Morgan Hill 2035 EIR, the Community
                                                                      Development Director shall require that
                                                                      environmental review conducted for any
                                                                      subsequent development project address growth
                                                                      impacts that would occur due to development
                                                                      exceeding the Morgan Hill 2035 EIR’s projections.
                                                                      This does not preclude the City, as lead agency,
CNF-24

                                                                     M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                          C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
               from determining that an EIR would be required
               for any development in the Urban Growth
               Boundary to the extent required under the
               relevant provisions of CEQA (e.g., Section 21166
               and related guidelines). The City will conduct the
               appropriate scoping at the time of initial study for
               any specific plan, all in accordance with these
               requirements.
GOAL CNF-3 A growth management system that maintains a
               population cap, a metered pace of development,
               and high level of community amenities, and that
               is clear, fair, flexible, and streamlined.
Policy CNF-3.1 RDCS Purpose. Maintain a Residential Develop-
               ment Control System (RDCS) to manage the
               amount, rate, type, and location of residential
               development in Morgan Hill.
Policy CNF-3.2 Relationship to General Plan. Require the RDCS
               to implement the goals, and policies of the
               General Plan as they relate to residential develop-
               ment in Morgan Hill through 2035.
Policy CNF-3.3 Basic Principles. Require the RDCS to be guided
               by basic principles of fairness, efficiency, predict-
               ability, and transparency.
Policy CNF-3.4 Population Limit. Plan for a January 1, 2035
               population of 58,200 residents.
Policy CNF-3.5 Rate of Growth. Maintain steady and predictable
               annual growth consistent with the population
               limit.
                                                                                                                  CNF-25
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-3.6  Adequate Services and Infrastructure. Allow
                                                                       residential growth only if it is within the ability
                                                                       for the City to provide adequate public services
                                                                       and infrastructure for new development and the
                                                                       community at large.
                                                       Policy CNF-3.7  Jobs/Housing Balance. Plan for residential
                                                                       growth that supports a healthy balance between
                                                                       residents and jobs located within Morgan Hill.
                                                       Policy CNF-3.8  Allotments Required. Require a building allot-
                                                                       ment in order to construct residential units,
                                                                       except for exempt units specified in the RDCS
                                                                       Ordinance.
                                                       Policy CNF-3.9  Annual Allotments. Limit the number of
                                                                       allotments available each year so that as of
                                                                       January 1, 2035 the population of Morgan Hill
                                                                       does not exceed 58,200.
                                                       Policy CNF-3.10 Multi-Family Housing. Maintain an adequate
                                                                       supply of allotments available for multi-family
                                                                       and affordable housing consistent with the City’s
                                                                       adopted Housing Element.
                                                       Policy CNF-3.11 Competition for Allotments. Require residential
                                                                       projects to compete for available allotments each
                                                                       year, except for projects exempt from the RDCS
                                                                       competition. The City shall award allotments to
                                                                       projects receiving the highest scores using criteria
                                                                       specified in the Municipal Code.
                                                       Policy CNF-3.12 Weighting of Points. Award a specific number of
                                                                       points for criteria that reflect community goals,
                                                                       values, and priorities such as promoting infill,
                                                                       affordable housing, high quality design, and
                                                                       encouraging green building.
CNF-26

                                                                     M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                          C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-3.13 Downtown Set-Asides. Set aside at least 500
                allotments for housing within the Downtown
                Specific     Plan   boundaries     through     2035.
                Downtown projects do not compete in the RDCS
                competition – projects consistent with the
                Downtown Specific Plan, General Plan, and
                Zoning Code receive allotments on a first-come-
                first-serce basis.
Policy CNF-3.14 Agricultural Preservation Set-Asides. Set aside
                at least 300 allotments for housing that may be
                applied anywhere in the City through 2035.
                Recipient projects must directly establish
                permanent agricultural conservation easements
                within the City Limits or within the City’s Priority
                Agicultural Conservation Area.
Policy CNF-3.15 Voluntary Features. Allow project applicants to
                incorporate features into projects to receive points
                on a voluntary basis. These features must exceed
                the minimum requirements that apply to all
                development as specified in the General Plan and
                Zoning Code.
Policy CNF-3.16 Policy CNF-3.16 Competition Criteria. Award
                points to projects using criteria that relate to the
                following:
                   Schools
                   Location
                   Affordable Housing
                   Housing Diversity
                   Parks and Open Space
                   Environmental Protection
                   Transportation
                   Infrastructure and Services
                   Project Quality
                                                                                                                  CNF-27

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       GOAL CNF-4 Orderly and limited expansion of City
                                                                      boundaries.
                                                       Policy CNF-4.1 Future Growth Areas. Use the current Urban
                                                                      Service Area and Urban Growth Boundary to
                                                                      identify future urban development areas based on
                                                                      adequacy and availability of municipal services.
                                                       Policy CNF-4.2 Urban Growth Boundary. Maintain a long-term
                                                                      Urban Growth Boundary that:
                                                                       a) provides greater stability of future land use
                                                                       patterns than is currently provided by the
                                                                       existing "short term" urban service area (USA)
                                                                       boundaries;
                                                                       b) indicates the preferred extent and direction of
                                                                       the City's future urban expansion and capital
                                                                       improvements planning;
                                                                       c) encourages compact and concentric urban
                                                                       growth and development;
                                                                       d) promotes fiscal responsibility, cost-effective
                                                                       service delivery, and the City's ability to plan for
                                                                       and adequately maintain urban services over
                                                                       time;
                                                                       e) provides for an adequate land supply
                                                                       necessary for sustainable economic growth;
                                                                       f) compensates for the impacts of the City's
                                                                       historical patterns of urban growth;
                                                                       g) achieves greater compatibility of land use
                                                                       planning and decision-making for lands of
                                                                       mutual interest to the City and County; and
                                                                       h) provide additional certainty to rural
                                                                       landowners needed for purposes of planning
                                                                       investments and maintaining viable agricultural
                                                                       operations.
CNF-28
                                                                 M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                      C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-4.3 Prerequisites for Urban Development. Consider
               land adjacent to the City as available for urban
               development only when it is included within the
               Urban Service Area and Urban Growth Boundary,
               can be developed in a manner that will be cost-
               effective to the City, and will be served by
               adequate public services and facilities.
Policy CNF-4.4 Adding Developed Lands into Urban Growth
               Boundary. Include developed unincorporated
               lands in the UGB when they provide for a logical
               extension of the boundary and are consistent with
               established planning criteria, findings, or
               prerequisites.
Policy CNF-4.5 Urban Growth Boundary Modifications. Require
               consistency of all future proposals to modify the
               UGB with applicable policies of the City's and
               County's General Plan, particularly concerning
               Countywide urban growth management.
Policy CNF-4.6 City/County Role in Urban Growth Boundary
               Modifications. Offer County staff and decision-
               makers adequate opportunity to participate in the
               evaluation of proposals to modify the City's UGB.
               The relative level of County participation should
               be in keeping with the geographic scale or impact
               of the proposed UGB changes (i.e., major
               revisions imply more significant role for joint
               City/County coordination; very minor or
               insignificant modifications would imply a
               potentially less significant role for joint
               City/County coordination).
                                                                                                              CNF-29
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-4.7 Urban Growth Boundary Modification Criteria.
                                                                      Significant modifications to the UGB are strongly
                                                                      discouraged in order to ensure the long term
                                                                      stability of the boundary by directing urban
                                                                      growth to areas of the city that are urbanized or
                                                                      planned for urbanization.
                                                                      a) Significant modifications to the UGB, or
                                                                      significant modifications to the General Plan text
                                                                      supporting the boundary, will only be considered
                                                                      in the context of a major, comprehensive update
                                                                      of the General Plan which fully considers all of
                                                                      the implications of expanding the limits of
                                                                      urbanization.
                                                                      b) Minor modifications to the UGB may be
                                                                      considered during an annual General Plan
                                                                      review. To qualify as a minor modification a
                                                                      proposed modification of the UGB must meet the
                                                                      following criteria:
                                                                        Be no larger than 5 acres in size; or
                                                                        If the modification includes both areas of
                                                                         expansion and areas of contraction, the net
                                                                         expansion area is no larger than five acres in
                                                                         size; and
                                                                        The expansion area must be located
                                                                         contiguous to lands with an urban land use
                                                                         designation on the City’s General Plan Land
                                                                         Use Map.
                                                                      c) All proposed modifications must:
                                                                        Demonstrate consistency with the applicable
                                                                         goals and policies in the General Plan and the
                                                                         surrounding General Plan Land Use
                                                                         designations.
                                                                        Demonstrate a fiscally neutral effect on City
                                                                         finances at the time of development in the
                                                                         future.
CNF-30

                                                                   M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                        C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
                  Be adequately served by public services and
                   infrastructure    without     decreasing   City
                   adopted level of service standards.
                  Demonstrate a public benefits such as the
                   preservation of sensitive habitat or prime
                   farmland, provision of affordable housing,
                   provision of public park or open space land, or
                   a public benefit established by the Morgan Hill
                   City Council.
Action CNF-4.A  Urban      Growth      Boundary       Modification
                Procedures. Modify the City’s Zoning Code to
                include detailed procedures for evaluation and
                consideration of UGB modification requests.
Urban Service Area
Policy CNF-4.8  Land Supply. Include enough land within the
                Urban Service Area to provide for a rate, amount,
                and type of development consistent with the
                General Plan; review and modify the Urban
                Service Area boundaries as needed.
Policy CNF-4.9  Orderly Growth. Urban growth should occur in
                an orderly and contiguous pattern, within the
                designated Urban Service Area, encouraging infill
                of vacant urban land. (South County Joint Area
                Plan 1.09 & 1.10)
Policy CNF-4.10 Urban Service Area Expansions. Base expansion
                of urban service areas and annexations on the
                General Plan, consistent with the City's schedules
                for development and extension of services. (South
                County Joint Area Plan 1.11 & 1.12)
Policy CNF-4.11 Urban Service Area Expansions Within UGB.
                Allow Urban Service Area expansions only within
                the long-term UGB and for lands with urban
                designations; the timing and extent of Urban
                                                                                                                CNF-31

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                                      Service Area expansion shall remain consistent
                                                                      with established Urban Service Area expansion
                                                                      policies and ordinances.
                                                       GOAL CNF-5 Efficient development of County land within
                                                                      the UGB consistent with the City’s long-term
                                                                      development strategy.
                                                       Policy CNF-5.1 Land Use Conflicts. Support the County’s policy
                                                                      to avoid land uses and development in the
                                                                      unincorporated areas which would potentially
                                                                      conflict with future annexation and the optimal
                                                                      utilization of lands within the UGB.
                                                       Policy CNF-5.2 Road and Infrastructure Extensions. Support the
                                                                      County’s policy to avoid premature road and
                                                                      infrastructure extensions in the unincorporated
                                                                      areas which would potentially conflict with
                                                                      optimal street configurations and development
                                                                      patterns within the UGB.
                                                       GOAL CNF-6 High-quality services and facilities that keep
                                                                      pace with community needs and standards.
                                                       Policy CNF-6.1 Services to Serve Growth. Manage and schedule
                                                                      urban growth consistent with the ability to
                                                                      provide a full array of urban services and
                                                                      facilities, such as sewer capacity, water,
                                                                      transportation, schools, public safety and other
                                                                      urban services. (South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                      1.08)
                                                       Policy CNF-6.2 Service Standards. Ensure that facility/service
                                                                      standards can be met for new development by the
                                                                      time of occupancy.
                                                       Policy CNF-6.3 New Public Facilities. Ensure that plans for
                                                                      public facilities (e.g., parks, City offices, fire
                                                                      stations) reflect the anticipated location, amount,
                                                                      and type of new development.
CNF-32

                                                                     M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                          C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-6.4 Public Facilities Upgrades. Evaluate the need for
               improvements to existing public facilities based
               on such factors as the location and extent of new
               residential,     commercial       and      industrial
               development,       residential     densities,   and
               neighborhood development patterns.
Policy CNF-6.5 Development Review Procedure. Require all City
               projects to go through the same development
               review procedure as private projects.
Policy CNF-6.6 Urban Level of Public Services. Fully utilize
               existing strategies to achieve an urban level of
               public services throughout the City, including by
               a) requiring that the timing and location of future
               urban development be based upon the availability
               of public services and facilities; b) requiring new
               development to pay all the incremental public
               service costs which it generates; and c) requiring
               developers to dedicate land and/or pay to offset
               the costs relating to the provision and expansion
               of public services and facilities. (South County
               Joint Area Plan 5.01)
Policy CNF-6.7 Impacts on City Infrastructure. Require all
               development that may result in a substantial
               impact on City infrastructure and/or services to
               be analyzed to determine the extent of that fiscal
               burden.
Policy CNF-6.8 Service and Utility Plans. Develop detailed
               service and utility plans for a 6-year time span.
Action CNF-6.A Level of Service Standards. Identify and adopt a
               set of level of service standards for major public
               facilities and services (roads, police, fire, sewer,
               water, drainage) that identify accepted service
               standards for development in Morgan Hill.
                                                                                                                  CNF-33
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Action CNF-6.B Municipal Service and Capital Improvement
                                                                      Program. Develop a comprehensive municipal
                                                                      service and capital improvement program for
                                                                      6-year time periods.
                                                       Action CNF-6.C Energy Needs. Determine the City’s future
                                                                      energy needs and develop strategies to ensure
                                                                      that adequate energy resources are available
                                                                      when needed.
                                                       GOAL CNF-7 Preservation of viable agricultural lands and
                                                                      publicly-accessible open space uses on
                                                                      unincorporated lands outside the UGB
                                                       Policy CNF-7.1 County General Plan Policies. Promote the
                                                                      maintenance of current County General Plan
                                                                      policies encouraging low-density uses, including
                                                                      large lots and agriculture, for County projects
                                                                      adjacent to the UGB. Encourage the County to
                                                                      retain large minimum parcel sizes, and promote
                                                                      agricultural    and   open      space   uses  on
                                                                      unincorporated lands.
                                                       Policy CNF-7.2 Rural Landowner Home Occupation. Support
                                                                      the County's effort to promote the use of
                                                                      expanded home occupations for rural landowners
                                                                      and agriculturists, within the parameters of the
                                                                      County's zoning ordinance.
                                                       Policy CNF-7.3 Rural Land Uses. Land uses in rural areas should
                                                                      be low-intensity and limited in number, and
                                                                      public services to rural areas should be
                                                                      appropriately limited. (South County Joint Area
                                                                      Plan 1.07)
                                                       Policy CNF-7.4 Agricultural Land Use Conflicts. Work with
                                                                      Santa Clara County to minimize potential land
                                                                      use conflicts between urban uses within the UGB
                                                                      and rural lands adjacent to the growth boundary.
CNF-34

                                                                  M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                       C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-7.5 Inter-Jurisdictional Support for Agriculture.
               Coordinate measures to enhance the economic
               viability of agriculture in conjunction with other
               inter-jurisdictional planning in the South County.
Action CNF-7.A Economic Viability of Agriculture Measures.
               Explore and implement various measures to
               enhance the economic viability of agriculture,
               including by maintaining the City's Right-to-Farm
               Ordinance.
Action CNF-7.B Roadside Services Land Uses. Support the
               County’s policy to prohibit the introduction of
               Roadside Services land use designations on
               unincorporated lands within the City’s Sphere of
               Influence.
Action CNF-7.C Compatible Agricultural and Residential Land
               Uses. Investigate potential conflicts between
               future residential development and existing
               agricultural operations and identify methods of
               resolving such conflicts prior to development.
U RBAN F ORM
GOAL CNF-8 A visually attractive urban environment.
Policy CNF-8.1 High Quality Design. Require all development to
               feature high quality design that enhances the
               visual character of Morgan Hill.
Policy CNF-8.2 Design Features. Encourage design features and
               amenities in new development and redevelop-
               ment, including, but not limited to:
                 Highly connected street layouts, supporting
                  multiple paths of travel for all modes.
                 Cluster buildings to create useable open space.
                 Abundant landscaping.
                                                                                                               CNF-35

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                                        Attractive transitions between uses.
                                                                        Comfortable pedestrian facilities that promote
                                                                         a high level of pedestrian activity.
                                                                        Distinctiveness and variety in architectural
                                                                         design.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.3 Changes in Building Scale. Discourage abrupt
                                                                      changes in building scale. A gradual transition
                                                                      between low-rise to mid-rise buildings should be
                                                                      achieved by using the low-rise buildings at the
                                                                      edge of the project site. Consider the relationship
                                                                      of buildings to the street, to one another and to
                                                                      adjacent structures and land uses.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.4 Architectural Quality. Optimize architectural
                                                                      quality by encouraging the use of quality
                                                                      materials, particularly as accents and authentic
                                                                      detailing, such as balconies and window trims.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.5 Building Façade. On all sides of buildings,
                                                                      require the incorporation of quality architectural
                                                                      design elements for all building façades and
                                                                      stepping back upper floors in order to reduce
                                                                      bulk and mass and to break up monotonous wall
                                                                      lines.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.6 Franchise Architecture. Discourage the use of
                                                                      “franchise architecture.”
                                                       Policy CNF-8.7 Design      Sensitivity.    Ensure      that   new
                                                                      development is sensitive to the character of
                                                                      adjacent     structures    and    the     immediate
                                                                      neighborhood.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.8 Blighted Buildings. Rehabilitate or replace run-
                                                                      down, blighted buildings and developments,
                                                                      including trailer courts.
CNF-36

                                                                    M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                         C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-8.9  Commercial Landscaping. Encourage new
                commercial development to provide outdoor
                areas and landscaping and tree canopy to enhance
                the surroundings.
Policy CNF-8.10 Public Landscaping. Landscape medians and
                public areas along major streets using drought-
                tolerant plant materials, and encourage Caltrans
                to use drought-tolerant plants along Highway
                101.
Policy CNF-8.11 Pedestrian Spaces. Encourage the design of
                attractive outdoor pedestrian spaces that
                encourage impromptu public gathering places
                with features such as plazas, interior walkways
                and paseos, ornamental gates, trellises, lighting,
                trees and landscaping, seating and fountains.
Policy CNF-8.12 Visual Impact of Parking. Require parking areas
                associated with development to be located and
                designed to minimize visual impact to the
                greatest extent feasible. This may include locating
                parking behind buildings street frontage, below
                grade, or screening through the use of natural
                landscaping.
Policy CNF-8.13 Permeable      Surface     Materials.   Encourage
                construction of parking areas, trails, and access
                roads     with    permeable     materials    where
                appropriate.
Policy CNF-8.14 Sound Walls. Minimize the use of sound walls to
                situations where they are required to meet noise
                standards and other forms of mitigation are not
                available. Use techniques less visually disturbing
                than sound walls, including but not limited to
                earth berms and intervening placement of non-
                sensitive buildings when requiring noise impact
                mitigation of new and/or expanded development.
                                                                                                                 CNF-37
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-8.15 Streetscape Improvement Maintenance. Ensure
                                                                       adequate maintenance of streetscape improve-
                                                                       ments.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.16 Undergrounding of Utilities. Require the
                                                                       undergrounding of all utilities, or a deferred
                                                                       improvement agreement, in conjunction with new
                                                                       construction and encourage the undergrounding
                                                                       of existing utilities where feasible.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.17 Public Art. Encourage installation of public art in
                                                                       new and renovated non-residential projects.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.18 Monterey Road Development Form. Ensure that
                                                                       development along West Little Llagas Creek
                                                                       incorporates the creek as an amenity.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.19 Incompatible Uses. Use setbacks, natural and
                                                                       man-made barriers such as streams, park land,
                                                                       and drainage ways, and other mitigation to
                                                                       separate incompatible uses whenever possible.
                                                       Policy CNF-8.20 Nighttime Lighting. Require nighttime lighting
                                                                       to be designed to minimize light spillage to
                                                                       adjacent properties.*
                                                       Policy CNF-8.21 Nighttime Lighting Technology. Require
                                                                       nighttime lighting to use current lighting
                                                                       technology to minimize lighting intensity and
                                                                       downshielded to reduce light pollution.*
                                                       Action CNF-8.A  Architectural Review Handbook. Update the
                                                                       Architectural Review Handbook as needed to
                                                                       reflect the City’s requirements for high-quality
                                                                       design.
CNF-38

                                                                   M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                        C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Action CNF-8.B  Parking Lot Lighting Efficiency Retrofit
                Ordinance. Develop a parking lot lighting retrofit
                ordinance requiring property owners or managers
                to replace inefficient parking lot or parking
                structure lighting with high-efficiency lighting
                technologies where feasible.
Action CNF-8.C  Public Art. Develop a plan and standards to
                encourage the inclusion of public art in new and
                renovated non-residential projects.
GOAL CNF-9 Appropriate transitions between urban land
                uses and surrounding undeveloped areas.
Policy CNF-9.1  Density Feathering from High to Low Densities.
                Encourage feathering from higher urban densities
                to lower rural densities to occur within the City
                limits. Feathering should begin as development
                nears the Urban Growth Boundary.
Policy CNF-9.2  Density Feathering West of Highway 101. West
                of Highway 101 and north of the Madrone
                Industrial Park, feather residential uses toward
                the northern Sphere of Influence boundary with
                San Jose.
Policy CNF-9.3  Density Feathering in South Morgan Hill.
                Maintain existing residential feathering south of
                Watsonville Road and west of Monterey Road.
R ESIDENTIAL N EIGHBORHOODS
GOAL CNF-10 A variety of housing types and densities
                available to all residents.
Policy CNF-10.1 Range of Residential Densities. Continue to
                provide for a full range of residential land use
                densities and building types, within the General
                Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
                                                                                                                CNF-39
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-10.2 Single-Family and Multi-Family Housing Ratio.
                                                                       Plan for an approximate 70/30 ratio of single-
                                                                       family to multi-family housing for all future
                                                                       residential development.
                                                       Policy CNF-10.3 Adequate Supply of Multi-Family Housing.
                                                                       Provide for an adequate supply of multi-family
                                                                       housing, located convenient to shopping, services,
                                                                       and transportation routes.
                                                       Policy CNF-10.4 Single-Family Housing Supply. Support actions
                                                                       to maintain an adequate supply of single-family
                                                                       housing throughout the community, including
                                                                       provision of affordable single-family housing to
                                                                       those persons who work within the community.
                                                       Policy CNF-10.5 Affordable Single-Family Housing. To the
                                                                       maximum extent possible, emphasize single-
                                                                       family units in affordable housing allocations,
                                                                       rental and ownership housing assistance projects,
                                                                       and rehabilitation programs to improve the
                                                                       existing housing stock.
                                                       Policy CNF-10.6 Density Near Infrastructure. Encourage higher
                                                                       residential densities at locations where convenient
                                                                       access and adequate infrastructure is readily
                                                                       available.
                                                       Policy CNF-10.7 Range of Parcel Sizes. Utilize a full range of
                                                                       parcel sizes and land use categories in the City's
                                                                       Zoning Ordinance to provide for a variety of
                                                                       residential densities and housing types.
                                                       GOAL CNF-11 High quality, aesthetically pleasing, livable,
                                                                       sustainable, well-planned residential
                                                                       neighborhoods, well-connected to
                                                                       neighborhood services.
CNF-40
                                                                      M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                           C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-11.1 Preservation of Single-Family Neighborhoods.
                Encourage preservation and rehabilitation of
                single-family neighborhoods within the City.
New Subdivisions
Policy CNF-11.2 Well-Designed Residential Neighborhoods.
                Design residential neighborhoods so they are
                distinct and buffered from conflicting non-
                residential uses.
Policy CNF-11.3 Appropriate Residential Transitions. Provide for
                an acceptable transition in lot size and density
                between adjacent residential areas.
Policy CNF-11.4 Internal Connectivity. Encourage the street
                network in new subdivisions to feature a high
                level of internal connectivity. This may be
                accomplished through frequent intersection of
                internal streets, blocks averaging 400 to 600 feet in
                length.
Policy CNF-11.5 Outside Connections. Require new subdivisions
                to provide multiple connections to the surround-
                ing community. Methods to achieve this may
                include:
                  Providing multiple points of entry into the
                   project     for    motorists,   bicyclists    and
                   pedestrians.
                  Extending the existing street pattern at the
                   edges of the subdivision into the site. Extended
                   streets should match the type and scale of
                   streets to which they connect.
                  Installing landscaping and street improve-
                   ments at the edge of subdivisions that appear
                   as common amenities shared with adjacent
                   neighborhoods.
                                                                                                                   CNF-41

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                                         Minimizing the use of gates, fences, and walls
                                                                          that separate the subdivision from the
                                                                          surrounding community.
                                                                         Planning for future connections to adjacent
                                                                          undeveloped property.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.6 Open Space Connections. Use existing and
                                                                       planned drainage/flood control and linear park
                                                                       system elements, as well as other publicly owned
                                                                       or restricted land, to connect residential
                                                                       neighborhoods.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.7 Clustering of Residential Units. Encourage the
                                                                       clustering of residential units to provide open
                                                                       space and recreation areas, and to provide buffer
                                                                       areas between different land uses (e.g., industrial
                                                                       and residential).
                                                       Policy CNF-11.8 Multi-Modal Transportation System. Require
                                                                       new subdivisions to contain a network of streets,
                                                                       sidewalks, trails, and transit facilities that
                                                                       accommodate all modes of transportation.
                                                                       Methods to achieve this may include:
                                                                         Incorporating complete streets designed for
                                                                          low vehicle speeds.
                                                                         Planting trees along both sides of streets.
                                                                         Installing bus stops, shelters, and benches in or
                                                                          adjacent to the project.
                                                                         Providing safe walking and bicycling routes to
                                                                          schools, parks, and other youth destinations.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.9 Continuous Sidewalks. Require continuous
                                                                       sidewalks along both sides of the street frontage.
CNF-42

                                                                       M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                            C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-11.10 Open Space. Require new subdivisions to feature
                 integrated common open spaces, parks, and
                 community facilities that serve as social and
                 design focal points. Open spaces should be a close
                 walking distance from all residents and should be
                 large enough to be useful for residents.
Policy CNF-11.11 Mix of Housing Types. Encourage a mix of
                 housing types and lot sizes within residential
                 projects with five or more lots or units.
Policy CNF-11.12 Design Variation. Require new residential
                 subdivisions to feature variation in lot and
                 building design to create visually interesting and
                 distinctive neighborhoods. This may be
                 accomplished by:
                    Limiting repetition of home              models,
                     particularly on adjacent lots.
                    Utilizing a cohesive architectural theme but
                     incorporating variation in architectural details.
                    Providing variation in one and two-story
                     building elements.
                    Providing variation in front, side, and rear
                     setbacks.
                    Providing variation in the width and size of
                     lots.
Policy CNF-11.13 Active Public Realm. Require new subdivisions
                 to feature an active and pedestrian-friendly public
                 realm. This may be accomplished through
                 locating front entries to face the street or other
                 public space, designing porches and front yards
                 to enhance the social role of streets, and
                 incorporating alleys to allow for rear-loaded
                 units.
                                                                                                                    CNF-43

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       General Residential Design
                                                       Policy CNF-11.14 Residential Development. Avoid monotony in
                                                                        the appearance of residential development.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.15 Architectural Style. Allow the design of homes in
                                                                        a diverse range of styles. However, buildings
                                                                        should strive for the authentic implementation of
                                                                        established architectural styles (See “A Field
                                                                        Guide to American Houses” by Virginia and Lee
                                                                        McAlester.)
                                                       Policy CNF-11.16 360-Degree Design. Require residential buildings
                                                                        to be well articulated on all sides. Side and rear
                                                                        facades shall maintain the architectural design,
                                                                        level of detail, and materials consistent with the
                                                                        front facade.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.17 Architectural     Details.   Require     residential
                                                                        buildings to feature architectural details such as
                                                                        eaves, bay windows, porches, and balconies that
                                                                        emphasize their residential and pedestrian-scale
                                                                        character.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.18 Orientation to the Street. For residential
                                                                        buildings adjacent to a street, orient entrances to
                                                                        that street.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.19 Parking and Driveways. Require the design and
                                                                        location of parking and vehicle circulation
                                                                        facilities of residential buildings to support a
                                                                        pedestrian-friendly environment. This may be
                                                                        accomplished by:
                                                                          Locating parking and driveways toward the
                                                                           rear or side of buildings and away from the
                                                                           public streets and sidewalks.
                                                                          Including driveways shared         by   multiple
                                                                           dwelling units.
CNF-44

                                                                        M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                             C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
                   Utilizing rear-loaded building types with
                    garages facing the rear of the property or an
                    alley.
                   Minimizing the number and frequency of
                    driveways intersecting sidewalks.
                   Locating front yard driveways at the edge of
                    the parcel rather than the center.
                   Screening parking areas adjacent to streets
                    with low fences and landscaping.
                   Providing vehicle drop-off areas to the side or
                    rear of multi-family buildings.
Policy CNF-11.20 Infill Compatibility. Require residential infill
                 development to complement existing develop-
                 ment patterns and minimize impacts on neighbor-
                 ing properties. This may be accomplished by:
                   Matching prevailing front and side setbacks on
                    developed blocks.
                   Breaking up large buildings into smaller forms
                    reflective of the scale of nearby structures.
                   Stepping back        upper     stories  of   taller
                    structures.
                   Using porches or balconies to counteract the
                    vertical emphasis of taller buildings.
                   Using trees and landscaping to soften scale
                    differences, particularly in areas where trees
                    and vegetation are unifying aspects of
                    community character.
Policy CNF-11.21 Neighbor Privacy. Require new residential
                 development to consider the privacy needs of
                 neighboring       properties.     This    may      be
                 accomplished by careful placement and design of
                 windows, stepping back upper portions of
                 buildings, and landscape design.
                                                                                                                     CNF-45

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Attached Single-Family and Multi-Family Design
                                                       Policy CNF-11.22 Minimized Mass and Scale. Minimize the
                                                                        perceived mass and scale of attached single-
                                                                        family homes and multi-family housing to appear
                                                                        consistent with Morgan Hill’s small town
                                                                        residential character. This may be accomplished
                                                                        by:
                                                                           Breaking larger buildings up into multiple
                                                                            masses and adding visual breaks in building
                                                                            volumes.
                                                                           Providing separation between           individual
                                                                            buildings within a single project.
                                                                           Including paseos, courtyards, plazas and other
                                                                            forms of open space that help to break up
                                                                            building mass.
                                                                           Utilizing landscaping that helps to soften the
                                                                            visual impact of larger buildings.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.23 Individual Units. Require attached single-family
                                                                        homes and multi-family housing to appear as
                                                                        individual residences or small groups of units.
                                                                        This can be accomplished by:
                                                                           Incorporating separate building volumes or
                                                                            façade protrusions.
                                                                           Utilizing window bays or balconies, porches,
                                                                            and entrance vestibules.
                                                                           Providing individual roof volumes, variation
                                                                            in roof heights, and other roof articulation.
                                                                           Adding variation in building colors and
                                                                            materials.
                                                                           Including narrow façade widths.
                                                       Policy CNF-11.24 Ground Level Entries. Require attached single-
                                                                        family homes and multi-family housing to
                                                                        provide as many private, ground level entries to
                                                                        individual units as possible.
CNF-46

                                                                        M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                             C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-11.25 Prominent Entries. Require attached single-
                 family homes and multi-family housing to feature
                 building entries that are prominent and visible.
                 Building entrances shall feature human-scale
                 porches, front stoops, or other methods to
                 accentuate ground level entries of individual
                 units.
Policy CNF-11.26 Multi-Family Entrances. Require multi-family
                 buildings that do not have ground floor entrances
                 for individual units to feature a prominent
                 ground or first floor entry, such as a highly visible
                 lobby or atrium.
Policy CNF-11.27 Ground-Floor Transition Zones. Require the
                 ground floor of attached single-family homes and
                 multi-family buildings to include transition zones
                 between private and semi-public spaces through
                 the use of landscaping, fences, trellises, walls, or a
                 change in floor elevation.
Policy CNF-11.28 Bicycles and Pedestrians. Require attached
                 residential sites to be designed to accommodate
                 the needs of bicyclists and pedestrians. This may
                 be accomplished by:
                   Providing bicycle and pedestrian connections
                    to adjacent uses with paseos, trails, sidewalks,
                    paths, and similar amenities.
                   Creating attractive connections through
                    landscaping, lighting, benches, other amenities
                    to create safe and visually interesting spaces.
                   Installing bicycle racks and lockers near
                    building entrances, integrated into the design
                    of the project and screened with appropriate
                    landscaping.
                                                                                                                     CNF-47

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-11.29 Multi-Family Open Space. Require attached
                                                                        single-family homes and multi-family housing to
                                                                        provide open spaces that are inviting places,
                                                                        useful to occupants, and encourage resident
                                                                        activity and interaction. This may be accom-
                                                                        plished by:
                                                                          Providing open space areas of sufficient size to
                                                                           be used by residents.
                                                                          Defining the edge of common open space with
                                                                           buildings, fences, and walls.
                                                                          Locating open space areas so that they are
                                                                           visible from individual units.
                                                                          Landscaping open space to create an attractive
                                                                           and comfortable environment.
                                                                          Incorporating lighting into open spaces as
                                                                           needed for public safety.
                                                                          Including amenities such as seating areas and
                                                                           walkways to promote resident gathering and
                                                                           interaction.
                                                       N EIGHBORHOOD C ENTERS
                                                       GOAL CNF-12 Distinctive neighborhood centers.
                                                       Policy CNF-12.1  Neighborhood        Center       Design.      Allow
                                                                        neighborhood centers within future residential
                                                                        neighborhoods. Neighborhood centers are
                                                                        envisioned as nodes or focal points that offer
                                                                        neighborhood-serving services and amenities
                                                                        within a reasonable walking distance from
                                                                        adjoining residential areas. These centers should
                                                                        be designed to increase the accessibility of goods
                                                                        and services       within existing residential
                                                                        neighborhoods, particularly for the benefit of
                                                                        senior citizens and those with limited mobility,
                                                                        and to offer opportunities for socialization.
CNF-48

                                                                      M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                           C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-12.2  Well-connected Neighborhood Centers. Provide
                 for safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle
                 connections as well as transit access to support
                 existing     neighborhood      centers,    including
                 shopping centers, medical offices, sports fields,
                 and the Centennial Recreation Center.
Policy CNF-12.3  Neighborhood-serving Retail in Neighborhood
                 Centers. Encourage neighborhood-serving retail
                 and service uses that promote community health,
                 social interaction within neighborhood centers,
                 such as small grocery stores, cafés, or recreational
                 uses.
Policy CNF-12.4  Neighborhood Center Requirements. Require
                 future neighborhood centers to meet the
                 following requirements:
                    The design of neighborhood center should
                     provide a sense of place, promote casual
                     interaction, and enhance overall well-being.
                    The design of neighborhood center should
                     complement the residential character of its
                     immediate surroundings, including site
                     design, access, building style, building
                     materials, signage, lighting, and landscaping.
M IXED U SE F LEX
GOAL CNF-13 Mixed use flex developments that include a
                 variety of uses and forms to foster a dynamic
                 urban environment.
Policy CNF-13.1  Mixed Use Flex Development. Encourage a mix
                 of uses, either vertically or horizontally, to allow
                 residents and employees to meet daily needs
                 without the use of the private automobile.
                                                                                                                   CNF-49

M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-13.2 Density Feathering. Encourage the feathering of
                                                                       land use densities and intensities from high to
                                                                       low along Monterey Road with higher intensity
                                                                       land uses located adjacent to Downtown.
                                                       Policy CNF-13.3 Maximize Land Use. Encourage mixed use flex
                                                                       development to maximize allowed densities and
                                                                       intensities adjacent to Downtown.
                                                       Policy CNF-13.4 Block-level Master Plans. Require mixed use flex
                                                                       developments to a prepare block-level master
                                                                       plan to ensure well-planned development.
                                                       Action CNF-13.A Monterey       Road      Infrastructure.  Provide
                                                                       infrastructure improvements, as appropriate, to
                                                                       stimulate development along Monterey Road.
                                                       D OWNTOWN
                                                       GOAL CNF-14 A vibrant, identifiable Downtown enlivened by
                                                                       public events, place-making activities,
                                                                       residences and businesses, taking advantage of
                                                                       the train station.
                                                       Policy CNF-14.1 Mixture of Uses Downtown. Encourage a
                                                                       mixture of uses in the Downtown that will
                                                                       promote its identity as the cultural and activity
                                                                       center of the City.
                                                       Policy CNF-14.2 Downtown as Local Retail Destination.
                                                                       Prioritize uses that support Downtown as the
                                                                       primary local retail destination.
                                                       Policy CNF-14.3 Downtown        Specific    Plan.    Support  the
                                                                       implementation of the Downtown Specific Plan.
CNF-50
                                                                    M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                         C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-14.4  Downtown Retail Uses. Encourage a mix of retail
                 uses in the Downtown, such as specialty retail,
                 office, entertainment, and other retail uses, with
                 offices located away from Monterey Road or on
                 upper floors along Monterey Road.
Policy CNF-14.5  Downtown        Residential     Uses.   Encourage
                 residential uses on upper floors above commercial
                 uses in the Downtown area.
Policy CNF-14.6  RDCS to Support Downtown Residential. Use
                 the Residential Development Control System to
                 foster residential uses above commercial uses.
Policy CNF-14.7  Pedestrian-Oriented Downtown. Enhance the
                 positive, friendly atmosphere of the Downtown
                 by encouraging proposed development to expand
                 pedestrian-oriented design and amenities east of
                 Monterey Road to Butterfield Boulevard.
Policy CNF-14.8  Downtown Streetscape. Continue the Downtown
                 streetscape and pedestrian-oriented design theme
                 along Monterey Road for at least one block north
                 of Main Avenue and at least one block south of
                 Dunne Avenue, and from Monterey Road east to
                 Butterfield Boulevard between Main and Dunne
                 Avenues, to provide a transition from downtown
                 adjoining commercial areas.
Policy CNF-14.9  Downtown Transit Stops. Locate transit stops
                 convenient to the Downtown and housing,
                 focusing on transit- and pedestrian-oriented
                 development.
Policy CNF-14.10 Adequate Downtown Parking. Require adequate
                 parking for all businesses within the downtown.
                                                                                                                 CNF-51
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-14.11 Downtown Parking Sharing. Consider allowing
                                                                        Downtown land uses with night and weekend
                                                                        peak parking demands to share parking spaces
                                                                        with uses that have daytime and weekday peak
                                                                        parking demands.
                                                       Policy CNF-14.12 Downtown          Transportation    Improvements.
                                                                        Ensure that Transportation Element and road
                                                                        improvement programs provide efficient access to
                                                                        the Downtown at a level of service not intended
                                                                        to accommodate regional pass-through traffic.
                                                       Policy CNF-14.13 Downtown Special Events. Provide community
                                                                        assistance and support for Downtown activities
                                                                        and special events - festivals, art shows, farmers’
                                                                        markets, collector car shows, museum exhibits,
                                                                        craft fairs, etc.
                                                       Policy CNF-14.14 Relocation of Industrial Uses from Downtown.
                                                                        Encourage industrial uses to relocate from the
                                                                        downtown and into more appropriate industrial
                                                                        areas within the City. Use these vacant parcels to
                                                                        expand activities and uses conducive to the
                                                                        pedestrian-oriented Downtown environment.
                                                       Action CNF-14.A  Downtown Streetscape Improvements Budget.
                                                                        Review and revise as necessary the budget for
                                                                        maintaining           downtown          streetscape
                                                                        improvements.
                                                       C OMMERCIAL AND O FFICE
                                                       GOAL CNF-15 Sufficient, sustainable, and concentrated
                                                                        commercial and office uses.
                                                       Policy CNF-15.1  Mix of Commercial Uses. Encourage a variety of
                                                                        commercial and office development to meet the
                                                                        needs of City residents.
CNF-52

                                                                     M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                          C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-15.2 Successful Commercial Uses. Ensure the viability
                of Downtown and other recognized shopping
                areas, and discourage isolated and sprawling
                commercial activities along major roads.
Policy CNF-15.3 Retail Uses at Major Intersections. Encourage
                retail sales use at major intersections as the focus
                of clustered commercial development.
Policy CNF-15.4 Commercial Uses Along Monterey Road north
                of Watsonville Road. Encourage commercial
                development and concentrate community
                shopping uses along Monterey Road north of
                Watsonville Road, but discourage commercial
                activities south of Watsonville Road.
Policy CNF-15.5 Office Development. Encourage new regional
                and local-serving office development at
                appropriate locations.
Policy CNF-15.6 Preservation of Homes Along Monterey Road.
                Encourage preservation of older homes along
                Monterey Road north of Central Avenue for
                commercial and office use.
GOAL CNF-16 Freeway-oriented major shopping centers
                concentrated around interchanges and designed
                to convey a positive image of Morgan Hill.
Policy CNF-16.1 Tourist and Sub-regional Uses at the Northeast
                Cochrane and Southwest Tenant Freeway
                Interchange. Encourage tourist-oriented and sub-
                regional retail uses at the northeast Cochrane and
                southwest Tennant freeway interchanges (also see
                Economic Development Element).
                                                                                                                  CNF-53
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-16.2 Ancillary Commercial Uses Limitations. Limit
                                                                       repetitive ancillary commercial uses, such as fast-
                                                                       food restaurants and service stations, on lands
                                                                       around all interchanges.
                                                       I NDUSTRIAL
                                                       GOAL CNF-17 Adequate land for maintaining and focusing
                                                                       industrial development in economically and
                                                                       geographically strategic locations.
                                                       Policy CNF-17.1 Industrial Land Conversion. Discourage the
                                                                       conversion of property designated for industrial
                                                                       to non-industrial uses.
                                                       Policy CNF-17.2 Industrial Land Use Conflicts. Ensure proposed
                                                                       new uses adjacent to industrial uses do not
                                                                       introduce land use conflicts that would adversely
                                                                       impact industrial activities.
                                                       Policy CNF-17.3 Buffer between Industrial and Incompatible
                                                                       Uses. Ensure that all industrial uses are well sited
                                                                       and buffered from incompatible uses; buffers may
                                                                       include offices adjacent to sensitive uses,
                                                                       landscaping, berms, etc.
                                                       Policy CNF-17.4 Property between Monterey Road and UPRR
                                                                       Tracks. Allow a mix of uses on the property
                                                                       located on the east side of Monterey Road south
                                                                       of the Union Pacific train trestle. Require designs
                                                                       for new development to recognize the
                                                                       significance of this portion of Monterey Road as
                                                                       the northerly entrance to downtown and the
                                                                       necessary limitations on use due to its single point
                                                                       of access.
CNF-54
                                                                   M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                        C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-17.5 Industrial Design Standards. Require all new
                industrial development to be consistent with the
                design and landscaping standards set forth in the
                Architectural Review Handbook.
Action CNF-17.A Industrial Land Supply Evaluation. Evaluate
                periodically the amount of industrial land
                available for development within the Urban
                Service Area, and propose expansion or
                adjustments in General Plan industrial land
                categories and related zoning as necessary.
C OMMERCIAL /I NDUSTRIAL
GOAL CNF-18 Integrated job-generating centers that offer
                workers and businesses a range of services to
                meet their daily needs.
Policy CNF-18.1 Vibrant Job Centers. Encourage land with a
                Commercial/Industrial designation to develop
                with job-generating uses with amenities that
                support workers and businesses, such as
                restaurants, lodging, fitness centers, and hair
                salons.
Policy CNF-18.2 Thoughtful Design. Encourage integrated and
                appropriate commercial uses on lands with a
                Commercial/Industrial designation that relate to
                and support surrounding businesses.
Policy CNF-18.3 Compatible Industrial Uses. Require Planned
                Development overlay zones (PD) for the
                industrial and/or commercial development along
                the side of Highway 101 (south of Cochrane Road
                and north of Diana Avenue) and the area west of
                Highway 101 and south of Tennant Avenue to
                ensure that issues such as circulation, allowable
                uses, neighborhood compatibility, high visibility,
                                                                                                                CNF-55
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                                       and development          standards     are  properly
                                                                       addressed.
                                                       Policy CNF-18.4 Commercial/Industrial Area East of Highway
                                                                       101. Require the commercial/industrial area east
                                                                       of Highway 101 to develop in no more than three
                                                                       PDs. The boundary between the PDs, should two
                                                                       or three be proposed, would be Half Road and
                                                                       Main Avenue. The PDs will need to address such
                                                                       issues as traffic circulation, design, allowable uses
                                                                       and impacts on surrounding areas. Mitigation of
                                                                       impacts on nearby residential areas shall be a
                                                                       high priority in planning for and development of
                                                                       the PDs. Allowable uses within these PDs shall
                                                                       include, in addition to industrial uses, retail
                                                                       services, lodging, medical facilities, hospitals, and
                                                                       educational facilities.
                                                       G ATEWAYS
                                                       GOAL CNF-19 Distinct, attractive, inviting, and improved
                                                                       gateways to the community.
                                                       Policy CNF-19.1 Unique Gateways. Develop welcoming gateway
                                                                       areas that emphasize the unique qualities of
                                                                       Morgan Hill.
                                                       Policy CNF-19.2 Visual Integrity of Gateways. Enhance the visual
                                                                       integrity of the gateways to the City such as the
                                                                       Madrone area north of Cochrane Road, the
                                                                       Cochrane Road/Monterey Road intersection,
                                                                       Monterey Road south of Watsonville Road, the
                                                                       Cochrane, Dunne, and Tennant freeway
                                                                       interchanges, and the Caltrain station.
                                                       Policy CNF-19.3 Freeway Gateway Design Standards. Apply
                                                                       gateway design standards to all freeway
                                                                       commercial development.
CNF-56
                                                                  M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                       C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-19.4  Landmark Buildings. Require high quality
                design for buildings at visually significant
                locations in gateway areas.
Action CNF-19.A Union Pacific Railroad Crossing Gateway. Work
                with Union Pacific and the California Public
                Utilities Commission to improve the appearance
                of the railroad overcrossing (a secondary gateway
                to the City) and land along the railroad.
A REAS OF S PECIAL C ONSIDERATION
GOAL CNF-20 Sustainable growth in the East of 101 Area Plan
                Overlay district.
Policy CNF-20.1 East of 101 Area Land Use Planning. Require the
                preparation of a comprehensive master plan
                when new residential development is proposed in
                the East of 101 Area Plan Overlay district.
Policy CNF-20.2 East of 101 Area Land Use Mix. Require new
                neighborhoods in the East of 101 Area Plan
                Overlay district to have an integrated, connected
                street network that encourages walking and
                biking.
Policy CNF-20.3 East of 101 Area Design. Require new residential
                development to be designed to minimize adverse
                impacts on adjacent residential and agricultural
                uses.
Policy CNF-20.4 East of 101 Area Integrated Agriculture. Strongly
                encourage new development to preserve existing
                agricultural uses as feasible and integrate
                agricultural features into new development to
                reflect the history of this area.
                                                                                                               CNF-57
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
                                                       Policy CNF-20.5  East of 101 Area Community Park. Plan for a
                                                                        community park facility within the East of 101
                                                                        Area that is well-connected to surrounding
                                                                        neighborhoods by bicycle and pedestrian
                                                                        facilities.
                                                       J OINT L AND U SE P LANNING IN THE S OUTH C OUNTY
                                                       GOAL CNF-21 Effective, stable growth of the South County.
                                                       Policy CNF-21.1  County Land Use Policies. Support the
                                                                        continuation of adopted County land use policies
                                                                        for the unincorporated areas in order to: a)
                                                                        promote a productive, primarily agricultural rural
                                                                        area; and b) balance the needs of rural residents
                                                                        and landowners and the needs for effective
                                                                        natural resource management, enhanced rural
                                                                        scenic quality, and lands for planned urban
                                                                        growth, rural activities, and long-term open
                                                                        space. (South County Joint Area Plan 17.01)
                                                       Policy CNF-21.2  City and County Land Use Policies. Promote the
                                                                        long-term stability of City and County policies for
                                                                        land use and urban growth so that individuals,
                                                                        organizations, and appropriate entities can make
                                                                        rational decisions about long-term land use and
                                                                        investment. (South County Joint Area Plan 17.02)
                                                       Policy CNF-21.3  City/County Land Use Policy Referral Process.
                                                                        Refer proposed major changes in City land use
                                                                        policy and major projects or expansions that
                                                                        could affect the unincorporated area in the SOI to
                                                                        Santa Clara County to offer them an opportunity
                                                                        for review and comment. The County’s review
                                                                        should focus on areawide objectives, such as jobs-
                                                                        housing balance, open space protection, and
                                                                        provision of infrastructure. (South County Joint
                                                                        Area Plan 17.04)
CNF-58

                                                                   M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                        C I T Y A N D   N E I G H B O R H O O D  F O R M
Policy CNF-21.4 Incorporation. If it is determined that a use
                proposed for the unincorporated area is needed in
                the South County but would be more
                appropriately located in a city, then the use
                should be located in a city, providing there is or
                could be sufficient and appropriately zoned land.
                (South County Joint Area Plan 17.06)
                                                                                                                CNF-59
M O R G A N   H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
C I T Y A N D  N E I G H B O R H O O D   F O R M
CNF-60
City of Morgan Hill
Housing Element
                    Adopted February 18, 2015

                                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                            CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 2
  1.1.1 Purpose of the Housing Element ...................................................................................... 2
  1.1.2 Process of Preparing the Housing Element....................................................................... 3
  1.1.3 Consistency with the Morgan Hill General Plan................................................................ 5
KEY FINDINGS OF THE BACKGROUND ANALYSIS ..................................................................... 7
  1.2.1 Demographic and Housing Trends .................................................................................... 7
  1.2.2 Future Housing Needs....................................................................................................... 9
  1.2.3 Affordable Housing Definitions ....................................................................................... 13
CURRENT HOUSING ELEMENT REVIEW AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS ........................................ 15
  1.3.1 Accomplishments of the Current Housing Element........................................................ 15
  1.3.2 Housing Element Program Review .................................................................................. 17
AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY .............................................................................................. 23
  1.4.1 Overview ......................................................................................................................... 23
  1.4.2 Development Under the Downtown Specific Plan ......................................................... 23
  1.4.3 Residential Development Control System....................................................................... 29
  1.4.4 Overview of Available Land for Housing by 2014 ........................................................... 31
HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS........................................................................... 35
IMPLEMENTATION TIMEFRAME ........................................................................................... 52
  1.6.1 Overview ......................................................................................................................... 52
  1.6.2 Implementation Summary Tables ................................................................................... 53
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES ..................................................................................................... 56
  1.7.1 Purpose of Establishing Quantified Objectives ............................................................... 56
  1.7.2 Quantified Objectives Summary Table............................................................................ 56
                                                                                                                                            1
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
1.1        BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION
1.1.1 PURPOSE OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The Housing Element of the General Plan is Morgan Hill’s
comprehensive statement of its housing needs and goals. It
identifies actions to meet the housing needs of the full spectrum
of city residents at all income levels. The policies contained in
this Element are a local expression of the statewide housing goal
of “attaining decent housing and a suitable living environment for
every California family." The Housing Element reflects the
concerns of the community such as protecting the unique
character of the city, discouraging developments outside the city’s urban service area, and preserving a
greenbelt legacy for future generations, all key objectives of the City’s Residential Growth Control System
ordinance (RDCS). The purpose of the Housing Element is to establish specific goals, policies, and
objectives relative to the provision of housing for all income levels, and to adopt an action plan toward this
end. In addition, the Element identifies and analyzes housing needs, as well as resources and constraints
related to meeting those needs.
This Housing Element builds on the City’s past Housing Element, which was certified by the State
Department of Housing and Community Development in 2010. The current Housing Element, focused on
the 2015-2023 planning period, meets the City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) determined
by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). The element is based on three strategic goals: (1)
provide an adequate supply of housing to meet future needs, (2) preserve the existing housing supply, and
(3) provide adequate housing for groups with special needs.
In accordance with State law, the Housing Element must be consistent and compatible with other General
Plan elements. Additionally, the Housing Element should provide clear policy and direction for making
decisions pertaining to zoning and development standards, subdivision approvals, housing allocations under
the RDCS, and capital improvements. The Housing Element must contain:
    An assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant to meeting those
     needs.
    A statement of the community's goals, quantified objectives, and policies relevant to the maintenance,
     improvement and development of housing.
2

                                                                             MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                  CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT
    A housing action program that sets forth an eight-year schedule of actions that the local government is
     undertaking or intends to undertake to implement the policies and achieve the goals and objectives of
     the Housing Element. The structure of Morgan Hill’s housing strategy involves policies and actions that
     facilitate the goals shown in Figure 1-1.
Figure 1-1           Structure of Morgan Hill’s Housing Strategy
Housing Strategy
                             Build new housing to meet the full range of future community
                                 housing needs, including affordability and accessibility
                              Preserve and rehabilitate existing housing in the community
                                        Build housing for groups with special needs
                              Ensure a range of housing types for all age groups, served by
                               transit, recreational amenities, shopping, and health and
                                 personal services, that allow residents to age in place
The housing action program must also identify adequate residential sites available for a variety of housing
types for all income levels; assist in developing adequate housing to meet the needs of lower and moderate
income households; address governmental constraints to housing maintenance, improvement, and
development; conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock; and promote
housing opportunities for all persons.
Although the Housing Element must follow State law it is by nature a local policy document. The focus of
the updated Housing Element is on the needs, desires, and vision of Morgan Hill residents.
1.1.2 PROCESS OF PREPARING THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The 2015 update of the Housing Element builds upon the 2010 update, which involved an extensive
community process. During the 2010 update, the Morgan Hill City Council created a twelve-member
Housing Element Update Task Force to provide guidance and technical assistance throughout the update
                                                                                                               3

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
process. The Task Force met nine times in 2008 and 2009. The initial focus of Task Force meetings was an
analysis of the current Housing Element and the identification and discussion of potential changes, followed
by discussion of specific policy options. All of the Task Force meetings were noticed and open to the public.
The 2014 update is intended for Streamlined Review by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development, which encourages targeted updates to the Housing Element rather than a
wholesale revision. While this update has not necessitated the creation of an entirely new housing advisory
Task Force, the City has solicited community feedback. The City is currently in the process of updating the
entire General Plan at the same time as this Housing Element update, and has been able to take advantage of
the community participation elements created for that process. Morgan Hill 2035 has provided a forum for
community and policymaker input into this Housing Element Update.
These opportunities for community input have taken the form of:
   Two series of stakeholder interview focus groups, soliciting ideas from local business leaders, retail
    brokers, property owners and developers, housing advocates and builders, government partners,
    residents, and non-profit partners. One interview series specifically addressed housing issues. For both
    interviews, the City emailed an invitation to a list of over 75 local housing advocates, developers, and
    interested residents, including the Housing Trust of Silicon Valley, the Housing Action Coalition, the
    Santa Clara County Housing Authority, Neighborhood Housing Services, South County Housing, Eden
    Housing, EAH Housing, Habitat for Humanity, ROEM, KB Homes, the Lewis Group, the Dahlin
    Group, Barry Swenson Builders, Summerhill Homes, DR Horton, and Signature Homes.
   A General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC), which is appointed by the City Council and provides
    guidance on the General Plan Update process, including the Housing Element. The GPAC meetings are
    publicly noticed meetings, and are publicized throughout the community, so that stakeholders not
    appointed to the GPAC itself may participate and give input. In March 2014, the GPAC held a meeting
    specifically focused on changing demographics in Santa Clara County and resulting changes in housing
    needs for senior citizens and Millennials.
   A Spanish-language meeting held immediately after the Spanish-language Mass at St. Catherine’s Parish
    at the Parish community room. A native Spanish speaker from City staff facilitated the meeting, which
    solicited input on a wide range of General Plan topics. Participants expressed concerns that there is not
    enough rental housing in Morgan Hill; that housing prices are unaffordable; and that there is not enough
    variety in the housing stock. They also noted that the list to receive housing assistance or be considered
    for a below-market-rate (BMR) unit is too long. A community workshop at which community members
    provided input into the vision and goals for the updated General Plan, including the Housing Element.
    Specifically, the community suggested that a new goal addressing housing needs for an aging population
    be added to the Housing Element.
4

                                                                              MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                      CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT
    Joint Study Sessions involving the Planning Commission and City Council to consider vision statement
     components and growth scenarios that impact future housing development.
The context for housing in Morgan Hill has not significantly changed since the 2010 update. Accordingly,
the community input resulted in minimal change to the Housing Element goals, other than clarifying and
strengthening the impact of existing goals. The one additional goal the community suggested has been added
to the Housing Goals, Policies, and Actions: supporting residents to age in place by providing services,
facilities and transit for all age groups.
The concurrent General Plan Update also has repercussions for the Housing Element. The City has worked
with the GPAC, Planning Commission, City Council, and community to prepare a set of alternative land use
scenarios for the General Plan. The land uses selected as part of the General Plan will impact the location,
type and quantity of housing that will be developed in Morgan Hill. This Housing Element’s analysis of land
available for housing, shown in Section 1.4 (Available Land Inventory), takes these alternative scenarios into
account.
1.1.3 CONSISTENCY WITH THE MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
The City of Morgan Hill is a General Law City and is
subject to the requirements of State law. One of the
State’s planning law requirements is that all of the goals
and policies of the City’s General Plan elements must
be internally consistent. Internal consistency of Morgan
Hill's General Plan has been achieved by ensuring that
all elements are mutually supportive. Further,
consistency is provided by assuring that all elements of
the General Plan meet State law requirements. The
Housing Element addresses all State requirements,
including relevant legislation enacted subsequent to adoption of the previous Element. It contains
information on housing constraints and actions to deal with constraints; and reflects recent population,
housing, land use, environmental, and employment data.
The Housing Element includes information on the number of units required to meet Morgan Hill’s housing
needs, and its share of the regional housing need (RHNA). Sites with development potential that align with
                                                                                                              5

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
the City’s housing needs are evaluated, consistent with the land use designations contained in the General
Plan. The entire General Plan, including this revised Housing Element, reaffirms City goals by: (1) acting as
a guide for municipal decisions which affect the quality and quantity of housing; and, (2) maintaining
Morgan Hill’s present quality of life by balancing the availability of housing with other considerations.
The Housing Element is also consistent with Morgan Hill’s Downtown Specific Plan, which was adopted in
November 2009.
6

                                                                                MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                         CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
1.2         KEY FINDINGS OF THE BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
1.2.1 DEMOGRAPHIC AND HOUSING TRENDS
Morgan Hill today is a suburban bedroom community
that is located approximately 20 miles south of
downtown San Jose and the major employment centers
of Silicon Valley. Its housing stock is made up primarily
of single-family homes and small-to-medium sized rental
apartment complexes. Many growing families call it
home, and it is not unusual to find many people who
have lived in the community for decades.
Morgan Hill experienced dramatic growth in the late 1960s through the late 1970s, which caused its
residents to enact a managed growth voter initiative to ensure that growth of population did not outpace
growth in school, sewer, and other infrastructure capacities. Since that time Morgan Hill has grown at a
more planned and sustainable pace. Based on current estimates, the City will continue to accommodate
growth projections. Growth will likely be at a slower pace in the near-term due to the current economic
and market conditions. Over time, Morgan Hill has developed vibrant employment centers and the General
Plan calls for additional employment growth, with an overall goal of achieving a balance of jobs and housing
so that it is less of a bedroom community.
In general, housing is slightly more affordable in Morgan Hill compared to many places in Santa Clara
County, but it is still more expensive than state or national averages. While the city’s housing stock is
meeting the needs of many community members, there are still some areas that need attention. Needs of
particular interest include seniors, special needs populations (such as people with disabilities), affordability,
and sustainability. Key points are summarized below, with full details of the Housing Needs Assessment
contained in Appendices A-E of this document.
1.2.1.1 DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS AND CONDITIONS
    The City’s population (as of 2013) is just over 40,000 people. The annual population growth rate was
     approximately 1.5 percent between 2000 and 2013. The growth rate has fallen since the average annual
     rate of 4 percent in the period between 1990 and 2000, but has remained steady in recent years.
                                                                                                                  7

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
   Morgan Hill is a city predominately comprised of families. Approximately 28 percent of the population
    is under the age of 18, and 79 percent of households are families, higher rates than Santa Clara County
    as a whole.
   The majority of Morgan Hill residents tend to be well-educated and work in white-collar fields.
    Approximately 70 percent have attended some college and more than half work in white collar or
    higher paying occupations. However, manufacturing accounted for the largest share of employment
    within the City itself, comprising 21 percent of all jobs in Morgan Hill. Consistent with trends
    throughout the county and state, educational and health services has become an increasingly significant
    employment sector in Morgan Hill over time, a trend that is likely to continue. The leisure and
    hospitality industry has represented a growing share of employment in Morgan Hill in recent years,
    suggesting that the City’s recreational and visitor amenities are becoming increasingly significant local
    employers.
   Approximately 61 homeless individuals were counted in Morgan Hill in 2013, a decrease from 211
    counted in 2009. See Appendix C-9 for more information.
   There are more jobs than housing units. Employment opportunity is increasing in Morgan Hill, as
    reflected by the ratio of jobs to employed residents. According to the Association of Bay Area
    Governments (ABAG Projections 2009), in 2000 the jobs/employed residents balance was 0.8. In
    2035, ABAG projects it will be 0.98. (A jobs/employed residents balance of 1 means there is an equal
    ratio of employed residents to local jobs.) The largest employers (as of 2011) include Anritsu, Comcast,
    the Morgan Hill Unified School District, and Safeway.
   The city’s senior population is expected to grow quickly in the coming years as the “baby boomer”
    generation ages and life expectancies increase. Between 2013 and 2018, the number of seniors 65+ in
    Morgan Hill’s population is projected to increase from 10.8 percent of the population to 12.7 percent.
    Because income tends to decline with age, overpayment for housing is a concern for the majority of
    seniors.
1.2.1.2 HOUSING TRENDS AND CONDITIONS
   Housing affordability decreased dramatically from 1998 to 2005. In 1998, the median household could
    afford the median priced home, but by 2005 housing prices were several hundred thousand dollars too
    expensive for households earning the median income. From 2008 to 2010, as a result of the “Great
    Recession” and subsequent housing market and lending crises, housing prices became more affordable
    due to foreclosures and short sales affecting available inventories. In January 2010, the median home
    price was approximately $485,000, which is nearly affordable to a median income buyer. However, by
    2012 the median had risen to $500,000.
8

                                                                               MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT
    Rental prices in Morgan Hill are relatively affordable and have not changed much in recent years when
     adjusted for inflation. Many moderate income households, and even some low income households, can
     afford market rate rents that are at or slightly below calculated moderate income affordable housing cost
     ranges.
    Approximately 72 percent of households own their homes. Vacancy rates for rental units tend to be low,
     ranging from less than one percent to just over four percent over the last ten years, as documented by
     the City’s bi-annual rental vacancy surveys.
     Construction has begun again after slowing during the recession. In 2012, 431 housing permits were
     issued, more than had been issued for the preceding four years.
    Most houses in Morgan Hill are single-family detached, traditional suburban homes. In recent years, the
     number of single-family attached homes has grown quickly. Of the permits that were issued in 2012, 59
     percent were for single-family units (both attached and detached), and 41 percent were for multifamily
     housing of five units or larger.
1.2.2 FUTURE HOUSING NEEDS
ABAG develops a Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) to
distribute the region’s share of the statewide housing need to the
cities and counties within the region, based on demographic
projections, as shown in Table 1-1. The current RNHA is for the
2014-2022 time-period, and is broken into housing needs for
various income levels.
With the adoption of Plan Bay Area in July of 2013, ABAG has
given increased emphasis in its allocations of housing growth to
areas along major transit corridors and to where there are a high number of existing jobs as well as
anticipated employment growth. The method for distributing the latest regional housing needs is intended to
allocate fewer units to more suburban outlying areas, in order to reduce development pressures on
agricultural lands and areas further from major job centers. Benefits of this approach include reduced
vehicle miles traveled and reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This approach has resulted in a lower
“fair share” Regional Housing Need Allocation for Morgan Hill than in previous cycles. This number is
further reduced based on new permits issued in 2014. See Section 1.4 (Available Land Inventory), for more
information. Lower income households (those making less than $84,900 for a family of four) represent 46
percent of the total RHNA for 2014-2022.
                                                                                                             9

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
TABLE 1-1 ABAG DEMOGRAPHIC PROJECTIONS 2010-2035
                                                                                           2010-2035
 Bay Area                           2010      2015      2020      2025      2030      2035    Change
 Population                    7,150,739 7,461,400 7,786,800 8,134,000 8,496,800 8,889,000 1,738,261
 Household Population          7,003,059 7,307,400 7,623,700 7,961,900 8,313,900 8,690,400 1,687,341
 Households                    2,608,023 2,720,410 2,837,680 2,952,910 3,072,920 3,188,330   580,307
 Persons Per Household              2.69      2.69      2.69      2.70      2.70      2.73       0.04
 Employed Residents            3,268,680 3,547,310 3,849,790 3,949,620 4,052,020 4,198,400   929,720
                                                                                           2010-2035
 Santa Clara County                 2010      2015      2020      2025      2030      2035    Change
 Population                    1,781,642 1,877,700 1,977,900 2,080,600 2,188,500 2,303,500   521,858
 Household Population          1,751,292 1,845,800 1,944,800 2,045,800 2,152,100 2,263,900   512,608
 Households                      604,204   639,160   675,670   710,610   747,070   782,120   177,916
 Persons Per Household              2.90      2.89      2.88      2.88      2.88      2.89      -0.01
 Employed Residents              802,030   881,770   968,790 1,003,550 1,039,330 1,085,880   283,850
                                                                                           2010-2035
 Morgan Hill                        2010      2015      2020      2025      2030      2035    Change
 Total Population
                                  37,882    39,900    41,900    43,900    46,100    48,400    10,518
 (Jurisdictional Boundary)
 Household Population
                                  37,496    39,400    41,400    43,400    45,600    47,900    10,404
 (Jurisdictional Boundary)
 Households                       12,326    12,950    13,590    14,200    14,860    15,500     3,174
 Persons Per Household              3.04      3.05      3.05      3.06      3.07      3.09       0.05
 Employed Residents               16,870    18,510    20,270    20,940    21,650    22,580     5,710
Source: ABAG Projections 2013.
10
                                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                          CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               2010-2035
Bay Area                                2010      2015      2020      2025      2030      2035     Change
Agriculture & Natural Resources       24,520    24,870    25,070    25,270    25,470    25,490        970
Construction                         213,930   230,970   250,750   278,150   302,180   326,420    112,490
Manufacturing & Wholesale            550,640   588,110   633,360   670,830   716,270   759,610    208,970
Retail                               347,400   370,880   399,950   453,870   491,310   529,530    182,130
Transportation & Utilities           166,540   175,570   185,650   190,340   197,690   207,920     41,380
Information                          158,710   170,620   186,710   212,010   233,730   253,640     94,930
Financial & Leasing                  272,580   289,540   310,840   341,980   368,640   398,190    125,610
Professional & Managerial Services   494,280   534,650   582,710   648,860   707,900   768,070    273,790
Health & Educational Services        638,110   695,010   757,260   804,250   880,850   956,750    318,640
Arts, Recreation & Other Services    482,590   521,110   565,390   598,830   649,080   702,990    220,400
Government                           126,540   133,260   143,000   155,510   165,610   178,780     52,240
Total Jobs                         3,475,840 3,734,590 4,040,690 4,379,900 4,738,730 5,107,390  1,631,550
                                                                                               2010-2035
Santa Clara County                      2010      2015      2020      2025      2030      2035     Change
Agriculture & Natural Resources        4,500     4,500     4,500     4,500     4,500     4,500          0
Construction                          45,090    49,800    55,070    63,450    71,140    78,170     33,080
Manufacturing & Wholesale            245,750   262,300   282,730   296,870   317,530   339,040     93,290
Retail                                83,620    89,170    97,420   114,670   126,820   139,530     55,910
Transportation & Utilities            27,170    28,210    29,560    30,170    31,660    33,810      6,640
Information                           42,990    47,300    52,540    60,230    66,520    73,080     30,090
Financial & Leasing                   39,570    42,110    46,240    52,400    57,430    63,490     23,920
Professional & Managerial Services   125,790   138,450   154,200   177,640   198,500   219,430     93,640
Health & Educational Services        127,740   141,510   157,310   170,260   191,050   211,220     83,480
Arts, Recreation & Other Services    141,780   154,120   167,050   179,030   197,020   217,030     75,250
Government                            22,270    23,760    25,360    28,300    30,320    33,320     11,050
Total Jobs                           906,270   981,230 1,071,980 1,177,520 1,292,490 1,412,620    506,350
                                                                                                                            11
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          2010-2035
 Morgan Hill                        2010       2015       2020        2025        2030        2035        Change
 Agriculture & Natural Resources           100        100         100         100          90          80          -20
 Manufacturing & Wholesale               5,430      5,600       5,770       5,690       5,610       5,590          160
 Retail                                  1,760      1,870       1,980       1,990       2,000       2,030          270
 Financial & Professional Services       3,420      3,750       4,110       4,250       4,400       4,600        1,180
 Health, Educational & Recreational
                                         3,890      4,380       4,930       5,190       5,460       5,800        1,910
 Services
 Other Jobs                              2.970      3,120       3,280       3,320       3,360       3,420          450
 Total Jobs                             17,570     18,820      20,170      20,540      20,920      21,520        3,950
Source: ABAG Projections 2013
12
                                                                            MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                   CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT
1.2.3 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEFINITIONS
As shown in Table 1-2, approximately 46 percent of the RHNA is
required to be affordable to lower income households. However,
most of what the State calls affordable housing is better thought
of as workforce housing. For example, a family household that
the State labels as low income might have annual income over
$80,000.
The State limits for the very low, low, and moderate income
categories are derived from the income limits updated annually
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) and the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD). The income limits are based
on the median income for the County and are adjusted for
household size. Very low income means households earning less
than 50 percent of the median income. Low income means
households earning 50-80 percent of the median income. Moderate income means households earning 80-
120 percent of the median income.
In the context of Housing Elements, affordable housing generally focuses on housing for very low, low and
moderate income households, but may also address housing for above moderate income households.
Generally, housing that costs no more than 30 percent of household income is considered affordable. This is
especially true for lower income families.
So how much do extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households earn and who are they?
Below are definitions. The current median income for a four-person household in Morgan Hill (and Santa
Clara County) is $105,500.
    Extremely low income households earn less than 30 percent of the median household income – or
     less than $31,850 in 2013 for a four-person household.
    Very low income households earn less than 50 percent of the median household income – or less
     than $53,050 in 2013 for a four-person household.
    Low (Lower) income households earn less than 80 percent of the median household income – or
     less than $84,900 in 2013 for a four-person household.
    Moderate income households earn less than 120 percent of the median household income – or
     $126,600 in 2013 for a four-person household.
                                                                                                          13

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
    Above moderate income households earn more than 120 percent of the median household
     income, or more than $126,600 in 2013 for a four-person household.
TABLE 1-2 MORGAN HILL REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATIONS (2007-2014 AND 2014-2022)
                                                   2007-2014                  2014-2022
Income Level                                Units            Percent    Units           Percent
Extremely Low                                159              12%       137              14.6%
Very Low                                     158              12%       136              14.4%
Low                                          249              19%       154               17%
Moderate                                     246              19%       185               20%
Above Moderate                               500               38%      316               34%
Total                                      1,312              100%      928              100%
Source: Association of Bay Area Governments, 2013.
14

                                                                               MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT
1.3 CURRENT HOUSING ELEMENT REVIEW AND
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
1.3.1 ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE CURRENT HOUSING ELEMENT
This section highlights some of the key
accomplishments during the previous Housing
Element cycle, from 2007 to 2014. This Housing
Element builds upon the success of the previous
Housing Element since the City completed many of
the implementing action programs set out in that
document. While in some cases, limited resources, the
dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency (RDA), and
the economic recession hindered the accomplishment
of some programs, most programs have been
implemented. For a full review of the previous
Housing Element, see Appendix A.
Overall, a significant number of housing units have been built, particularly for seniors. Morgan Hill achieved
its quantified housing production objectives for total units and above moderate income units. The City did
not accomplish its objectives for extremely low, very low and low income housing during the previous
Housing Element cycle. Contributing to this was the dissolution of Morgan Hill’s Redevelopment Agency,
which had assisted in the production of over 750 affordable ownership and rental units from 1999 until its
dissolution in 2011.
In the absence of the Redevelopment Agency, the City continues to encourage and support affordable
housing. The City has responded to the difficulty of creating new rental housing complexes by establishing a
separate set-aside in the City’s Residential Development Control System (RDCS) selection process to allow
apartment complexes to have their own competition, adjusting scoring criteria further to facilitate multi-
family development, adopting the Downtown Specific Plan, and facilitating Measure A, which exempts 500
units from the RDCS restrictions. The City is also supporting Senate Bill 391, the California Homes and Job
Act, which, if enacted, will provide funding for affordable housing statewide.
                                                                                                            15

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
TABLE 1-3 QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES (2007-2014) COMPARED TO ACTUAL ACCOMPLISHMENTS
                                     Extremely    Very                                   Above
                                         Low      Low        Low        Moderate       Moderate          Total
                                     Comp/Obj  Comp/Obj   Comp/Obj      Comp/Obj       Comp/Obj        Comp/Obj
New Construction                       9 / 66   89 / 158  100 / 249       36 /246     1,027 / 500    1,261 / 1,219
Rehabilitation                         5 / 56    36 / 56    9 / 56         0 / 56         N/A           50 / 224
Conservation                          0 / 176   59 / 213    35 / 51         N/A           N/A           94 / 440
Note: comp = completed; obj = objective.
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2013.
Some of the particularly noteworthy accomplishments of the current Housing Element include the
following:
1. Met Moderate and Above-Moderate Housing Objectives. Provided for the orderly creation of
      new housing, with 1,261 new housing units created since 2007. Approximately 16 percent of the units
      built have been affordable to very low and low income residents. In the previous housing cycle the City
      more than met its objectives in all income categories with the help of its active Redevelopment Agency.
      The affordable units that have been built during the most recent cycle are largely attributable to the
      City’s work establishing affordable and special needs housing as a high priority in the City’s RDCS.
2. Maintained an Active Redevelopment Agency Until its Dissolution. The Morgan Hill
      Redevelopment Agency provided housing set-aside funds and applied for funds from State programs to
      assure sufficient funding for affordable housing projects, helping finance over 750 units and allocating
      over $32 million for housing. Some of these include the Viale Teacher Housing development on the
      Northwest corner of Watsonville Road; Calle Sueno; Jasmine Square; Royal Court; Madrone Plaza
      Phase I, a 95-unit ownership project with 71 units affordable to low and moderate income households;
      The Crossings, a 24-unit rental apartment acquisition and rehabilitation project; and Horizons, a 49-
      unit senior apartment project. The Redevelopment Agency was dissolved in 2011. Its Successor Agency
      has transferred its remaining properties to the City.
3. Annually Reviewed the Residential Development Control System (RDCS) to Ensure Its
      Effectiveness. Recent changes include creating a multi-family rental competition to encourage a more
      diversified housing stock, incorporating green building/sustainable incentives, variable pricing for BMR
      units by housing types/zoning, and a senior housing competition.
4. Provided Downpayment Assistance to Homebuyers. Downpayment assistance was provided to
      40 households through the City’s Downpayment Assistance Program, although this program has now
      been defunded due to Redevelopment Agency dissolution.
5. Provided Assistance to Acquire, Rehabilitate, or Preserve 144 Housing Units, Ensuring
      They Remain Affordable. Since 2010, the City has assisted the Horizons, EAH Housing, and Crest
16

                                                                                MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
     Avenue Rehabilitation projects, as well as the Crossings, a 24 unit acquisition and rehabilitation project.
     In Fiscal Year 2010-2011, there were five rehab loans totaling $155,780. Since that time, the
     Rehabilitation Loan Program has been disbanded because Redevelopment funding has ended.
1.3.2 HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM REVIEW
The goals, policies, and programs contained in the current
Morgan Hill Housing Element remain current as the City
moves forward during the next planning period (2015-2023).
The overview below focuses primarily on those programs
implemented by the Housing Division of the City of Morgan
Hill and Santa Clara County to address housing problems in
Morgan Hill.
1.3.2.1 CITY OF MORGAN HILL PROGRAMS
Although the goals, policies, and programs remain current, accounting for the updating of dates and
quantified objectives, the viability of funding for Morgan Hill’s housing programs is uncertain. During the
first part of the previous housing cycle, the Morgan Hill Redevelopment Agency provided housing set-aside
funds for affordable housing projects, including housing rehabilitation loans, senior housing and mobile
home repair grants, below market rate housing, and new development/major rehabilitation/special
programs. In 2011, Redevelopment Agencies were dissolved at the State level, and as a result, many of these
programs are now unfunded and have been placed on hold. The City is seeking other funding sources. In the
meantime, there is $4 million in housing funds remaining from the former Redevelopment Agency, and
another $6 million in Supplemental/Educational Revenue Augmentation Funds (SERAF/ERAF) funds will
come back to the city from the former agency.
The following descriptions discuss both programs that are currently in operation and those that are
currently unfunded and on hold while the City searches for sources of funding to replace the funding
eliminated with the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency. In addition to the remaining $10 million
mentioned above, one hope for a continuing source of funding is Senate Bill 391, the California Homes and
Jobs Act, which would provide statewide funding for affordable housing.
1.3.2.2 ONGOING PROGRAMS
The Below Market Rate Housing (BMR) Homeownership Program helps qualifying buyers obtain affordably priced
homes. The homes are typically provided by developers based on Development Agreement commitments
                                                                                                              17

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
they make as part of the annual building allotment competitions, resulting from the City’s Residential
Development Control System approved by voter initiative in November 1977 and subsequently extended
and amended in 1990, 2004, 2006 and 2009. Between 1990 and 1997, 185 new BMR housing units were
produced in Morgan Hill, of which 93 were lower income, 86 were median income, and six were moderate
income units. Since 1998, 67 units were constructed under the BMR program including 61 lower income
units and six median income units. A total of 252 units have been constructed under this program since
1990. The City currently has over 500 first time homeowners in the program.
Participating homebuyers must be income eligible and be
pre-approved to be able to financially qualify for a fixed-rate,
fixed-term mortgage, and must have a minimum 3 percent
down payment from their own funds in order to purchase a
home. Eligible applicants are placed on a waiting list until the
opportunity to purchase a unit becomes available either
through new construction or resale of an existing unit.
Priority on the waiting list is provided for buyers who live or
work within the city limits. This program helps low and moderate income households purchase homes that
are affordable and adequate to their needs. It also prevents affordable homes from being sold to persons with
little or no income obstacles, maintaining a larger base of affordable homes in the area. Home prices range
from $264,000 for a low income, two-bedroom home to $439,000 for a moderate income, four-bedroom
home. At the time of sale, properties will have a resale/owner occupancy/option to purchase restriction
recorded on the title in order to preserve the long term affordability of the unit.
Without a funding source to potentially preserve BMR units via acquisition, as was the practice when there
were funds available from the Redevelopment Agency, more units with affordability covenants will be lost
from the program. The City currently receives approximately $300,000 annually in loan repayments, which
can serve to fund new loans and help fund loan administration with the City’s remaining funds.
In addition to the BMR Homeownership Program, the City offers the Below Market Rate Housing (BMR) Rental
Program, which provides rental assistance to lower income households. The BMR Rental Program currently
has 45 units, in addition to over 1,300 affordable rental units created through RDCS competitions. Like the
City’s BMR Ownership program, the BMR rental units result from developments that have obtained
allocations from the RDCS competitions. BMR Rental Program applicants must be income eligible and be a
resident of Santa Clara County or employed in Morgan Hill. Eligible participants are placed on a waiting list
and referred to rental complexes when a BMR rental unit becomes available. Eligible participants must also
meet the individual leasing requirements of the participating apartment complexes to receive housing. These
requirements may include a credit check, a criminal background check, a security deposit (first and last
months’ rent), references, etc. to assure the owner/property manager that a potential tenant is responsible.
18

                                                                                MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
Referred tenants must be re-certified annually. Current BMR rental rates range from $625-$818 for a one-
bedroom unit rented to a very low income household, to $1,475 to $1,519 for a four-bedroom unit rented
to a lower income household. Most rents include utilities.
As with the BMR Homeownership Program, the City is required to administer the program. The City is
searching for other funding sources to sustainably fund the costs of administration.
To replace the Blight Busters program that was defunded due to the dissolution of the Redevelopment
Agency, the City is starting a Below Market Rate Rehabilitation Program, expected to be operational in Spring of
2014. This program will provide assistance to BMR homeowners and seniors who need help with repairs.
1.3.2.3 PROGRAMS WITH UNCERTAIN FUNDING
The City has historically offered a Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program in order to maintain and improve
housing conditions and Morgan Hill’s stock of affordable housing. This program provided loans to lower
income owner-occupants of single-family dwellings and owners of rental housing with income-qualified
renters. The loans were available to qualifying homeowners and owners of rental properties in which at least
51 percent of the rental units were occupied by lower income tenants. Loans could be used for accessibility
upgrades, emergency repairs, plumbing and heating, electrical and lighting work, earthquake retrofitting,
fire prevention, security and safety items, roofing, handicapped accessibility, termite and dry rot repair, and
other improvements approved by the City. Loans typically ranged up to $40,000 without separate City
Council approval of individual projects, depending on the work needed and the type of unit being repaired.
Interest rates typically ranged from 3.0 percent to 7.0 percent. The maximum loan term was typically 55
years, and could be amortized or deferred.
                                                                                                              19

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Before and After Examples of Rehabilitation Projects
            Jasmine Square                      Villa Ciolino                      Royal Court
 Before
  After
Rehabilitation loans were financed through Redevelopment Agency 20 Percent Set-Aside Funds and CDBG
monies. Five loans were granted in the amount of $155,780 during Fiscal Year 2010/2011, the last year that
the program was in operation. The housing rehabilitation loan program has been effectively eliminated due
to the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency.
The Minor Home Repair Grant Program was broken into two subprograms: the Senior/Special Needs Housing
Repair Program and the Mobile Home Repair Program. The Business Assistance and Housing Services Department
administered both programs. Although eligibility requirements differ slightly, both programs allowed
eligible applicants to receive a home repair grant of up to $7,500. Eligible persons were required to meet
homeownership, age, disability, and income requirements for the Senior/Special Needs Housing Repair
Program or mobile home ownership and income limits for the Mobile Home Repair Program. Eligible
repair work included: accessibility upgrades, emergency repairs, plumbing and heating, electrical and
lighting work, earthquake retrofitting, fire prevention, security and safety items, roofing, termite and dry
rot repair, and other improvements approved by the City.
The Redevelopment Agency’s Affordable Housing Set-Aside Funds funded approximately 828 grants for
mobile home and senior home repair, and clean-up/paint. This program has been defunded due to
dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency.
20

                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                         CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
1.3.2.4 SANTA CLARA COUNTY HOUSING PROGRAMS
The Housing Authority of Santa Clara County administers the
Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments Program (Section 8).
This program links landlords with tenants eligible for rental
assistance. Section 8 guarantees landlords fair market rent while
providing subsidies for tenants in rental properties. Section 8
tenants are those elderly, handicapped, or very low or extremely
low income families needing help to secure decent housing.
Morgan Hill is participating in this program to encourage
landlords to accept Section 8 vouchers, and will be on the list of
cities in the rent subsidy program. The County has four Federal
grant programs to assist eligible persons seeking permanent,
transitional, or emergency housing-related services. Currently,
272 Morgan Hill households use Section 8 housing choice vouchers. There are 252 households on the
waiting list for vouchers from Morgan Hill. However, this number underestimates need because the waiting
list was last opened in 2005 for one week.
Community Development Block Grants (CDBG)
Morgan Hill participates in the Santa Clara County CDBG Urban County Program that provides
funding to urban county cities and nonprofit agencies to enable them to offer housing and housing-related
services to eligible lower income persons including seniors, persons with disabilities, the homeless, and
battered spouses. The program provides approximately $130,000 annually in funding for each participating
city for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of affordable housing, public facilities, and services
for lower income persons. Each of the Urban County cities develops its own local funding priorities based
on the overall community needs and goals documented in the County’s Consolidated Plan. In previous
years, the CDBG loan program has been used to assist with home improvements for applicants who meet
the income guidelines.
HOME Program (Home Investment Partnership Act)
The federal HOME Program is administered by the County Office of Affordable Housing and provides
loans and grants to nonprofit organizations to assist with financing to develop permanently affordable
housing through acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation.
                                                                                                                 21

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Shelter Plus Care
Shelter Plus Care (S+C) is another Housing Authority program that provides a five-year rent subsidy to
homeless/disabled individuals and their families to assist them in securing permanent affordable rental
housing. Applicants must be currently homeless and must be diagnosed with one of the following disabilities:
mental illness, HIV/AIDS, or a drug and/or alcohol dependency. In addition to rent subsidy, the program
also arranges for various treatment services and case management. S+C clients are required to pay 30
percent of their monthly income towards rent; S+C pays the balance.
22
                                                                                    MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
1.4          AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY
1.4.1 OVERVIEW
This Housing Element ensures there is adequate available land to meet future needs for all income levels.
Because the City has nearly 300 vacant and unconstrained acres zoned for residential development and a
Downtown Specific Plan that encourages dense housing in the City’s core, this is easily accomplished. A full
list of all undeveloped and underdeveloped parcels can be found in Appendix F.
1.4.2 DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN
The Downtown Specific Plan, adopted in 2009, amended
the City of Morgan Hill General Plan and Zoning
Ordinance for the downtown area and modified the
relevant plans, policies, and design guidelines that guide
and regulate development in the area. The Downtown
Specific Plan includes existing and planned land uses,
circulation, parking, urban design guidelines, signage
guidelines, infrastructure, and an implementation plan.
The Downtown Specific Plan, which covers 115 acres and
18 blocks, is based around the following vision statement:
“Strengthening downtown as the gathering place, a connecting force, the social and activity heart of Morgan
Hill, is the overriding aspiration of this Plan — a place where residents from all segments of the community
can live, work, meet, shop, dine and participate in public celebrations, and share in the richness of Morgan
Hill’s community life. It will be a place like nowhere else — a place with its own scale, character and uses.”
Downtown Morgan Hill is unique in that it has a commuter rail station within easy walking distance of a
variety of retail, office, and residential uses, as well as special uses such as the Morgan Hill Community and
Cultural Center. The Downtown Specific Plan encourages housing in this transit-rich, walkable core by:
    Adding a Mixed Use land use designation and Central Business District (CBD) zoning designation.
     Parcels with these designations make up the majority of the area along Monterey Road and between
     Monterey Road and the railroad tracks, and allow for unlimited residential density.
                                                                                                              23

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Figure 1-2              Downtown Specific Plan Zoning Map1
    1
      See the Downtown Specific Plan for detailed zoning and other recommendations.
24
                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
    Proposing a variety of residential densities for a majority of the area west of Monterey Road and in the
     northeast and southeast corners.
    Removing the requirements for residential units to provide guest parking.
The City has taken steps to create a positive, pro-active development environment to ensure that the
development goals of the Downtown Specific Plan are realized. Morgan Hill is reducing developers’
predevelopment risk and costs and providing more certainty as to project time-to-market by:
    Implementing flexible zoning.
    Streamlining permitting for projects within the Specific Plan’s parameters to only a Design Permit and
     Building Permit once site control has been secured.
    Providing environmental clearance via a companion Master Environmental Impact Report.
    Providing Sewer Impact Fee credits.
    Investing $25 million in Downtown public improvements, including development of a new 275-space
     parking structure, two new parks, a hilltop trail, and streetscape improvements.
    Exempting 600 units in the Downtown from the Residential Development Control System (RDCS)
     competition.
For projects within the Plan’s parameters, only a Design Permit and Building Permit would be required,
once site control has been secured. Developers should therefore anticipate reduced predevelopment risk
and costs, as well as more certainty as to project time-to-market.
Prior to its dissolution, the Redevelopment Agency held 17 properties downtown. Three of these properties
have been transferred to the City of Morgan Hill for redevelopment, while the remaining 14 are intended,
according to the November 2013 Long-Range Property Management Plan, to be sold for private
development to further the goals of the Downtown Specific Plan. These goals include enhancing Morgan
Hill’s economic vitality by increasing the number of housing units in the downtown core.
Housing types envisioned include for-sale condominiums (from two-bedroom, two-bath to four-bedroom,
three-bath, and sized from 900 to 1,500 square feet); for-rent apartments (there is a range of studios and
one-to three-bedroom units, sized from 400 to 1,300 square feet). To make development more likely, units
will not be required to provide guest parking, but will still need to meet on-site parking requirements in
accordance with the Specific Plan.
As part of the Downtown Specific Plan process, Morgan Hill conducted a block by block analysis of
redevelopment potential. In the downtown area it found potential for a net gain of 1,190 new units (1,393
                                                                                                             25

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
gross), 93,490 square feet of retail and 85,591 square feet of office/service. Approximately 850 of those
units are expected by 2015. The sites selected for the 2015 Development Projection generally have
residential allotments through the Residential Development Control System (RDCS) and have property
owners or developers who are actively evaluating and preparing development plans.
The 2015 residential development projections assume 255 units within blocks 1-20 (allocations awarded
March 2006), an additional 100 residential units provided by Measure F (November 2006 ballot measure),
and 495 additional units provided by Measure A (May 2009 ballot measure) for a total of 850 residential
units. The City has recently released a Request for Proposals (due December 18, 2014) to developers
selected from an RFQ process for four downtown sites based on these assumptions and expects that
responses to this RFP will likely result in around 200 new units in the Downtown.
For the purposes of this Housing Element, it is estimated that 850 units will be constructed, which is based
on a block by block analysis of current uses, ownership, market potential, etc. A number of these lots are far
along the entitlement process and are expected to break ground soon. Details for the 209 units that have
started the entitlement process are below, by block. Blocks are shown in Figure 1-3.
TABLE 1-4 DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT BY BLOCK
   Block    Anticipated Units      Zoning                                            Notes
  Number
 1                  13         CBD Mixed Use    Likely to redevelop because part of the lot is currently vacant and the
                                                remainder is underutilized as a parking lot.
 2                  59         CBD Mixed Use    Agency owned. RFQ released and responses received. The Agency has
                                                selected a development partner.
 3                 115         CBD Mixed Use    The projected redevelopment occurs primarily along Third Street and
                                                includes ground-floor retail uses with offices or condominiums/apartments
                                                on the upper floor(s). The Agency has an option to purchase the property
                                                at the northwest corner of Depot and Third Street.
 4                 232         CBD Mixed Use    This is a high priority for development. Most of the block is vacant, and has
                                                been awarded RDCS allocations (and based on Measure A is now exempt
                                                from RDCS.) City has provided significant investment for redeveloping Third
                                                Street including replacing infrastructure and making streetscape
                                                improvements, making this area ripe for new housing.
 7                  46           Mixed Use      Owner has the vacant parcel available for sale as a residential
                                                development. The parcel has an allocation of units based on the density
                                                prior to the adoption of the Specific Plan. The Granary project, on a
                                                portion of block 7 is entitled with 30 condo units; scheduled to begin
                                                construction December 2014.
 13                 14          Multi-family    The increase in density and units being exempt from RDCS should
                              medium, and CBD   encourage the redevelopment of the underutilized site and older
                                 Mixed Use      structures.
26
                                                                                                        MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                 CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT
   Block        Anticipated Units            Zoning                                                  Notes
 Number
 14                     35                 Multi-family        Developer has expressed interest in developing the predominantly vacant
                                        medium, and CBD        properties. The Agency is installing major road street improvements along
                                           Mixed Use           the frontage and has agreed to not require the Developer to reimburse the
                                                               Agency for the improvements if the property is developed in a timely
                                                               manner.
 15                    134                Multi- family        Phase I of a new 134-unit housing development, Huntington Square, is in
                                             High/R4           construction. Price points are between $350,000 and $475,000. City is
                                                               providing down payment assistance for low and moderate income buyers.
 18                     80                Commercial,          EAH (nonprofit housing corporation) owned vacant site. 80 allocations (40
                                        Office Industrial,     for very low seniors and 40 market rate town houses). The market rate
                                        and Multi-family       units will be developed by a for-profit developer. $3.2 million in RDA
                                          Medium (R3)          acquisition and pre-development financial assistance. Project sponsors are
                                                               applying for tax credits and other subsidies.
 20                     90               Mixed Use and         The projected redevelopment offers the potential for mixed use
                                           Multi-family        development east of the creek easement and medium density residential
                                             medium            units west of the creek easement, to total approximately 90 dwelling units
                                                               and 17,000 square feet of ground-floor retail uses on the block.
 Total                 850
Note: 32 units were not assigned to a specific block.
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2014.
There are a number of other potential projects in the early stages of development. Based on conversations
with developers and others, as well as material submitted through the RDCS, estimated sales and rental
prices and affordability levels are summarized below. Note: Because the City is making down payment
assistance available for downtown, these units will be more affordable than implied by the calculations
below.
TABLE 1-5 APPROVED DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENTS WITH AFFORDABILITY
           Name of Development                       Price for        Price for        Affordability       Low       Mod      Above        Total
                                                      2 brdms          3 bdrms                                                 Mod
 Church-Alcini/ Rancho Del Pueblo (04-
                                                                    $400K (mid)         Moderate                     14                     14
 15)
 E. Main-Ahlin (MC-05-06)
                                                   $300k (mid)      $300k (mid)         Moderate                      99                    99
 Huntington Square
                                                                     $600,000-            Above
 E. Third-Glenrock (MC-05-11)                       $650,000                                                                    57          57
                                                                      $750,000          moderate
 Monterey-Sherman House (MF-07-01)                  $238,500          $264,000             Low              23                              23
 TOTAL                                                                                                    23        113      57           193
Note: Rental affordability is based on 30 percent of income. Owner affordability based on calculations at Mortgageloan.com assuming 5.2
percent interest, 30 year, 20 percent down payment, one percent taxes, 0.5 percent insurance, and no other costs, and a family of four. The
maximum price for a lower income unit is $348,000, and a moderate unit is $500,000.
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2014.
                                                                                                                                             27
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Figure 1-3       Downtown Blocks
28
                                                                              MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                     CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT
1.4.3 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT CONTROL SYSTEM
The voters of Morgan Hill first passed the City’s Residential
Development Control System (RDCS) in 1977. That initiative,
Measure E, has been updated and extended a number of times.
Parts of the initiative have been codified in the City's General
Plan while other parts have been included in the City Zoning
Ordinance. The provisions of the initiative can only be changed
by the affirmative vote of the City electorate. The initiative
applies to all residential development except for secondary
dwelling units and one-dwelling-unit developments that are not
part of larger projects.
The RDCS gives the City flexibility to ensure that new housing
meets the needs of residents. The existing RDCS awards points
to projects that best satisfy and accomplish goals of the General
Plan, and specifically the Housing Element, as well as related
City goals as they evolve to meet changing community needs. The criteria are reviewed annually and
adjusted accordingly. For example, because in recent years there was concern that rental units were not able
to compete effectively in the RDCS, the City created a multi-family rental category. This resulted in the first
applications for rental housing in over a decade. The City has also used the RDCS competition to promote
sustainable housing, and has created competition categories for senior housing and for the Central
Commercial Residential (CC-R) and Light Commercial/Residential (CL-R) zoning districts that are located
along transportation corridors near downtown.
The RDCS is not an obstacle to the production of housing or affordable housing. On the contrary, the
system has resulted in the orderly production of thousands of housing units, many at prices affordable to all
income levels. RDCS allocations, which average approximately 200 to 250 per year, are more than necessary
to meet the current RHNA of 918 units (1,800 to 2,000 allocations are expected in this housing element
cycle, as shown in Table 1-6). In fact, the RDCS promotes housing by counteracting potential NIMBY
concerns. Pre-RDCS, when growth rates were over ten percent per year, there was considerable opposition
to new projects. With the RDCS, there is more widespread support for orderly growth.
The RDCS is the City’s primary tool for encouraging the development of affordable housing. Among other
objectives, Morgan Hill has used and modified the RDCS to provide sufficient housing for local workers,
foster the development of a balanced community, and ensure compliance with State housing laws.
                                                                                                             29

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Affordable housing has been given its own competition category, in which 20 percent of total allotments
have generally been set aside for affordable housing units. Any kind of development producing more than 75
percent affordable housing in a single development can compete in this category. Other developments not
meeting the affordability threshold compete for the remaining 80 percent of allotments in “Open Market”
competitions. The Open Market pool has been further subdivided into competition categories such as
“Small” or “Vertical Mixed-Use.” At least 33 percent of allotments must go toward single-family unit
development. Affordable housing developers are encouraged to submit their proposals for any competitions
that they choose (open market, small, etc.) and there is no percentage limit on the number of allocations
that can be affordable.
TABLE 1-6 RANGE OF ANTICIPATED ALLOCATIONS UNDER RDCS, 2015-2023
                                         Allocations        Total Allocations Over
                 Estimate                  per year                 8 Years
 Below Current Average                       175                     1,400
 Current Average                             225                     1,800
 Above Current Average                       250                     2,000
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2013.
Of the 1,258 units approved in the 2006 to 2013 competitions, approximately 5 percent were designated
for extremely low or very low income residents, 27 percent to low income residents and 6 percent to
moderate income residents. (In reality, the moderate income number is higher because some open market
units are affordable to moderate income residents.)
Morgan Hill builds more housing than its RHNA requirement and more than many other communities.
While the RDCS slowed growth from the extremes of the 1970s, Morgan Hill is growing faster than the
county as a whole. From 2000 to 2013, the number of households in Morgan Hill grew 16.9 percent, while
households in the county grew seven percent. Furthermore, there are over 1,000 units from previous
competitions that are eligible to be built at any time.
Exemptions to the RDCS for downtown (and for second units) also contribute to affordability and provide
even more flexibility for development. Downtown has the highest densities and is the most likely place for
developers to build housing that is affordable. In total, 600 units have been exempted for downtown housing
development, more than equal to the very low and low income targets for RHNA.
RDCS competitions are held annually or biannually, through a competitive process involving all projects
proposed for development for a given year. That process utilizes an objective point system to evaluate such
30

                                                                                  MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
aspects of development as design, diversity of housing types, the provision of affordable housing, and the
potential impact on public facilities, traffic, infrastructure, and public services. The affordable housing factor
grants additional points to projects that commit 5 to 10 percent of the total number of project units to be
deed-restricted affordable to persons/families of low or moderate income. The greater the percentage of
affordable units (up to 10 percent) and the greater level of affordability provided, the greater the number of
points awarded. To qualify for points, for-sale projects must incorporate units that are affordable to
persons/families of low or moderate income and rental projects must incorporate units that are affordable
to persons/families of very low or low income.
The City’s RDCS has been amended to make it easier for higher density residential and vertical mixed use
downtown projects to compete for residential building allocations against the detached single-family
residential projects. In 2005, the City held a competition for projects in the area in and around downtown,
resulting in 363 residential building allocations awarded in fiscal year 2009/2010. Of the 363 units, 255
were located within the 18-block boundary of the Downtown Specific Plan.
1.4.4 OVERVIEW OF AVAILABLE LAND FOR
HOUSING BY 2014
Morgan Hill has approximately 230 acres of vacant, unentitled land that is
unconstrained by environmental or other factors and available for residential
development, in addition to underutilized land that could become available for
development in the future. This vacant land has the potential for nearly 1,400
housing units.
Table 1-7 shows the number of acres of residentially zoned land available and
suitable for development, as well as the number of units that could potentially be developed on them given
their density. The details of the methods used to calculate the number of potential housing units, as well as
detailed information about each parcel, are available in Appendix F. HCD considers parcels zoned for 20
dwelling units per acre to be suitable for housing affordable with to residents with low and very low
incomes. The City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is also shown in Table 1-7, as well as the
surplus of units that could be produced over and above the allocation.
                                                                                                                31

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
1.4.4.1 VACANT LAND
TABLE 1-7 VACANT LAND INVENTORY
 Income Level                                 Acres      Potential Units     RHNA           Surplus
 Low and Very Low Income                        29            468             427             41
 Moderate Income or Above                      229            910             501            409
 Total                                         258           1,378            928             450
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2013.
Because the Morgan Hill 2035 General Plan is being developed concurrently with and slightly behind the
schedule of the Housing Element, the alternatives being evaluated in that process were taken into
consideration in calculating the number of potential units. Some downtown parcels are opportunity sites
undergoing consideration as of February 2014 as alternatives in the Morgan Hill 2035 General Plan. For
these sites, the allowed density that was the lowest of the three alternatives was used to calculate the
number of potential units.
Downtown will be a significant source of new development in future years. Since the last Housing Element
update, Morgan Hill has added new zoning categories that will facilitate dense residential development:
 CBD Central Business District (mixed-use, no minimum or maximum density)
 D-R3 Downtown Medium-Density Residential (14-21 du/ac)
 D-R4 Downtown High-Density Residential (21-40 du/ac)
The majority of Morgan Hill’s capacity for developing new housing is in the Central Business District (CBD)
mixed use zone, which has no maximum density and is expected to develop at more than 20 units per acre.
The minimum density for affordable housing, 20 dwelling units per acre, was used to calculate the number of
potential units on CBD/Mixed Use parcels, shown in Table 1-8. This was done to provide a conservative
estimate of the units that could potentially be built during this housing cycle. Because these zones have the
capacity for unlimited density, parcels in these areas of the downtown actually have higher capacity for
housing than indicated in Table 1-8. Table 1-8 summarizes by zoning type the vacant, residentially-zoned land
that is available for development in Morgan Hill, as well as the housing units that could potentially be built
on that land.
32

                                                                                                             MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                         CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
TABLE 1-8 VACANT AVAILABLE LAND AND UNITS BY LAND USE DESIGNATION
                                                                     b
                                                  Allowed Density                                          Potential
                            a
  Land Use Designation                             (Units per Acre)             Total Acres                   Units
  R3                                                       21                        12                        195
  PUD                                                      20                         5                         75
  CBD                                                      20                        11                        182
  MU                                                       20                         1                         16
  R2 3,000                                                 15                         2                         28
  R2 3,500                                                 12                        28                        266
  SFH                                                      10                        22                        177
  CL-R                                                     10                         5                         43
  R1 7,000                                                  6                        15                         70
  SFM                                                       6                         5                         22
  R1 9,000                                                  5                        44                        176
  R1 12,000                                                 4                        12                         37
  RPD                                                       3                         3                          8
  SFL                                                       3                         5                         12
  RE 40,000                                                 1                        70                         56
  RE 100,000                                                1                        18                         14
  Total                                                                              258                      1,378
a. Land Use designations shown are either current zoning designations or potential General Plan designations for those sites
under consideration as part of the General Plan alternatives.
b. CBD and MU designations have no maximum allowed density. 20 dwelling units per acre is used here as a conservative
estimate.
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2013.
1.4.4.2 ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS
Second Units
In addition to vacant land, second units (guest houses, in-law suites, granny apartments, etc.) are a source of
potential new housing. Second units provide an important source of flexibility and affordability in the
housing stock. They often are desirable housing choices for young adults, seniors and other special needs
populations. The rental income can often help the primary home owner afford their mortgage.
                                                                                                                                           33
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Currently in Morgan Hill, second units are encouraged through the RDCS. Specifically, if 15 percent of
units in a development have second units, the development is awarded two points in the housing needs
category. Recent residential developments in Morgan Hill that utilized this option include Cochrane Borello,
City Ventures, Sherimar Ranch, and Mission Ranch.
Produced and Expected Units
Units that have been produced or are expected to be produced between January 1, 2014 and January 31,
2015 will reduce the RHNA by that number of units. Table 1-9 summarizes the units that have been
produced already or are expected to be produced during this time period. These include 14 affordable for-
sale units being built as Phase II of Madrone Plaza. These units are restricted by covenant to prices affordable
to a household earning up to 80 percent of AMI. Given this information, the RHNA is expected to be
reduced by 14 low-income units and 54 above-moderate-income units.
TABLE 1-9 PRODUCED AND EXPECTED UNITS WITH SPECIFIC AFFORDABILITY INFORMATION
                                         Ext.      Very Low        Low       Moderate      Above          Total
                                         Low        Income       Income       Income      Moderate        Units
Madrone Plaza Phase II                    –            –            14           –            –            14
Additional Building Permits Issued        –            –             –           –           54            54
Total                                                               14                       54            68
Source: City of Morgan Hill, 2014.
34

                                                                               MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
1.5     HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
              Goal HE-1            Adequate new housing to meet the full range of
                                   future community housing needs, including
                                   affordability and accessibility.
Policy HE-1a:   Adequate Land for New Development. Ensure that an adequate amount of land is
                available for new residential development, zoned for a range of residential densities.
                Action HE-1a-1:            Evaluate Land Availability Annually. Evaluate annually
                the amount of land available for development and the projected eight-year need, and
                adjust the General Plan and zoning as necessary to accommodate the City's regional
                housing allocation.
Policy HE-1b:   Capital Improvement Programming. Give high priority in the annual Capital
                Improvement Program to providing adequate public facilities for residentially zoned land needed
                to accommodate the City's ABAG projected regional housing needs allocation (RHNA).
Policy HE-1c:    RDCS Allocations. Encourage the allocation of the maximum possible number of housing
                units under RDCS allocations.
                Action HE-1c-1:            Annual RDCS Objectives. Establish annual objectives under
                the RDCS allocation process for affordable housing based on past production and
                future needs.
                Action HE-1c-2:            Annually Evaluate RDCS Allocations. Annually evaluate
                the outcome of the allocation process to determine if further adjustments to the system
                are advisable to ensure that the annual allocations are maximized for both market rate
                and affordable housing. Points to consider include the RDCS’s impacts on cost, supply
                and affordability of housing, as well as the timing of the process. Ensure that there are
                sufficient allocations to meet the Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA). Include
                results in the annual progress report submitted to HCD.
Policy HE-1d: Variety of Housing. Encourage a variety of housing types and densities within the community.
                                                                                                               35

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-1e:    New Housing (30 Percent Multi-Family). Continue to ensure that an average of at least
                 30 percent of all new housing allocations are designated for multi-family units.
Policy HE-1f:    New Multi-Family Housing (30 Percent Rentals). Ensure that a minimum of 30
                 percent of new multi-family units are rentals. Any of the 600 units in the Downtown Area
                 exempted from the RDCS under Measures A and F that are developed as rentals may be counted
                 toward this requirement. Continue to include a separate rental set-aside in future RDCS
                 competitions, as appropriate.
Policy HE-1g:    Minimum Densities. Require development of property designated as multi-family to occur at a
                 density no less than the minimum density prescribed by the General Plan.
Policy HE-1h:    Affordable Housing Strategy Implementation. Encourage the creation of rental
                 housing, including housing for extremely low income households, through available funds, banked
                 land and community partnerships.
                 Action HE-1h-1:            RDCS Refinement. Continue to develop and implement
                 varied RDCS standards for different types of developments. For example, consider if
                 senior or multi-family developments should have different scoring criteria than single-
                 family developments.
                 Action HE-1h-2:            Review Height Limits. Review the Zoning Ordinance to
                 ensure that height limits allow for a desirable design at the intended density.
                 Action HE-1h-3:            Review Design Standards. Review design guidelines and
                 standards to ensure that housing developments, particularly in higher density
                 designations, provide adequate privacy, open space and other amenities.
Policy HE-1i:    Flexible Housing. Allow flexibility to encourage alternative housing solutions that support
                 affordable and intergenerational housing, including attached or detached accessory dwelling
                 suites, home sharing and cohousing.
Policy HE-1j:    New Market Rate Developments. Promote and encourage provision of housing within new
                 market rate development that is affordable to extremely low, very low, low, median, and moderate
                 income households.
                 Action HE-1j-1:           Monitor and Implement RDCS in New Projects.
                 Continue to monitor and ensure that an appropriate percentage of all new market rate
                 housing be affordable to lower, median, and moderate income households. The
36
                                                                                  MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                           CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
                  Planning Commission and City Council shall annually review proposed RDCS
                  allocation procedures to ensure that developers will maximize points in the RDCS by
                  providing sufficient affordable units.
Policy HE-1k:     Density Bonuses and Other Incentives. Continue to provide density bonuses and other
                  incentives consistent with State law and Chapter 18.47 of the Zoning Code for those projects
                  committing to provide appropriate amounts of below market rate units, including extremely low
                  income units. Other incentives may include: (a) exceptions to design and development standards
                  on a case by case basis that reduce the cost of producing housing units without sacrificing the
                  objectives for which these standards were adopted; (b) payment of fees from former Redevelopment
                  Agency tax increment housing set-aside funds and other appropriate funding sources; (c) priority
                  permit processing to ensure that project funding is not jeopardized; and, (d) assistance in accessing
                  funding by applying to, or supporting applications to, State, federal, and private agencies.
Policy HE-1l: Incentives for Affordable Developments. Provide incentives through the RDCS for Below
                  Market Rate (BMR) and other affordable projects that provide a high percentage of affordable
                  units.
                  Action HE-1l-1:             RDCS Points for BMR Housing. On an annual basis, when
                  the City Council updates RDCS scoring criteria, ensure that provisions are retained
                  within the RDCS that award points for developments that voluntarily reserve a
                  percentage of the proposed housing for below market rate units.
Policy HE-1m:     Housing Fees. Allow small projects (fewer than 16 units) to voluntarily pay a housing fee
                  when it is not feasible to provide affordable housing on site.
Policy HE-1n:     Local Needs. Provide local residents and local employees preferential access to housing
                  programs, as permitted by relevant law.
Policy HE-1o:    75 Percent Affordable Projects. Reserve a portion of the annual RDCS housing allocations
                  for projects with 75 percent affordable housing.
Policy HE-1p:     RDCS Reservation of Building Allotments. Continue to reserve a minimum of 20 percent
                  of the annual RDCS building allotments for projects that are 75 percent affordable or a level
                  established by City Council policy. Ensure that these developments meet the full spectrum of needs
                  associated with all income groups.
Policy HE-1q:     Affordable Housing. Encourage the production and preservation of affordable housing units.
                                                                                                                     37
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
                 Action HE-1q-1:              New Funding Sources. Monitor and consider new sources
                 of funding for affordable housing development and rehabilitation; continue to regularly
                 apply for grant funding such as CalHOME.
Policy HE-1r:    Funds for Affordable Units. When available, continue to make housing funds available to
                 finance affordable projects, including housing for extremely low income households. Consider
                 assistance to below market rate ownership housing where a financing gap can be demonstrated.
                 Action HE-1r-1:              Partnership for Tax Credits. Continue to support
                 applications for Low-Income Housing Tax Credits either by acting as co-applicant with
                 the developer or providing them with matching funds.
Policy HE-1s:    Rental Housing Incentives. Continue to assist market rate and nonprofit developers in
                 developing affordable rental housing.
Policy HE-1t:    Acquisition of Existing Housing by Nonprofits. Continue to work with nonprofit housing
                 agencies to acquire older, substandard market-rate rental units for conversion to a mix of market-
                 rate and affordable units.
Policy HE-1u:    Housing for Larger Households. Encourage the production of multi-family units
                 appropriate for larger households.
Policy HE-1v:    Provision of Larger Rental Units. Ensure that new affordable BMR rental units assisted
                 with City housing funds provide a specified percentage of three- and four-bedroom units.
Policy HE-1w:    Provision of Larger Ownership Units. Ensure that new BMR ownership units continue to
                 offer an appropriate percentage of three- and four-bedroom units in consideration of the
                 proportion of large, low income families in relation to the population as a whole.
Policy HE-1x:    Mobile Homes and Manufactured Housing. Allow mobile homes and manufactured
                 housing where appropriate.
Policy HE-1y:    Allowances for Manufactured Housing. Retain provisions in the Zoning Ordinance that
                 permit manufactured housing on single-family lots by right in residential zoning districts so long
                 as the manufactured homes are placed on permanent foundations and meet all other City
                 requirements.
Policy HE-1z:    Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions. Continue to allow mobile home parks as
                 conditional uses in the R-2 zone and manufactured home subdivisions within single-family
                 residential zones as permitted uses.
38
                                                                               MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-1aa: Environmental Sustainability. Promote environmental sustainability in new construction.
Policy HE-1bb: Evaluate Street Requirements. Continue to evaluate street requirements and look for
               opportunities to conform to green streets and complete streets guidelines (e.g., alternate ways of
               handling storm water or making streets more walkable).
               Action HE-1bb-1:             Solar Energy Assessment District. Study the possibility of
               forming a voluntary (opt-in) solar energy assessment district to provide loans to offset
               the initial cost of installing solar panels or other efficiency improvements. Loans would
               be paid for by a municipal bond and paid back by an increase in the participating
               household’s property taxes for the life of the loan.
Policy HE-1cc: Secondary Units. Encourage development of secondary dwelling units.
               Action HE-1cc-1:             R-2 Zoning. Modify the R-2 zoning standards (Chapter
               18.55 of the Zoning Code) to explicitly state that second units are an allowed use.
               Action HE-1cc-2:             Secondary Unit Information. Develop resources to help
               educate homeowners, architects, and builders about secondary dwelling units.
               Potential actions include producing handouts and fact sheets and hosting “How To”
               workshops.
Policy HE-1dd: Ministerial Approval of Second Units. Continue to allow staff to approve secondary
               dwelling units ministerially when appropriate.
               Action HE-1dd-1:             Secondary Unit Fees. Reduce per-unit impact fees for
               secondary dwelling units to reflect smaller household sizes and lesser impacts.
Policy HE-1ee: RDCS Incentives for Second Units. Continue to incentivize secondary dwelling units in the
               RDCS scoring criteria.
               Action HE-1ee-1:             Secondary Unit Ordinance. Study and revise the
               secondary dwelling unit ordinance to ensure it follows standard best practices. Points
               to consider include:
                        Clarify the ordinance to ensure properties are not subdivided and second units
                         sold as separate units.
                        Utilize window design techniques to reduce impact on adjacent property for
                         two-story second units.
                                                                                                                  39

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
                           Increase the maximum permitted second unit size to 50 percent of primary
                            dwelling or 750 square feet, whichever is smaller.
                           Reduce parking requirements to one space for a two-bedroom second unit, or
                            allow tandem parking for the two spaces.
                           Reduce or eliminate the minimum lot size for second units.
                           Have second units governed by the same land use controls as other buildings
                            (setbacks, lot coverage, etc.).
                           Review and revise the zoning ordinance to allow second units in additional
                            zoning districts, including certain multi-family and mixed use districts such as
                            CC-R and CL-R, where some existing lots developed with single-family uses
                            could accommodate greater density in a second unit configuration.
Policy HE-1ff:   Programs Providing Very Low and Low Income Housing. Participate in programs that
                 assist very low and low income households to secure adequate housing.
Policy HE-1gg:   Santa Clara Housing Programs. Continue participating in and publicizing programs such
                 as the County’s Mortgage Credit Certificate program, Housing Trust Fund of Santa Clara
                 County, CalHFA, etc.
Policy HE-1hh:   Relocation Assistance. Require relocation assistance when privately funded redevelopment
                 displaces extremely low, very low, low, or moderate income residents.
Policy HE-1ii:   Rental Assistance Programs. Encourage landlords to utilize rental assistance programs,
                 such as housing vouchers and Section 8 vouchers administered by the Housing Authority of Santa
                 Clara County.
                 Action HE-1ii-1:             Rental Assistance Programs. Undertake the following:
                 (1) Refer rental property owners to the Santa Clara County's Housing Authority's
                 waiting list; (2) When in contact with rental property owners, inform them of the
                 Housing Authority's vouchers program; and, (3) Promote the availability of vouchers
                 for use in the rental rehabilitation program.
Policy HE-1jj:   Leverage Funding. Leverage housing assistance funds wherever possible by combining them
                 with funds from State, federal, and other sources.
Policy HE-1kk:   Use of Local Housing Funds. Use local housing funds to leverage the maximum amount of
                 additional financing for affordable housing projects.
40

                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                         CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-1ll: Work with Local Legislators. Continue to work with local legislators and provide input to
               the State Legislature to ensure that State programs and legislation meet local housing needs and
               support local housing programs.
               Action HE-1ll-1:             Update Funding Information. Update, as needed,
               directories of State and federal housing and community development programs that
               provide financial assistance. Annually identify State and federal programs that are most
               applicable to Morgan Hill and have the greatest potential for funding affordable housing
               in the city.
Policy HE-1mm: Housing Assistance Funds. Provide housing assistance funds in the form of loans wherever
               possible so that the funds will eventually return to the City for future use.
Policy HE-1nn: Home Improvement Loans. Continue to provide home improvement loans through the City's
               Housing Rehabilitation programs to very low, low, median, and moderate income homeowners.
               Action HE-1nn-1:             Housing Rehabilitation of Rental Properties. Provide
               financial assistance for substantial housing rehabilitation to rental property owners with
               extremely low, very low or low income tenants in exchange for long term affordability
               (as required by the funding source).
               Action HE-1nn-2:             First-Time Homebuyer Program. Provide a first-time
               homebuyer downpayment assistance program targeted to low and moderate income
               residents and employees.
               Action HE-1nn-3:             Promote Extremely Low Income Housing. Provide
               priority funding consideration for extremely low income housing developments.
Policy HE-1oo: Annual Monitoring. Monitor housing development and housing needs annually to ensure that
               goals and quantified objectives are being met.
               Action HE-1oo-1:             Update City’s Affordable Housing Strategy. Continue
               to update the City’s Affordable Housing Strategy with the most current Census data.
               Identify methods to create housing affordable to extremely low income households.
               Action HE-1oo-2:             Review Housing Objectives Annually. Review housing
               objectives annually and recommend program modifications if annual housing objectives
               are not being met.
                                                                                                               41

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-1pp:   Review Potential Governmental Constraints to Housing. Continue to review potential
                 governmental constraints, such as public works standards (including Chapter 12 of Morgan Hill’s
                 Municipal Code and standards for private streets), to ensure that they do not pose an undue
                 impediment to the provision of new housing or the rehabilitation of existing housing.
Policy HE-1qq:   Sales Prices and Rental Rates. Continue to have developers report initial sales price and
                 rents of new units prior to occupancy approval.
Policy HE-1rr:   Below Market Rate (BMR) Housing. Continue the BMR program as a source of affordable
                 housing.
Policy HE-1ss:   BMR Occupancy. Require all BMR units to be restricted to use as affordable housing as
                 required by funding source.
Policy HE-1tt:   BMR Deed Restrictions. Continue to require the recordation of deed restrictions for all
                 affordable units except as secondary dwelling units.
                 Action HE-1tt-1:              Term of BMR Units. Review the term of affordability for
                 ownership housing units.
                 Action HE-1tt-2:              BMR Equity. Develop opportunities for owners of BMR
                 units to build equity/wealth, while protecting the public investment of resources.
Policy HE-1uu:   Preserve At-Risk Units. Preserve as many at-risk below market rate ownership and rental
                 units as possible.
Policy HE-1vv:   Affordability Controls. Continue to extend the affordability restrictions as part of the next
                 sale to eligible purchasers and, if necessary, exercise the City's right of first refusal to purchase
                 BMR units to ensure they remain affordable.
                 Action HE-1vv-1:              Annual Monitoring of Potential At-Risk Units.
                 Annually monitor the status of at-risk assisted rental housing units. Contact current
                 property owners of at-risk projects to determine their financial objectives and
                 appropriate financial assistance needed to meet those objectives (rehabilitation
                 assistance, operating subsidies, additional Section 8 vouchers, etc.).
Policy HE-1ww: Assist Nonprofits in Acquisition of At-Risk Units. Assist nonprofit housing
                 organizations in acquiring and/or rehabilitating existing affordable rental housing through the
                 provision of financial assistance in exchange for extending the affordability period as required by
                 the applicable funding source.
42

                                                                                  MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-1xx:  Condominium Conversions. Regulate the amount and timing of condominium conversions.
Policy HE-1yy:  Condominium Conversion Restrictions. Continue the City's program to restrict conversion
                of rental units to condominiums if the rental vacancy rate is less than five percent, and to restrict
                the conversion of projects that have received allotments under the “Rental” category.
                Action HE-1yy-1:              Semi-Annual Survey of Rental Vacancies. Conduct a
                semi-annual survey of rental housing vacancies to determine the applicable vacancy rate
                for implementing the condominium conversion ordinance.
Policy HE-1zz:  Housing Discrimination. Work to eliminate discrimination in housing based on race, color,
                religion, sex, age, family size, marital status, or national origin.
                Action HE-1zz-1:              Housing Discrimination. Refer discrimination complaints
                to Project Sentinel or other organizations that combat housing discrimination.
Policy HE-1aaa: Support for Fair Housing Programs. Continue to contract with organizations that provide
                Fair Housing services or support programs and have a demonstrated track record of effectiveness,
                as available funds allow.
Policy HE-1bbb: Equitable Buyer Selection Procedures. Maintain an equitable buyer selection procedure
                through a waiting list process for low, median, and moderate income units.
Policy HE-1ccc: Publicity for City Programs. Continue to publicize and broaden understanding and
                acceptance of City housing programs, including the discrimination complaints procedure, through
                public presentations, publications, news items, advertisements in newspapers such as the Morgan
                Hill Times and Gilroy Dispatch, public service announcements on the City's local access television
                channel, and by posting flyers at City Hall, City parks, and at various local houses of worship on
                a continuing bases. Make special outreach efforts to the non-English speaking community and
                underserved/underrepresented populations.
Policy HE-1ddd: Integration of Affordable and Market Rate Housing. Integrate below market rate and
                other affordable "set aside" units into existing or proposed developments.
Policy HE-1eee: RDCS and Neighborhood Context. Retain provisions within the RDCS that give higher
                ratings to projects that create neighborhoods and residential developments of ethnic and economic
                diversity.
Policy HE-1fff: Creative Approaches to Mixing Housing Types. Continue allowing developers the
                flexibility to develop creative approaches for mixing various housing types and affordability levels
                                                                                                                    43

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
                 within the boundaries of an entire development in order to achieve their voluntary BMR set-aside
                 commitments.
Policy HE-1ggg: RDCS Flexibility. Provide flexibility in the RDCS system where possible.
Policy HE-1hhh: Modifications to Approved Projects. Allow developers to propose changes to their approved
                 but not built projects, assuming that the modifications do not cause a net loss of RDCS points,
                 promote affordability, and are in the best interest of the City.
              Goal HE-2              Preservation and rehabilitation of the existing
                                     housing supply.
Policy HE-2a:    City Housing Stock. Maintain and conserve the city's existing housing stock.
Policy HE-2b:    Rehabilitation Loan Program. As funds allow, continue the Housing Rehabilitation Loan
                 Program, which provides home improvement and rehabilitation assistance using CDBG or other
                 housing funds.
Policy HE-2c:    Code Enforcement. Continue City's code enforcement programs with emphasis on rental units,
                 assistance in maintaining affordability, and non-displacement of existing tenants.
Policy HE-2d:    Renovations under the Downtown Specific Plan. Encourage the renovation of buildings
                 consistent with the Downtown Specific Plan.
Policy HE-2e:    Home Repairs. When funds are available, continue to provide funding for mobile home repair,
                 senior home repair programs, neighborhood clean-up and paint, and rental lighting and security
                 grant programs.
                 Action HE-2e-1:              Resale and Rental Inspection. Research and evaluate
                 creating a resale and rental inspection program to maintain and improve the quality of
                 the housing stock.
Policy HE-2f:    Preserve Existing Residential Neighborhoods. Promote and encourage the preservation
                 of existing residential neighborhoods.
44
                                                                               MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-2g: Capital Improvement Program. Coordinate the planning and funding of neighborhood
              infrastructure improvements by integrating the Capital Improvement Program with the goals and
              policies of the Housing Element and Affordable Housing Strategy, which is updated annually.
Policy HE-2h: Loans for Improvements Related to Code Enforcement. Support neighborhood code
              enforcement programs with technical assistance to homeowners and low-cost loans when funds are
              available. (See Policy 2a regarding City programs for housing rehabilitation, code enforcement,
              and neighborhood improvement).
Policy HE-2i: Public Information on Rehabilitation Loans. When Rehabilitation Loan funding is
              available, continue public information efforts to encourage property owners in target
              neighborhoods to participate in the rehabilitation loan program.
Policy HE-2j: Overcrowding. Continue to permit the addition of bedrooms and other expansions as an eligible
              rehabilitation activity to alleviate overcrowding.
Policy HE-2k: Nonprofit Acquisition of Substandard Housing. Continue to work with nonprofit
              housing organizations to identify and acquire dilapidated or substantially substandard housing
              units for the purpose of rehabilitating or replacing these housing units. The City shall monitor
              progress, coordinate with the nonprofits as they complete these projects, and report to the State
              Housing and Community Development Department on the financing and construction in
              compliance with State Government Code Section 65583.1(c)(4).
Policy HE-2l: Mobile Home Parks. Preserve and protect existing mobile home parks.
Policy HE-2m: Rent Stabilization Ordinance. Maintain the City's rent stabilization ordinance for mobile
              home parks.
              Action HE-2m-1:               Work with Mobile Home Interest Groups. Work with
              mobile home residents and nonprofit groups, as opportunities and interests arise, to
              explore the purchase of existing mobile home parks to preserve or enhance their
              affordability. Options include providing funding for feasibility studies, assisting in
              accessing state and federal programs (such as the California Mobilehome Park Resident
              Ownership Program), and using available local affordable housing funds as gap funding.
Policy HE-2n: Environmental Sustainability. Promote environmental sustainability in the existing housing
              stock.
                                                                                                                45
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
                 Action HE-2n-1:              Energy Audits/Weatherization. Partner with local
                 organizations for energy audits/weatherization programs. Typical projects include
                 energy audits, energy efficiency rebate applications, weatherization (reducing air
                 leakage, etc.), window replacement, appliance swaps, etc.
Policy HE-2o:    Rehabilitation and Sustainability. Ensure that all housing units rehabilitated with City
                 assistance are environmentally friendly and energy-efficient. The City has adopted the latest
                 version of Title 24 and can include funding for required updates as part of the assistance package.
                 Typical projects include replacing traditional water heaters with tankless models, new windows,
                 etc.
              Goal HE-3              Adequate housing for groups with special needs.
Policy HE-3a:    RDCS Incentives for Large Families. Provide incentives through the RDCS for the
                 production of affordable housing for large families.
Policy HE-3b:    RDCS Incentives for Large Families. Continue to implement RDCS criteria that provide
                 additional points for the production of housing for large families in the "Housing Needs" and
                 "Housing Types" sections of the criteria.
Policy HE-3c:    Homeless. Meet the needs of residents who are homeless or at risk for homelessness.
Policy HE-3d:    Housing First. Adopt a Housing First model that recognizes the unique characteristics of
                 Morgan Hill as a small suburban city. Study how to best implement the policy to meet the needs
                 of Morgan Hill residents. Through the Housing First policy, Morgan Hill will emphasize
                 permanent affordable housing. When appropriate and feasible, Morgan Hill will try to make
                 support services accessible.
Policy HE-3e:    Support of Homeless Shelter and Services Agencies. Continue to support the effort of
                 agencies providing emergency shelter for homeless Morgan Hill residents. When appropriate and
                 possible, provide funding.
Policy HE-3f:    Work with Santa Clara County Agencies. Continue engagement with other Santa Clara
                 County agencies and nonprofits to address homelessness and other housing or community service
                 related issues.
46
                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-3g: Religious Institutions Shelters. Allow religious institutions to operate small emergency
              shelters and transitional facilities as an ancillary part of their regular operations with no
              additional local permitting requirements.
Policy HE-3h: Housing for Persons with Disabilities. Promote housing that is appropriate for and
              accessible to persons living with disabilities.
Policy HE-3i: State and Federal Accessibility Requirements. Continue to enforce State and federal
              requirements for accessibility to the disabled in new multi-family units.
              Action HE-3i-1:               Low Interest Loans for Accessibility. When funds are
              available, provide low interest rehabilitation loans to make existing residences
              accessible to the disabled.
              Action HE-3i-2:               Housing for Mentally Impaired Homeless Adults.
              Work with nonprofit organizations (Community Solutions and South County Housing
              are two examples of nonprofits with which the City has relationships) to evaluate the
              need for additional units in Morgan Hill for mentally impaired homeless adults.
              Action HE-3i-3:               Housing for Developmentally Disabled Adults.
              Coordinate with North Bay Regional Center to integrate their clients into affordable
              housing. Consult with North Bay Regional Center on new affordable development
              projects to ensure that new units are built that support adults with developmental
              disabilities to live lives integrated with the rest of the community.
Policy HE-3j: Housing for Seniors. Assist in providing housing for seniors.
              Action HE-3j-1:               Locations for Senior Housing. Identify criteria and
              locations within the city that are appropriate for senior housing developments and
              assist developers as appropriate.
Policy HE-3k: RDCS Allocation for Senior Housing. Continue exempting specified types of senior housing
              from the RDCS.
Policy HE-3l: Smaller Senior Units on Single-family Lots. Allow small senior units on single-family
              lots.
              Action HE-3l-1:               Reduced Impact Fees for Senior Housing. Reduce per-
              unit impact fees for small senior housing units to reflect smaller household sizes and
              lesser impacts.
                                                                                                            47
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-3m:    Services for Special Needs Populations. Assist in providing housing related services to
                 groups with special needs.
Policy HE-3n:    Work with Other Agencies. Continue to work with outside agencies and organizations to
                 maximize housing opportunities for the full spectrum of housing needs.
Policy HE-3o:    Use CDBG and Other Funding. Continue to use CDBG and other available funds to
                 support the provision of housing related services for groups with special needs such as the elderly,
                 single parents with children, and battered women.
Policy HE-3p:    Domestic Violence Facilities. Continue to fund upgrades at facilities for people leaving
                 domestic violence as appropriate.
Policy HE-3q:    Preferential Handling of Special Needs Populations. Include preferential handling of
                 special needs populations, such as domestic violence cases, youth aging out of foster care, the
                 developmentally disabled, single parents, etc., in the management plans and regulatory
                 agreements of funded projects.
                 Action HE-3q-1:              Emergency Voucher Program. Consider implementing a
                 one-time emergency voucher program to assist residents displaced by criminal activity,
                 natural disasters or other emergencies. Coordinate with social service providers.
48
                                                                                  MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                           CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
              Goal HE-4             A range of housing types for all age groups, served
                                    by transit, recreational amenities, shopping, and
                                    health and personal services, that allow residents to
                                    age in place.
Policy HE-4a:   Downtown Development. Provide for a vibrant mix of residential and commercial
                development downtown.
Policy HE-4b:   Implement Downtown Specific Plan. Continue implementing provisions of the Downtown
                Specific Plan, and encourage development in the nearby Central Commercial Residential (CC-R)
                zoning district. Examples of incentives include City payment of sewer connection fees, RDCS
                exemptions, down payment assistance, etc. Monitor and track new housing developments, paying
                particular attention to affordability, adjusting strategy where appropriate.
                Action HE-4b-1:               Impact Fees for Downtown Housing. Reduce per-unit
                impact fees for small downtown housing units, to reflect smaller household sizes and
                lesser impacts.
Policy HE-4c:   Impact Fee Credits for Previous Uses. Continue to allow projects being developed on
                previously developed parcels to receive a credit of impact fees, based on the previous uses, to be
                applied toward any impact fees owed.
Policy HE-4d:   Parking Flexibility in the Downtown. Consider reducing parking minimum standards for
                smaller housing units in the Downtown Area, and allow flexibility for developers to purchase
                parking in other areas of the Downtown instead of providing it on site.
Policy HE-4e:   Adequate Land for Multi-Family Housing. Provide an adequate supply of land for multi-
                family housing located convenient to shopping, services, and transportation routes.
Policy HE-4f:   Adequate Higher Density Multi-Family Zoned Sites. Maintain an adequate supply of
                land zoned land for multi-family use to accommodate the City's ABAG assigned regional housing
                allocation for lower income households. This will be reviewed annually as part of the RDCS
                process.
Policy HE-4g:   Site Multi-Family Zones Near Services. When rezoning sites for multi-family housing,
                locate sites near amenities to increase affordable housing projects’ eligibility for tax credit
                financing.
                                                                                                                   49

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy HE-4h:    Land Acquisition for Affordable Housing. Continue to pursue opportunities for land
                 acquisition for future affordable housing development in areas zoned for multi-family or
                 commercial that permit mixed projects, either through acquisition of suitable sites by the City or
                 by assisting a nonprofit housing developer to acquire land for future development. The City
                 accomplishes this by maintaining close relationships with for profit and nonprofit developers,
                 monitoring local real estate conditions, etc.
Policy HE-4i:    Transit Corridors Development. Continue to promote smart growth development along
                 identified transit corridors. Downtown is the primary transit corridor; see the Downtown Specific
                 Plan for implementation information.
Policy HE-4j:    Facilitate Land Assembly. Facilitate assembling smaller parcels to develop residential
                 projects large enough to yield multi-family and affordable units by making the Available Land
                 Inventory available to developers.
Policy HE-4k:    Variety of Single-family Homes. Provide for a variety of single-family lot sizes.
Policy HE-4l:    Single-family High Zoning. Maintain the Single-family High category; R-1-4,500 zoning
                 district, with the goal of accommodating market rate affordable homes. Infill sites seeking a
                 change to the Single-family High land use designation should be a minimum of 30,000 square
                 feet and result in development that is compatible with existing surrounding development. This
                 land use designation is meant to serve as a transition between single-family and multi-family land
                 use. Ensure that the homes are an appropriate size and scale for the lot.
Policy HE-4m:    New Residential Development Locations. Encourage new residential development in
                 appropriate residential and commercial areas.
Policy HE-4n:    Mixed Use Development. Continue to maintain the mixed residential and commercial uses
                 classification on sites designated mixed-use.
Policy HE-4o:    Work with Affordable Housing Developers to Identify Sites. Continue to work with
                 for-profit and nonprofit affordable housing developers to identify appropriate sites through
                 regular contacts with such organizations and maintenance of a site inventory for the benefit of
                 nonprofits.
Policy HE-4p:    Work with Affordable Housing Developers to Encourage Universal Design.
                 Encourage universal design and maximize visitability, building on Title 24.
50
                                                                              MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
              Action HE-4p-1:               Increased Awareness of Universal Design Principles.
              Increase awareness of universal design principles. Educate the Planning Commission
              about universal design. Make information available at Development Services Center.
              Action HE-4p-2:               Universal Design Ordinance. Study and, if appropriate,
              adopt a universal design ordinance or policies to encourage the inclusion of universal
              design features in new construction. Options include identifying minimum, cost-
              effective amenities for all new construction and offering points in the RDCS for homes
              that provide a more extensive selection of universal design features.
Policy HE-4q: Aging In Place. Assist seniors to stay in their homes and neighborhoods
Policy HE-4r: Rehabilitation Loans for Seniors. Continue to fund the Home Rehabilitation Program,
              when possible. Maintain priority for eligible improvements related to health, safety or other
              essential repairs.
Policy HE-4s: Senior-Friendly Design. Encourage new housing to be senior friendly where possible (for
              example, have a bedroom and bathroom on the ground floor, or have the entire unit contained
              within a single floor), particularly in Single-family High and all Multi-Family land use
              designations.
Policy HE-4t: Complete Intergenerational Neighborhoods. Design for complete neighborhoods for all
              ages
Policy HE-4u: Mix of Housing Near Services. Encourage a mix of housing types in each neighborhood
              located convenient to shopping, services, recreation, and transit routes.
Policy HE-4v: Housing Coordinated with Transportation. Coordinate new housing development with
              improvements to pedestrian and bicycle routes and amenities.
                                                                                                            51
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
1.6        IMPLEMENTATION TIMEFRAME
1.6.1 OVERVIEW
The Morgan Hill Housing Element is built around
preserving and enhancing residential neighborhoods,
sustaining the community's character and environmental
resources, and efficiently planning for the future use of
remaining undeveloped or redeveloping properties so
that they fulfill unmet needs. The implementing actions
in the Housing Element and associated programs, as
described in the previous section, are intended to
address these concerns.
In reviewing the list of actions, it is important to
recognize two other concerns: (1) there are limited staff and budget resources to undertake all of the
programs listed immediately; and (2) some actions require other funding or actions to occur first.
The Morgan Hill Redevelopment Agency previously provided housing set-aside funds and applied for funds
from State programs to assure sufficient funding for affordable housing projects. With the dissolution of
Redevelopment throughout California, many of Morgan Hill’s implementing programs have been reduced
or eliminated. Additional revenue sources are still being pursued, along with the City Council’s vote in May
2013 to support Senate Bill 391 (the California Jobs and Homes Act), which would add additional
opportunities to the City for affordable housing funding if it is passed. The bill was heard in Assembly
Committee in August 2013. While passed by the State Senate, the bill will remain on the Assembly
Appropriations Committee’s calendar while work is done to strengthen the bill and move it forward early in
2014.
Although implementation of the Housing Element is supported by its policies and those of the Downtown
Specific Plan, its success will be influenced by the ability of the city to fund its programs, which will depend
significantly on whether Senate Bill 391 or a similar financing mechanism is funded statewide. Fortunately,
the City will still have approximately $10 million to invest in limited programs and potentially at least two
to three new affordable housing developments. These funds are sourced from in-lieu fees, existing funding,
sales of City-owned BMRs, and Supplemental/Educational Revenue Augmentation Funds (SERAF/ERAF)
repayments over the next five years.
52

                                                                                  MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
This section covers all of the implementing actions described in the Housing Element, conservatively
accounting for the lack of Redevelopment funds while representing the City’s commitment to take an active
leadership role in assuring the implementation of the programs described. It is the City’s intent to: (1)
encourage public review and effective participation in all aspects of the planning process; and (2) assure
annual review of the Housing Element in order to periodically revise and update this Action Plan as
necessary to keep it effective.
1.6.2 IMPLEMENTATION SUMMARY TABLES
 Table 1-10          Summary of Actions
 Morgan Hill Housing Element Action            Time Frame         Dept            Source of Funding
 Goal 1 Adequate New Housing to Meet Future Community Housing Needs
 1a-2: Evaluate Land Availability Annually     Annually           Planning         General Plan Update Fee
                                               As part of annual
                                               review of RDCS
 1b-1: Annual RDCS Objectives                                     Planning         Community Development Fund
                                               criteria, usually
                                               spring-summer
 1b-2: Annually Evaluate RDCS Allocations      Annually           Planning         Community Development Fund
                                                As part of annual
                                               review of RDCS
 1c-6: RDCS Refinement                                            Multiple         Multiple
                                               criteria, usually
                                               spring-summer
                                                As part of the
                                               Morgan Hill 2035
                                               Zoning Code
 1c-7: Review Height Limits                                       Planning         Community Development Fund
                                               Update scheduled
                                               to be completed
                                               in 2016
                                                As part of the
                                               Morgan Hill 2035
                                               Zoning Code
 1c-8: Review Design Standards                                    Planning         Community Development Fund
                                               Update scheduled
                                               to be completed
                                               in 2016
                                               As part of annual
 1d-1: Monitor and Implement RDCS in New       review of RDCS
                                                                  Planning         Community Development Fund
 Projects                                      criteria, usually
                                               spring-summer
                                               As part of annual
                                               review of RDCS
 1e-1: RDCS Points for BMR Housing                                Planning/Housing Community Development Fund,
                                               criteria, usually
                                               spring-summer
 1g-1: New Funding Sources                     Ongoing            Multiple         Community Development Fund
                                                                                                               53

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
 Table 1-10           Summary of Actions
 Morgan Hill Housing Element Action                 Time Frame          Dept            Source of Funding
 1r-1: Partnerships for Tax Credits
                                                    Currently being
                                                                        Public Works,
 1j-2: Solar Energy Assessment District             studied (Nov.                        TBD
                                                                        Enviro
                                                    2014)
                                                    As part of the
                                                    Morgan Hill 2035
                                                    Zoning Code
 1k-1: R-2 Zoning                                                       Planning         General Plan Update Fee
                                                    Update scheduled
                                                    to be completed
                                                    in 2016
 1k-2: Secondary Unit Information                   Ongoing             Housing          Housing Fee
 1k-4: Secondary Unit Fees                          Ongoing             Planning         Community Development Fund
                                                    As part of the
                                                    Morgan Hill 2035
                                                    Zoning Code
 1k:6: Secondary Unit Ordinance                                         Planning         Community Development Fund
                                                    Update scheduled
                                                    to be completed
                                                    in 2016
                                                                                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1l-3: Rental Assistance programs                   Ongoing             Housing
                                                                                         In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                    Not less than
                                                    annually, at                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1m-3: Update Funding Information                                       Housing
                                                    beginning of fiscal                  In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                    year
                                                                                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1n-2: Housing Rehabilitation of Rental Properties  Ongoing             Housing
                                                                                         In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                                                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1n-3: First-Time Homebuyer Program                 Ongoing             Housing
                                                                                         In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                                                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1n-4: Promote Extremely Low Housing                Ongoing             Housing
                                                                                         In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                                                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1o-1: Update City’s Affordable Housing Strategy    May 2014            Housing
                                                                                         In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                    Each spring as part
 1o-2: Review Housing Objectives Annually           of annual report    Housing/Planning Multiple
                                                    to City Council
                                                    Prior to approval
                                                                                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1p-3: Term of BMR Units                            of each BMR         Housing
                                                                                         In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                    project
                                                                                         Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1p-4: BMR Equity                                   Ongoing             Housing
                                                                                         In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                    Annually,
                                                    beginning no later                   Successor Agency Housing Funds,
 1q-2: Annual Monitoring of Potential At-Risk Units                     Housing
                                                    than December                        In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                    2015
54

                                                                                    MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                              CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 1-10           Summary of Actions
Morgan Hill Housing Element Action                 Time Frame       Dept            Source of Funding
                                                   Semi-annually in
1r-2: Semi-Annual Survey of Rental Vacancies       March and        Planning/Housing Multiple
                                                   October
                                                                                     Successor Agency Housing Funds,
1s-1: Housing Discrimination                       Ongoing          Housing          In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                                                     CDBG
Goal 2 Preservation of the Existing Housing Supply
                                                   By December
2a-5: Resale and Rental Inspection                                  Building         Building
                                                   2016
                                                                                     Successor Agency Housing Funds,
2c-2: Work with Mobile Home Interest Groups        Ongoing          Housing
                                                                                     In lieu fees and loan repayments.
                                                                    Housing/Env.
2d-1: Energy Audits/Weatherization                 Ongoing                           Multiple
                                                                    Programs
Goal 3 Adequate Housing for Groups with Special Needs
                                                                                     Successor Agency Housing Funds, In
3c-2: Low Interest Loans for Accessibility         Ongoing          Housing
                                                                                     lieu fees and loan repayments.
3c-3: Housing for Mentally Impaired Homeless
                                                   Ongoing          Housing/Planning Multiple
Adults
                                                   By December
3d-1: Locations for Senior Housing                                  Housing/Planning Multiple
                                                   2015
3i-3: Housing for Developmentally Disabled Adults
                                                   By December                       Successor Agency Housing Funds, In
3e-5: Emergency Voucher Program                                     Housing
                                                   2015                              lieu fees and loan repayments.
Goal 4 Range of Housing Types for All Age Groups
4a-2: Impact Fees for Downtown Housing             Ongoing          Multiple         Multiple
4e-1: Increased Awareness of Universal Design
                                                   Ongoing          Planning         Community Development Fund
Principles
4e-2: Universal Design Ordinance                   Ongoing          Planning         Community Development Fund
                                                                                                                       55
MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
1.7         QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
1.7.1 PURPOSE OF ESTABLISHING QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
State law requires the Housing Element to include
quantified objectives for the maximum number of units
that can be constructed, rehabilitated or conserved.
Policies and programs establish the strategies to
achieve these objectives. The City’s quantified
objectives represent the City’s best effort in
implementing each of the programs. Assumptions are
based on past program performance and funding
availability, construction trends, land availability, and
future programs that will enhance program
effectiveness and achieve full implementation of the City’s objectives. The tables below summarize the City’s
quantified program objectives for housing during the 2015-2023 planning period.
1.7.2 QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES SUMMARY TABLE
The following is a summary of quantified objectives for the 2015-2023 Housing Element cycle based on
current market trends. Morgan Hill has objectives in three categories: new construction, rehabilitation and
conservation/preservation (of affordability). The objectives are based on the City’s best effort given
available resources. The assumptions in each category are explained following Table 1-11.
TABLE 1-11 MORGAN HILL QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES SUMMARY 2015-2023
                                            New                                        Conservation/
                                        Construction          Rehabilitation            Preservation
Extremely Low Income                         75                    16                        –
Very Low Income                              75                    80                        –
Low Income                                   70                     –                        –
Moderate Income                             170                     –                        –
Above Moderate Income                      2,510                    –                        –
Total                                      2,900                   96                        –
56

                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
The new construction targets are based on actual and anticipated RDCS allocations from Fiscal Year
2013/2014 through Fiscal Year 2022/2023. 2013 is chosen as the start year because these units are likely to
receive their building permits in 2014. (Being awarded allocations means that the applicant has a right to
submit a project for discretionary project and CEQA review, and then to obtain building permits.) When
calculating units produced between 2015 and 2023, the City will use the calendar year, as prescribed by
State law. These numbers are also based on the City’s current growth cap, and do not reflect the reality that
the RDCS numbers will likely be raised in 2016, resulting in increased allocations across all income
categories.
The City is committed to providing housing for residents of all income levels and has a strong history of
producing lower income housing. As with most jurisdictions, the City is operating in an environment of
limited resources and must prioritize limited funding. Extremely low income units require approximately
$200,000 in funding per unit, or over $27 million to meet the entire City RHNA allotment. This is many
times the City’s entire housing budget. While the City is committed to meeting the needs of extremely low
income households, it believes that the money is better spent on the full spectrum of lower income housing.
The City will aggressively pursue additional resources for extremely low income housing and will increase
its target if these resources become available. The City estimates that given its existing funds, it will be able
to fund three 50-unit projects serving low, very low and extremely low-income residents.
Due to Measure A, passed by voters in May 2009, up to 500 units in the downtown are also exempt from
the RDCS process. As of late 2014, almost 100 units have taken advantage of this exemption, including the
Weston Miles and Lyon projects. Downtown units will not have affordability controls on them, but because
they will be modest in size, they will be naturally affordable. Specifically, they will range from 900 to 1,500
square feet for condominiums and 400 to 1,300 square feet for rental units. Based on current data, we
expect sales prices to range from $300,000 to $500,000 and rental prices to be similar to the rest of the city
on a square foot basis ($1,200-$1,600). Based on the proposals it has been receiving, the City expects 200
units of RDCS-exempt moderate income housing to be built during this housing cycle in the downtown.
All developers, but particularly those competing in the affordable housing RDCS competition, are
encouraged to submit proposals that meet the full spectrum of need. The RDCS competition (set-aside) for
affordable housing covers all lower income housing units, including extremely low and very low income.
The City will work with developers to help them identify the resources and subsidies to extend housing
opportunities for all income groups.
                                                                                                                 57

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
TABLE 1-12 NEW CONSTRUCTION TRENDS BASED ON EXPECTED MARKET
                                                                                    Above
                                  Extremely Low Very Low      Low      Moderate   Moderate
                                      Income     Income     Income      Income     Income     Total
RDCS Allocations 2014-2016                –          –         20          20        710       750
Anticipated Allocations 2016-2023        75         75         50          50       1,800     2,050
Downtown Units (RDCS Exempt)              –          –          –         100         –        100
Total                                    75         75         70         170       2,510     2,900
RHNA                                      –        273        154         185        316       928
Rehabilitation objectives in Table 1-11 are based on historic patterns for home improvement grants and
loans, as well as the Cochrane Village project, expected in 2014. The conservation and preservation projects
in the previous Housing Element cycle were funded through the Redevelopment Agency. Following the
dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, no conservation or preservation projects are currently planned.
58

                                                                                MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT
Glossary
Above Moderate Income Households: Defined as households earning over 120 percent of the median
household income. As of April 2013, a family of four earning more than $126,600 per year was considered
above moderate income.
Accessible Housing: Units accessible and adaptable to the needs of the physically disabled.
Affordable Housing: Housing that a lower income household can buy or rent without spending more
than 30 percent of their income. The generally accepted measure for determining whether a person can
afford housing means spending no more than 30 percent of one's gross household income on housing costs,
including utilities, principal and interest. For example, a school teacher earning $50,000 per year can afford
$1,250 per month for housing. A police officer or fire fighter earning $60,000 can afford up to $1,500 per
month.
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG): The Association of Bay Area Governments is the
regional planning agency for the nine counties and 101 cities and towns of the San Francisco Bay region.
ABAG runs a number of programs designed to foster cooperation, save jurisdictions’ resources and address
regional issues. It is responsible for developing the Regional Housing Need Allocation.
Conservation (of Affordable Housing): In term of the Housing Element, conservation generally
means programs to ensure that affordable housing remains affordable. Conservation in other contexts can
mean reducing the energy use associated with a home.
Below Market Rate (BMR) Unit: Housing that has affordability controls that limit the sales or rent
price. In Morgan Hill, BMR housing is often created through the RDCS.
Emergency Shelter: Emergency or homeless shelter means housing with minimal supportive services for
homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or
household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.
Extremely Low Income Households: Extremely low income is a subset of the very low-income
regional housing need and is defined as households earning less than 30 percent of the median household
income, which for family of four corresponds to less than $31,850 per year, as of April 2013.
Fair Housing: Refers to housing programs that fight housing discrimination.
                                                                                                             59

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
Housing and Community Development (Department of) (HCD): The State Department that
writes guidelines for and certifies Housing Elements.
Housing Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land. Gross density includes all the land
within the boundaries of a particular area and excludes nothing. Net density excludes certain areas such as
streets, open spaces, easements, water areas, etc.
Housing Element: The chapter of a General Plan (long-term comprehensive plan for a city) that deals
with housing issues. Housing Elements must be certified by the State Department of Housing and
Community Development.
Housing First: Housing First or Rapid Re-housing is a method of addressing homeless that emphasizes
permanent housing with support services as needed. Developed in the late 1980s/early 1990s, it emphasizes
finding permanent housing as quickly as feasible for people who are homeless or at risk for homelessness. It
is an alternative to the “Continuum of Care” model, which emphasizes getting people “ready” before
providing permanent housing. When possible, Housing First programs provide services that help people stay
in their homes, such as counseling, job training, etc. Santa Clara County has embraced a Housing First
model.
(Affordable) Housing Fund: See Redevelopment Agency Set Aside Funds. A replacement source of
funding for affordable housing after the dissolution of Redevelopment has not been identified as of 2014.
Housing Unit: A home, including traditional detached single-family houses, apartments or
condominiums.
Jobs/Housing Balance: The relationship of the number and types of jobs in a community with the
amount and affordability of housing. An appropriate balance is commonly thought to be around 1.3 to 1.5
jobs for every housing unit or approximately one job for every resident in the work force.
Low Income Households: Low income household according to the State definition are households
earning 50-80 percent of the median household income, adjusted for family size, with some adjustment for
areas with unusually high or low incomes relative to housing costs. As of 2013, a family of four earning
between $53,050 and $84,900 per year was considered low income.
Lower Income Households: Lower income households refer to low, very low, or extremely low income
households. In other words, for a family of four in Santa Clara County in 2013, they would have to make less
than $84,900 to be considered lower income.
60

                                                                                 MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                         CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
Median Household Income: The middle point at which half of the City's households earn more and half
earn less. In 2013, the Department of Housing and Urban Development median household income for a
family of four in Santa Clara County was $105,500.
Moderate Income Households: Households earning 80-120 percent of the median household income.
As of 2013, a family of four earning between $84,900 and $126,600 per year was considered moderate
income.
Persons per Household: Average number of persons in each household.
Redevelopment Agency (RDA): A local agency created to redevelop blighted areas. Redevelopment
Agencies were dissolved statewide in 2011.
Redevelopment Agency 20 Percent Set Aside Fund: Redevelopment Agencies were required to
spend 20 percent of the tax revenue they received (called the tax increment) to create, preserve, protect,
rehabilitate or develop affordable housing.
Rehabilitation: In the context of the Housing Element, this refers to houses that are substantially
renovated and meet certain conditions as defined by State law.
Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA): The number of new homes that a city must plan for in a
Housing Element. It is determined by the Association of Bay Area Governments based on State population
projections and local conditions. Morgan Hill’s RHNA for 2007-2014 was 1,312, lower than the allocation
for 1996-1006, which was 2,484. The RHNA is divided by income level (above moderate income, moderate
income, low income, very low income).
Residential Development Control System (RDCS): A growth control ordinance passed by voters in
1977 and updated multiple times since then. The RDCS encourages developers to provide housing that
meets the needs of Morgan Hill residents, and limits the number of housing units that can be built in a given
year
Secondary (Second) Unit: A small home that is on the same lot as the main house. Second units are
sometimes referred to as Granny Suites or Inlaw Apartments.
Senior Housing: Defined by California Housing Element law as projects developed for, and put to use as,
housing for senior citizens. Senior citizens are defined as persons at least 62 years of age.
Supportive Housing: Supportive housing is permanent rental housing linked to a range of support
services designed to enable residents to maintain stable housing and lead fuller lives. This type of housing has
no limit on length of stay, is occupied by the target population (such as low-income persons with disabilities
                                                                                                              61

MORGAN HILL GENERAL PLAN
CITY OF M ORGAN HILL
HOUSING ELEMENT
and certain other disabled persons) and is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive
housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her
ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
Transitional Housing: Transitional housing and transitional housing development mean rental housing
operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the
assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall
be no less than six months. Transitional housing is used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals
and families to permanent housing. A homeless person may live in a transitional apartment for up to two
years, but usually less, while receiving supportive services that enable independent living.
Universal Design: Universal design refers to a set of principles that call for the built environment to be
useable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without special accommodations or alternative
arrangements. For example, door knobs can be hard for seniors and people with disabilities to use because
they require a tight grip, but door levers can be used by all. Good universal design construction benefits
everyone, but is particularly important to those with disabilities, and saves costs because renovations are less
likely to be needed.
Very Low Income Households: Households earning less than 50 percent of the median household
income. As of April 2013, a family of four earning less than $53,050 per year was considered very low
income.
Workforce Affordable Housing: Housing that is affordable to the workforce in the community.
62
                                                                       5
The Economic Development Element promotes the economic
well-being of local residents and businesses by establishing policy
guidance to help diversify the local economy with a broad range
of business types across industry sectors and increase the quality
and quantity of job opportunities for local residents. To support
these goals, the City aims to develop a robust mix of land uses
that will support the City’s fiscal sustainability, decrease the need
for local residents to commute, create a thriving downtown that
remains a focal point of community life, and enhance Morgan
Hill’s appeal as a tourist destination. This Element provides some
brief background information and related goals, policies, and
actions on the following topics:
     Household Prosperity
     Fiscal Sustainability
     Business Retention and Attraction
     Tourism
     Downtown
     Commercial Development
     Office and Industrial
     Infrastructure to Support Businesses
One of the key community benefits from successful economic
development efforts is household prosperity. Local residents
enjoy increased economic opportunity when the community hosts
a robust and diverse range of business activity and associated
jobs. Actions that help residents upgrade their job skills will better
connect the local population with new job opportunities.

High-quality public services, infrastructure improvements, and
other enhancements to local quality of life are critical to successful
business retention, expansion, and attraction, and also contribute
to local households’ overall well-being. The City of Morgan Hill
plays a central role in delivering these public “goods” for the
benefit of businesses and residents alike. The financial resources
to address these needs require that the City maintain a healthy,
fiscally sustainable budget. This, in turn, depends on cultivating a
diversified tax base that balances the need for both housing and
job-generating land uses.
Morgan Hill desires to retain and attract businesses that expand
the range of goods and services available locally, position the City
as a hub of economic activity within the greater Bay Area region,
and provide a diverse range of economic opportunities for local
residents and entrepreneurs. By providing a business-friendly
climate, outstanding quality of life, attractive public
infrastructure, and a supply of land that is planned for a broad
range of business types, the City will help to create and maintain
jobs, diversify the local economy, and expand the local tax base.
Morgan Hill and its businesses can benefit from the economic
activity associated with visitor spending. Much of this activity will
involve food, lodging, public art, and retail expenditures of short-
term visitors who are attracted to establishments near the
Highway 101 corridor; however, the City will continue to build its
appeal as a destination for tourism activity tied to the City’s
charming downtown, local arts and cultural activities, Villa Mira
Monte, surrounding winery and agri-tourism operations, and
sports facilities.

Downtown Morgan Hill is an important community focal point,
providing goods and services for local residents, businesses and
their employees, and visitors. While there are many shopping
venues in Morgan Hill, downtown is a unique commercial district
known as a location for specialty retail and boutique stores and
services, and for arts, cultural, and entertainment activities. New
lodging and residential uses can help to strengthen downtown for
these targeted uses by expanding the base of demand for goods
and services and enlivening the area.
The success of the local economy depends on many factors. A
primary concern is ensuring that goods and services required by
residents, employees, and visitors are provided at appropriate
locations with convenient access. Accommodating unique, niche
retail businesses in particular can help bolster the City’s economic
base and differentiate Morgan Hill from other competitive areas.
As consumer shopping habits change and the retail industry
reinvents itself, it will be important to ensure that the City’s
shopping centers can evolve through changes in their mix of uses
and physical configurations, so that they remain vibrant
community assets.
As with the retail sector, contemporary office and industrial
workplaces are changing in response to demographic shifts in the
workforce and changing preferences, in addition to adapting to
structural changes in the economy. In our innovation- and
knowledge-driven economy, businesses recognize that providing
work environments that are attractive to world-class talent is
critical to competitiveness. To support the continued success of
existing Morgan Hill businesses and to position Morgan Hill as a
compelling choice within the regional office and industrial
markets, the City will ensure that property owners and businesses
in its office and industrial districts have the flexibility to adapt

their environments so that they continue to appeal to a talented
workforce.
In addition to providing land to support business expansion and
attraction, a key economic development role for the City of
Morgan Hill is to provide or facilitate the provision of
infrastructure to support businesses, including transportation
facilities, “wet” utilities like water and sewer services, and “dry”
utilities like electricity and telecommunications systems. Public
services may also be considered “infrastructure” that is critical to
support local businesses. Planning for fiscal sustainability will
help the City ensure that it has the financial resources to develop
and maintain high-quality public infrastructure and services. The
City can also serve as a convener and facilitator of projects to
identify the need for, and develop, enhanced private
infrastructure and services.
GOAL ED-1         High quality jobs for residents that support
                  household incomes in line with local housing
                  costs and higher-education institutions that
                  enhance skills and increase access to high-
                  quality education.
                  Local Wage Levels. Focus business retention,
                  expansion, and recruitment efforts on businesses
                  that will help to increase the average wage paid in
                  local businesses and minimize the need for
                  Morgan Hill residents to commute out of Morgan
                  Hill for higher paying jobs.
                  Jobs/Housing Balance. Balance jobs and housing
                  supplies to minimize traffic congestion, and
                  commute times, and to optimize economic

diversity and capacity to provide services. (South
County Joint Area Plan 3.00)
Regional Housing Needs Allocation. Work with
the Association of Bay Area Governments to
ensure that the fair share housing allocation for
Morgan Hill is appropriate.
Local Higher Education Resources. Support
development of training programs for career
readiness and career enhancement through
County agencies, schools, and local employers to
maintain and expand a local labor force with
skills that match anticipated employment needs.
Higher Education as a Local Targeted Industry.
Support the further development of higher
education institutions and facilities in Morgan
Hill.
Jobs/Housing Balance Monitoring. Implement a
 Jobs/Housing Monitoring Program, and develop:
 a) a workable definition of jobs/housing balance,
 b) criteria for assessing the effectiveness of
 remedial actions, and c) a process for investi-
 gating area-wide transportation improvements or
 traffic management programs that will address
 the effects of any jobs/housing imbalance.
 Monitor the jobs/housing ratio in the City and
 Sphere of Influence as development proceeds, so
 that appropriate policies to maintain balance can
 be implemented. (South County Joint Area Plan
 3.03, 3.04, 3.05, 3.06)
Local Access to Regional Higher Education.
 Maintain and expand partnerships with Gavilan
 College to offer additional job readiness courses
 within the City of Morgan Hill.
          Develop New Partnerships with Higher
           Education Institutions. Building on the model of
           cooperation with Gavilan College, seek
           partnerships with complimentary educational
           institutions, local businesses, and business
           associations to expand the range of higher
           education opportunities for local workers and
           help to generate a more productive labor force for
           local businesses.
          Expanded Zoning for Educational Facilities. To
           increase flexibility for the establishment of new
           dedicated higher education facilities within
           Morgan Hill, review the Zoning Ordinance and
           identify commercial and/or service zones where it
           would be appropriate to add educational
           institutions to the list of permitted or
           conditionally permitted uses.
GOAL ED-2 A strong, unique, stable, and diverse economic
          base that supports fiscal sustainability.
          Robust Mix of Land Uses. Maintain sufficient
          areas of land to promote the development of a
          balanced community containing adequate jobs,
          retail services, and commercial activity. Preserve
          an adequate supply of industrial and commercial
          lands to support local jobs and City's fiscal
          sustainability.
          Economic Development to Manage Fiscal
          Impacts. Encourage economic development that
          addresses community needs and minimizes
          negative impacts on services, including impacts
          on water, stormwater, and wastewater. (South
          County Joint Area Plan 2.00)
Economic Diversity. Promote a diversified
economic industry base with a variety of job types
and skills to insulate the local economy from
possible    economic      downturns.      Encourage
agriculture as an appropriate part of the economic
mix. (South County Joint Area Plan 2.02)
Fiscal Impact Analysis. Require both a General
Fund fiscal impact and job analysis before
approving a significant change in land use
designation from one general type of use to
another (e.g., from residential to commercial, or
from commercial to office). While fiscal
considerations, including the effect of the change
on the projected fiscal balance at General Plan
buildout, will be one factor in determining
whether to grant approvals for land use changes,
they will not be the only factor.
Fiscal Mitigation. Require mitigation if a fiscal
analysis indicates that a project could lead to
adverse fiscal effects. Mitigation requirements
may be waived for a project if the City Council
makes “findings of overriding considerations” to
the effect that the project would provide other
community benefits with values that offset or
exceed the adverse fiscal impacts. Examples of
such offsetting benefits could include provision of
affordable housing that addresses unmet
workforce housing needs, or development of
public or private facilities that represent valuable
community resources or amenities.

GOAL ED-3  A high-quality business community with
          established roots in Morgan Hill.
          Business Retention, Expansion, and Attraction
          Efforts. Encourage retention and expansion of
          existing businesses, and attract new businesses,
          that:
            generate revenue to the City General Fund
             (such      as     retail   and      point-of-sale
             manufacturing);
            help provide greater fiscal strength and
             stability to the City;
            add industry diversity to the local economy;
            stimulate other businesses to develop in the
             city;
            augment or provide a service/amenity
             presently needed or lacking in the community,
             including higher education and medical
             services opportunities; and
            offer higher-paying, quality jobs for local
             residents.
          Employment Land Supply. Preserve the City's
          supply of industrial and commercial lands to
          support the City's goals and policies related to
          economic development and jobs-housing balance.
          Use of City Funds to Increase Impact. When
          feasible and appropriate, leverage City funds with
          other funding sources to assist targeted business
          types, when such assistance is net fiscally positive
          to the City and will contribute to overall
          community economic health.

Business Attraction and Retention Strategy.
Develop a biennial strategy that details the City's
proactive approach to business attraction and
retention that identifies the specific industries
toward which efforts will be targeted, and focus
the City’s available economic development
resources on assisting the targeted industries.
Diverse Housing Stock. To help Morgan Hill
businesses recruit and retain the necessary
workforce, provide a diverse housing stock that
meets the needs of employees at different income
levels and with diverse household characteristics
and housing preferences.
Business Friendly Environment. Support and
align policies and fee structures around a
business first culture that welcomes a range of
sectors that employ people across a range of wage
levels.
Flexible Business District Zoning. Maintain
flexibility within industrial, business park, and
office zoning districts that support modern
industry uses and that are integrated
appropriately with other land uses and attract a
broad range of users.
Dynamic       Working       Environments.      Allow
amenities, such as retail, services, restaurants, and
lodging, as ancillary uses to support the primary
job-generating uses within business park settings
to create dynamic working environments.
Partnerships to Support Manufacturing Sector.
 Among targeted industries, identify opportun-
 ities for partnerships to support and expand
 Morgan Hill’s manufacturing, prototyping, and
 production sectors.

Business Assistance Programs. Develop and
maintain a range of non-financial business
assistance    programs,     such      as    including
development fee deferral and financing, to
facilitate retention and expansion of existing
businesses and to encourage new businesses and
industries to locate in and strengthen the viability
of the downtown and local business/industrial
parks.
Business Assistance through Private Partner-
ships.     Encourage     and     facilitate    private
partnerships and resources to assist business
retention and growth.
Community Assets. Assist targeted businesses by
investing in community assets, such as public
infrastructure, that will benefit more than just the
targeted business, rather than providing funds
directly to businesses (e.g., through direct
subsidies).
Return on Investment. Consider investing City
resources to support targeted business retention,
expansion, or attraction when there is a reason-
able expectation of a rate of return in the form of
net positive fiscal impacts, ensuring that the City
can reinvest to support other businesses or
economic development objectives in the future.
Housing Element as a Tool to Address
Workforce Housing Needs. Support the Housing
Element policies and actions that encourage a
diverse range of housing types, including, but not
limited to, market rate rentals and small for-sale
units, and continue to support affordable housing
and move-up and executive housing.
          Permit Streamlining. Review the City’s business
          licensing     and      permitting    requirements,
          procedures, and policies, seeking to streamline
          and simplify wherever possible.
          Business Ombudsperson Services. Utilize
          economic development staff to provide business
          ombudsperson services to the community.
GOAL ED-4 A vibrant, enhanced, visible, and well-promoted
          tourist industry that draws on Morgan Hill’s
          unique character and variety of amenities.
          Public Assets to Support Tourism. Utilize the
          City’s Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) process to
          plan, develop, and maintain public facilities such
          as cultural facilities, Villa Mira Monte, public
          parks and plazas, and sports facilities that
          support tourism.
          Wine Tourism. To enhance the City’s appeal as a
          tourism destination, support efforts to further
          develop the local wine industry.
          Sports Tourism. Support the investment,
          development, and maintenance of infrastructure
          that supports sports tourism.
          Arts and Culture. Support arts and culture as a
          key asset in a unique and authentic community.
          Publicly Accessible Artwork. Encourage publicly
          accessible artwork in outdoor spaces that
          showcases the social and cultural identity of the
          community.

Public Artwork Installations. Integrate public
artwork installations that promote the social and
cultural identity of the community into new
development and redevelopment plans.
Public Art at Key Destinations. Prioritize public
art in key destination areas like Downtown.
Public Art in the Planning Process. Integrate
public art into the planning process for significant
non-residential development projects.
Overnight Accommodations. Support the
construction of a full range of new lodging
facilities to build the local tourism industry,
enhancing the City’s position as a hub for wine
tourism and for visitors attracted to the City’s
sports facilities.
Regional Freeway Visibility and Access.
Encourage the location of tourist- and recreation-
oriented commercial development and support
facilities along the freeway.
Tourism Support Services. Actively promote
development of tourist-oriented commercial,
industrial, and recreational uses and facilities,
including such uses as lodging, meeting and
conference centers, outdoor restaurants, wine and
beer tasting, and farmers’ markets.
Tourism Marketing and Branding. Support
marketing and branding efforts that promote the
City’s image as a unique and attractive tourism
destination.
Bed and Breakfast Establishments. Adopt zoning
 for bed and breakfast establishments where
 compatible with existing and planned land uses.

          Tourism Promotion. Work with local and
          regional community groups to promote and
          stimulate tourism activity, including by
          increasing distribution of information about
          county and regional parks, sports and recreation
          facilities, and area wineries, breweries, working
          agriculture,      and    eating    and    drinking
          establishments.
          Cross-Promotion. Capitalize on visitors attracted
          to the City’s sports and recreation facilities and
          develop strategies and programs that expose
          them to the downtown and other City amenities
          through cross-promotional efforts such as shuttle
          services.
GOAL ED-5 A downtown where residents and visitors of all
          ages can live, work, meet, shop, dine, participate
          in public celebrations, discover the story and
          past of our city, and share in the richness of
          Morgan Hill’s community life.
          Downtown Specific Plan. Support imple-
          mentation of the Downtown Specific Plan, which
          articulates the City’s goals and policies for the
          downtown area.
          Public/Private Partnerships to Enhance the
          Downtown Environment. Encourage downtown
          merchants and property owners to participate in
          maintenance of downtown infrastructure.
          Mixed-Use Downtown. Support mixed-use
          development downtown with residences above
          ground-floor commercial uses, consistent with the
          adopted Downtown Specific Plan.

          Downtown as Cultural Center. Position
          downtown as the local focal point for fine dining,
          arts, culture, history, entertainment, and boutique
          retail activity.
          Downtown Anchor Tenant(s). Identify approp-
          riate locations and provide incentives for
          attracting one or more major catalyst tenants (e.g.,
          offices, retail) to the downtown.
GOAL ED-6 A mix of uses along Monterey Corridor that
          supports the Downtown and encourages
          walking and biking.
          Monterey             Corridor      Non-Residential
          Development.           Encourage    non-residential
          development along Monterey Corridor that
          supports Downtown’s role as the cultural and
          activity center of Morgan Hill.
          Monterey Corridor Residential Development.
          Support the development of housing along
          Monterey Corridor to foster a vibrant urban
          environment that enables residents the option of
          walking and biking to their daily needs.
GOAL ED-7 Thriving stores, restaurants, and shopping
          centers that meet local resident shopping needs
          and also attract regional shoppers and tourists.
          Shopping Center and Other Commercial
          Development. Support the development of retail
          facilities to meet local demand and regional
          market opportunities, including the overlap
          between visitor and resident serving uses, by

encouraging retail goods and services that serve
both market segments.
Regional      Retail    Facilities.  Support     the
development of regional retail facilities that are
visible and accessible from the City’s freeway
exits, to provide for easy access by local residents
as well as shoppers traveling from outside the
City.
Commercial Center Revitalization and Reuse.
Support actions and projects that facilitate
revitalization of existing shopping centers and,
when appropriate, reuse.
Compatible Uses in Retail Centers. Encourage
the evolution of retail centers into mixed-use
activity nodes by supporting integration of uses
that provide necessary or useful services or
amenities that will benefit nearby residential
areas and commercial establishments. Such uses
may include but shall not be limited to:
a. Health services and fitness facilities.
b. Childcare.
c. Housing, including affordable and senior
    housing.
d. Religious facilities.
e. Education/training facilities.
f.  Parks/community facilities/public gathering
    places.
Incentives to Revitalize and Reuse Shopping
Centers. Consider and, if appropriate, offer a
range of financial and non-financial incentives
and assistance to encourage revitalization and
reuse of obsolete shopping centers, including, but
not limited to:

  Target public investments, including enhanced
   transit service where possible, to obsolete
   commercial centers in coordination with
   private revitalization and reuse plans.
  Partner with property owners to offer technical
   assistance and proactively engage neighbors
   and other stakeholders in developing reuse
   concepts.
  Offer property owners flexibility in designing
   reuse projects – e.g., give property owners the
   option to request a “planned development” or
   “special planning area” designation that
   would allow them to creatively and efficiently
   plan new development while working within
   site constraints.
  Offer permit streamlining/priority processing
   to facilitate shopping center revitalization and
   reuse projects.
  When justified, offer incentives in the form of
   impact fee credits or reductions and/or public
   financing assistance to enhance feasibility of
   commercial center revitalization and reuse
   projects.
Enhanced Shopping Center Functionality.
Ensure that shopping center revitalization and
reuse plans incorporate appropriate public
improvements, pedestrian and bike amenities,
transit facilities, connections to adjacent
development, auto parking, and other design
features that will enhance their function as
community activity hubs.
Viability of Ongoing Retail Uses. If retail uses
are to remain as part of a shopping center
revitalization or reuse project, encourage site
designs that optimize retail visibility and access
and ensure that new uses do not conflict with
remaining retail functions.

          Tenant Assistance. Proactively assist tenants who
          will be dislocated by revitalization or reuse
          projects to find replacement business locations
          within the City.
          Neighborhood Retail Centers. Identify locations
          for neighborhood retail centers (including mixed-
          use developments) within a ½-mile of centrally-
          located residential neighborhoods so that
          residents have access to shopping for convenience
          goods and services within a short walk, bike ride,
          transit trip, or drive from home.
          Retail Market Studies. Periodically conduct retail
          market studies to identify under-served market
          niches and implement recommendations to
          increase and attract local retail activity.
GOAL ED-8 Office and industrial areas that provide high-
          quality work locations for existing and new
          businesses.
          Office and Industrial Development. Support the
          development of office and industrial facilities to
          meet local demand, compete for regional growth
          opportunities, and create high-quality jobs that
          match with local housing opportunities.
          Office and Industrial Zoning Updates. Review
          zoning policies and, where appropriate, include
          provisions to allow stand-alone retail and services
          establishments that provide amenities for the
          zones’ primary office and industrial tenants and
          their employees.

          Industrial Land Study Updates. To provide a
          quantified basis for the annual land supply
          review, conduct periodic updates of the 2013
          “Economic and Fiscal Impact Analysis of
          Industrial Land Conversion” report, similar to the
          “2015 Morgan Hill Industrial Land Study
          Update,” in order to monitor trends in the
          consumption and availability of land to support
          continued office and industrial growth within the
          City.
          General Plan and Zoning to Ensure Adequate
          Land Supplies. Use the Industrial Land Supply
          Study findings to identify any land use actions
          necessary to ensure an adequate supply of
          strategically located office and industrial land on
          an ongoing basis and use the Annual General
          Plan Review to introduce any needed land use
          changes.
GOAL ED-9 Public and private infrastructure that helps
          make Morgan Hill a competitive business
          location.
          Robust Telecommunications. Support the
          development of state-of-the-art telecommuni-
          cations, policies, amenities, and facilities that meet
          the needs of local businesses and assist the City in
          attracting new businesses.
          Roadway Capacity to Support Business. Use the
          City’s Capital Improvement Program to ensure
          that road improvement programs provide for
          adequate, convenient access to commercial,
          industrial, and service areas.

Robust Transportation Options. Work with local
and regional transportation agencies to ensure
that local employees and residents have a robust
set of transportation options to respond to
changing     workforce       demographics   and
preferences, reduce roadway congestion, and
improve local quality of life.

                                                                      6
HEALTHY COMMUNITY
CHAPTER PURPOSE
The Heathy Community Element addresses elements of the built
environment, programs, and partnerships that contribute to the
overall health and well-being of Morgan Hill’s residents. Health is
determined not only by individual choices, but also by the
opportunities people have to engage in a healthy lifestyle. The
City envisions providing these opportunities through convenient
and safe access to health care, active recreation, education, social
services, and fresh food.
Similarly, Morgan Hill provides a supportive base for its residents
to lead successful and healthy lives by celebrating its cultural and
historical heritage, and values the educational, cultural, and social
development and participation of all residents, regardless of age
or socioeconomic status. The Healthy Community Element
identifies policies and actions that will help residents lead full,
healthy lives.
SCHOOLS
Schools serve as neighborhood gathering places, education
facilities, and recreation centers for the entire community. The
following policies will ensure the City strives for collaboration
with schools to efficiently coordinate schools, housing
development, and recreation facilities to share resources and plan
for future growth. The policies also support safe, convenient
opportunities for residents to reach these amenities on foot or by
bicycle.
YOUTH AND SENIOR SERVICES
Morgan Hill is a supportive place for residents of all ages. Because
the very young and the very old have limited mobility, special
                                                                        HC-1

M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    needs, and sometimes limited autonomy, the policies in this
                                                    element are intended to facilitate transportation, facilities, social
                                                    services, and community involvement that allow residents to feel
                                                    safe, valued, engaged, and independent throughout their life
                                                    spans.
                                                    PARKS, RECREATION, AND TRAILS
                                                    Residents are able to live more active lifestyles when they have
                                                    easy access within walking distance of their homes to open space
                                                    and recreational facilities and programs. These policies encourage
                                                    innovative partnerships, funding, and development programs to
                                                    maintain and develop parks and recreation that current and
                                                    future residents of all ages, incomes, and mobility levels can
                                                    conveniently access as the community grows.
                                                    CULTURE AND THE ARTS
                                                    Arts and cultural exhibits, activities, practices, celebrations, and
                                                    education are the heart of a community, and allow its residents to
                                                    have healthy self-expression and development both individually
                                                    and collectively. Morgan Hill celebrates its unique cultural,
                                                    agricultural and historic identity with policies that encourage art
                                                    to transform the public realm, support artists’ ability to produce
                                                    and sell their work, provide arts education to residents of all ages,
                                                    use art as a form of community dialogue, and create exhibits and
                                                    festivals where locals and visitors can celebrate together.
                                                    LIBRARIES
                                                    Like schools, libraries can serve as gathering places and
                                                    educational facilities for the entire community, supporting
                                                    learning, cognitive development, technology skills, literacy, and
                                                    job training. Morgan Hill’s library policies acknowledge the need
                                                    to partner with the Santa Clara County Public Library to further
                                                    develop this role, as well as the possibility of partnering with local
                                                    schools to open their libraries to the public.
HC-2

                                                                     M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                         H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
HEALTHY FOOD
Having affordable options for fresh, whole foods in proximity to
homes is a recipe for healthy eating. Morgan Hill’s healthy food
policies promote these options by expanding the opportunities for
food carts, urban agriculture, community gardens, and residential
gardens to produce and sell food, particularly to residents who
might otherwise have a hard time accessing high-quality fresh
food. The policies also address food education, as culturally aware
education about growing, preparing and eating healthy food
provides residents with the inspiration and information needed to
take advantage of these quality food sources.
ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE
In addition to developing a built environment that supports
healthy lifestyles, the City of Morgan Hill facilitates access to
mental and physical health services. The City collaborates with
providers to promote available services, encourages medical
facilities to locate on accessible sites served by transit, and
partners with local educational and career training organizations
to ensure that adequate education is available to train needed
medical professionals.
CULTURAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES
Morgan Hill’s history is a part of its identity today. To maintain
this identity, policies direct City staff to identify and update the
list of historic and cultural resources the community should
preserve, protect significant structures from loss, destruction,
significant alteration, and demolition when possible, and operate
programs to assist property owners in preserving and restoring
such buildings as a community asset. These policies support the
incentives, permits, and processes described in the City’s Historic
Resources Code.
                                                                                                                 HC-3

M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
                                                    S CHOOLS
                                                    GOAL HC-1     Coordinated urban and school development.
                                                    Policy HC-1.1 Neighborhood Schools. Coordinate community
                                                                  development and school development to promote
                                                                  neighborhood schools, which educate neighbor-
                                                                  hood children and serve as a community resource
                                                                  facility.
                                                    Policy HC-1.2 Coordinate School Development. Work with the
                                                                  Morgan Hill Unified School District to coordinate
                                                                  planning for school facilities in conjunction with
                                                                  new development, and to identify appropriate
                                                                  locations for future school facilities.
                                                    Policy HC-1.3 Quality Education. Cooperate with the City of
                                                                  San Jose, Santa Clara County, and the Morgan
                                                                  Hill Unified School District to ensure a high-
                                                                  quality education experience by providing
                                                                  adequate and safe school facilities, preventing
                                                                  overcrowding, and providing school locations
                                                                  convenient to the population served.
                                                    Policy HC-1.4 Strategic Plan. Encourage the Morgan Hill
                                                                  Unified School District, Gavilan College, and
                                                                  private schools to develop a strategic plan for and
                                                                  construct schools to coincide with the planned
                                                                  future growth of the City.
                                                    Policy HC-1.5 Site Selection. Work with the Morgan Hill
                                                                  Unified School District in selecting sites for new
                                                                  schools to optimize educational and community
                                                                  development goals. (South County Joint Area
                                                                  Plan 4.08)
HC-4
                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                          H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Policy HC-1.6  Efficient Siting. Site new residential development
               in areas served by existing schools to allow school
               facilities to be used most efficiently and to
               minimize busing needs. (South County Joint Area
               Plan 4.05)
Policy HC-1.7  Neighborhood Activities. Encourage the Morgan
               Hill Unified School District to design, site, and
               upgrade elementary schools with flexible facilities
               that are accessible after school hours for
               community use to serve as the focal point of each
               neighborhood's diverse and changing social,
               cultural, vocational, recreational, and educational
               activities.
Policy HC-1.8  Park Coordination. Work with the Morgan Hill
               Unified School District to locate parks and schools
               together to optimize their use as community
               facilities. (South County Joint Area Plan 4.10)
Policy HC-1.9  Impact Mitigation. Ensure that secondary and
               college facilities are sited so that impacts typically
               associated with those uses (such as traffic, noise,
               and lighting) are adequately mitigated.
Policy HC-1.10 Community Issues. Coordinate actions with
               school districts and other community and social
               agencies to mobilize additional resources to deal
               with issues that impact the role of schools, such as
               drugs, job training, and teenage pregnancy, so
               that these are adequately dealt with during
               periods of rapid growth or change. (South County
               Joint Area Plan 4.07)
Policy HC-1.11 Comparable Fees. Encourage the Morgan Hill
               Unified School District to develop a mechanism to
               ensure that residential development in the county
               and San Jose pays fees comparable to those paid
               in the City.
                                                                                                                  HC-5
M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Policy HC-1.12 School Availability. The City Council may
                                                                   reduce the number of available residential
                                                                   allotments for an individual RDCS competition
                                                                   year upon making certain findings, including that
                                                                   public infrastructure and services (including
                                                                   schools) are or will be inadequate to
                                                                   accommodate new development.
                                                    Action HC-1.A  Funding. Support the development of additional
                                                                   and innovative financing techniques for school
                                                                   improvements and construction. (South County
                                                                   Joint Area Plan 4.13)
                                                    Y OUTH AND S ENIORS
                                                    GOAL HC-2      A built environment and community services
                                                                   that serve the special needs of youth and
                                                                   seniors, allowing residents to age in place.
                                                    Policy HC-2.1  Increased Services. Provide programs to address
                                                                   the growing need for youth and senior services in
                                                                   existing areas and new developments.
                                                    Policy HC-2.2  Coordinated Senior Services. Utilize partner-
                                                                   ships with the County and other regional service
                                                                   providers to plan for and provide services to meet
                                                                   the needs of an increasing senior population.
                                                    Policy HC-2.3  New Development. Encourage developers of new
                                                                   residential developments to work with the City to
                                                                   explore ways to offer increased youth and senior
                                                                   services.
                                                    Policy HC-2.4  Universal Design. Encourage Universal Design, a
                                                                   design concept that encourages accessibility for
                                                                   people of all ages, in new residential construction
                                                                   and major remodels.
HC-6
                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                          H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Policy HC-2.5    Community Representation. Value the role of
                 youth and seniors by including representatives on
                 boards and commissions and providing youth
                 and seniors with volunteer opportunities.
Policy HC-2.6    Healthy Kids. Support the implementation of the
                 41 Developmental Assets identified as crucial to
                 supporting healthy youth development.
Policy HC-2.7    Underage Tobacco Access. Update and enforce
                 tobacco control laws that regulate the location
                 and retailing practices of tobacco stores and
                 reduce underage access to tobacco and tobacco-
                 related accessories, including e-cigarettes.
Policy HC-2.8    Underage Alcohol Access. Promote policies that
                 restrict the availability, accessibility, promotion,
                 and placement of alcohol in proximity to youth.
Action HC-2.A    Strengthen Services. Study the effectiveness of
                 existing youth and senior services and explore
                 ways to increase and strengthen these services.
P ARKS , R ECREATION , AND T RAILS
GOAL HC-3        Usable, complete, well-maintained, safe, and
                 high-quality activities and amenities, including
                 active and passive parks and recreational
                 facilities, community gardens, and trails that are
                 accessible to all ages, functional abilities, and
                 socio-economic groups.
Policy HC-3.1    Universal Recreation. Provide recreational
                 facilities and programs that meet the needs of all
                 Morgan Hill residents, including seniors, youth,
                 low-income residents, and citizens with
                 disabilities.
                                                                                                                  HC-7
M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Policy HC-3.2 Parkland Standard. Strive to provide park land
                                                                  that meets the standards set in the current Parks,
                                                                  Facilities, and Recreation Master Plan by acquiring
                                                                  and developing parks and recreation facilities and
                                                                  developing joint use agreements with other
                                                                  agencies and organizations that provide
                                                                  community recreation facilities.
                                                    Policy HC-3.3 Park Land Fees. Continue to require park land
                                                                  dedication or in-lieu fees from all new
                                                                  development to meet the recreation and open
                                                                  space needs of the residents of Morgan Hill.
                                                    Policy HC-3.4 New Facilities. Continue to develop and expand
                                                                  the recreational facilities identified within
                                                                  updates to the Bikeways, Trails, Parks, and
                                                                  Recreation Master Plan. These include, but are not
                                                                  limited to, softball/baseball fields and basketball,
                                                                  tennis, and sand volleyball courts.
                                                    Policy HC-3.5 Mini-Parks. Avoid developing public mini-parks,
                                                                  which have high maintenance costs and limited
                                                                  recreational value, unless they serve a specific
                                                                  function, such as a downtown plaza.
                                                    Policy HC-3.6 Flood Control Basins. Allow two acre or larger
                                                                  flood control basins to count as parkland only
                                                                  when they can provide recreational opportunities.
                                                    Policy HC-3.7 Maintenance. Maintain parks and recreational
                                                                  facilities consistent with established standards.
                                                    Policy HC-3.8 Private      Open      Space.     Encourage     new
                                                                  development to permit public access to private
                                                                  open space and parks where feasible and
                                                                  appropriate.
HC-8
                                                                   M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Policy HC-3.9  Open Space Requirements. Require multi-family
               residential developments to include common
               open space suitable for group gatherings.
               Common open space shall be funded and
               maintained by Homeowners Associations or
               property owners.
Policy HC-3.10 Walking Distance. Site parks and recreational
               facilities to maximize access for all residents.
               Where feasible, distribute neighborhood parks
               throughout the community so that all residents
               live within a ½-mile walk of a neighborhood or
               community park. See the Parks, Facilities and
               Recreation Programming Master Plan for definitions
               of neighborhood and community parks.
Policy HC-3.11 Conservation Coordination. Coordinate location
               and development of parks with the Natural
               Resources and Environment Element of the
               General Plan to maximize opportunities for
               resource protection, greenbelt creation, environ-
               mental education, and passive recreational use of
               open space.
Policy HC-3.12 Bikeways. Coordinate trails, parks, and
               recreation facilities with a Citywide bikeways
               system to include bicycle paths, lanes, and routes.
Policy HC-3.13 Sports Fields. Locate sports fields and courts for
               efficiency and convenience. Group some fields
               and courts together at centers or complexes for
               league and tournament use, and others at
               neighborhood parks for neighborhood use.
                                                                                                               HC-9

M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Policy HC-3.14 Streamside Trails. Work in partnership with the
                                                                   Santa Clara Valley Water District to establish
                                                                   easements and develop trails and linear parks
                                                                   along creeks and drainage channels, connecting
                                                                   parks, regional trails, schools, library, and other
                                                                   community facilities and ensuring that natural
                                                                   resources are protected and restored.
                                                    Policy HC-3.15 County Parkland. Work in partnership with the
                                                                   Santa Clara County Parks and Recreation
                                                                   Department to enhance community use of County
                                                                   parkland adjacent to or within the City.
                                                    Policy HC-3.16 Greenbelt Areas. Where possible, coordinate the
                                                                   location of future parks with greenbelt areas to
                                                                   maximize public open space and recreational
                                                                   benefits.
                                                    Policy HC-3.17 Regional Needs. Plan and design parks and
                                                                   recreational facilities primarily to meet local
                                                                   needs. Consider regional need when meeting that
                                                                   need will provide long-term operations and
                                                                   maintenance benefits (such as facilities where
                                                                   regional tournaments may help offset long-term
                                                                   operations costs), economic development benefits
                                                                   through sports tourism and other means, or to
                                                                   meet other General Plan goals. Locate and design
                                                                   regional facilities to minimize impact on
                                                                   residential neighborhoods.
                                                    Policy HC-3.18 Minimizing Impacts. Minimize impact on
                                                                   adjacent neighborhoods by utilizing evaluation
                                                                   criteria from the Parks, Facilities and Recreation
                                                                   Programming Master Plan to select sites for major
                                                                   parks and special use facilities.
HC-10
                                                                  M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                      H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Policy HC-3.19 Community Involvement. Incorporate commun-
               ity outreach and involvement into the design
               process for parks and recreation facilities and in
               the development of community recreation
               programs.
Policy HC-3.20 Safety. Incorporate fire and police services into
               the design review process for new parks,
               recreation facilities, and trails.
Policy HC-3.21 Multiuse Facilities. Incorporate multi-functional
               and multi-generational design into facilities,
               provided that such uses do not create long-term
               operational conflicts.
Policy HC-3.22 School Coordination. Work in partnership with
               Morgan Hill Unified School District (MHUSD)
               and other schools where appropriate to identify
               potential locations for future parks adjacent to
               future schools in areas currently underserved by
               parks. Where feasible, the lead agency (MHUSD
               or the City) shall acquire the full amount of land
               needed for the school or park, with the other
               agency agreeing to pay its fair share.
Policy HC-3.23 Educational Joint Use. Develop joint use
               agreements between the City and Morgan Hill
               Unified School District for all new school or
               neighborhood parks and school facilities,
               identifying maintenance responsibilities and
               maximizing shared use of resources where
               mutually beneficial to enhance educational and
               community recreational use.
Policy HC-3.24 Parkland      Acquisition.         Actively pursue
               acquisition    of appropriate parkland for
               recommended parks, trails and facilities, and to
               meet existing and future recreation needs.
                                                                                                            HC-11
M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Policy HC-3.25 Partnerships. Utilize joint use agreements,
                                                                   memorandums of understanding, and other
                                                                   agreements to partner with public, nonprofit, and
                                                                   private agencies and organizations, including the
                                                                   Morgan Hill Unified School District and other
                                                                   schools, Santa Clara Valley Water District, Santa
                                                                   Clara County Parks and Recreation Department,
                                                                   the Open Space Authority, and the Morgan Hill
                                                                   Historical Society to acquire, develop, and
                                                                   maintain parks and recreation facilities. When
                                                                   appropriate, prioritize partnerships where
                                                                   revenues beyond operations and maintenance
                                                                   costs must be reinvested in the facility or
                                                                   elsewhere within the community to enhance
                                                                   recreation opportunity.
                                                    Policy HC-3.26 Long-Term Operations. Consider long-term
                                                                   operations and maintenance implications when
                                                                   designing new or renovating existing parks and
                                                                   recreation facilities. Identify cost implications and
                                                                   funding sources for long-term operations and
                                                                   maintenance for each new facility prior to
                                                                   proceeding with project development.
                                                    Policy HC-3.27 Business Plans. Develop business plans for new
                                                                   sports parks and special use facilities that address
                                                                   management structure, potential partnerships,
                                                                   long-term operations and maintenance costs and
                                                                   potential for cost recovery through user fees and
                                                                   other means.
                                                    Policy HC-3.28 Funding. Actively pursue additional funding
                                                                   sources and mechanisms to support acquiring,
                                                                   developing, and operating parks, trails, facilities
                                                                   and recreation programs.
HC-12
                                                                   M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Policy HC-3.29 Development Requirements. Continue to require
               park acquisition and development fees and/or
               land dedication to support the acquisition and
               development of parks, trails and other recreation
               facilities.
Policy HC-3.30 Case-by-case Programs. Evaluate whether the
               City or recreation partner(s) should provide
               recreation programs on a case-by-case basis,
               balancing cost recovery with community access.
Policy HC-3.31 HOA Park Guidelines. Evaluate the design and
               development of HOA parks against the guide-
               lines from the Bikeways, Trails, Parks & Recreation
               Master Plan.
Action HC-3.A  Annual Review. Review the Parks, Facilities and
               Recreation Programming Master Plan annually as a
               part of the City’s regular budgeting process.
Action HC-3.B  Maintenance Evaluation. Evaluate park and
               recreational facility maintenance standards and
               performance on a regular basis.
Action HC-3.C  Periodic Review. Review the Parks, Facilities and
               Recreation Programming Master Plan thoroughly
               every 5 years to measure progress and address
               unforeseen future needs and conditions.
Action HC-3.D  Information Center. Continue to provide public
               information programs to enhance the City’s role
               as a center of information for community
               recreation programs offered by the City and other
               recreation providers.
Action HC-3.E  Maintenance Standards. Establish measurable
               maintenance standards for parks and recreational
               facilities to encourage a consistent and high level
               of maintenance.
                                                                                                             HC-13

M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Action HC-3.F Pursue Funding. Actively pursue grants,
                                                                  donations, corporate sponsorships, and joint
                                                                  projects with other departments, agencies and
                                                                  organizations to supplement acquisition and
                                                                  development revenues.
                                                    Action HC-3.G Parkland Dedication. Consider adoption of a
                                                                  Citywide Parkland Dedication Ordinance to
                                                                  achieve more development of public park space.
                                                    Action HC-3.H Nonprofit Foundation. Encourage establishment
                                                                  of a nonprofit foundation to support parks and
                                                                  recreation facilities and programs.
                                                    Action HC-3.I Fund Development. Establish a consistent and
                                                                  reliable funding source for long-term operations
                                                                  and     maintenance.      Consider    a    Citywide
                                                                  assessment district, utilizing the Residential
                                                                  Development Control System, and other
                                                                  mechanisms for this purpose.
                                                    Action HC-3.J Cost Recovery. Establish operations and
                                                                  maintenance cost-recovery goals for programs.
                                                                  Establish which types of programs should be self-
                                                                  supporting and which programs may be partially
                                                                  or fully subsidized by the City. Coordinate user
                                                                  fee schedules with MHUSD so that School District
                                                                  and City facilities have consistent user fees.
                                                    Action HC-3.K Fee Review. Review and, if necessary, update
                                                                  park development impact fees every two years to
                                                                  ensure they are consistent with land values and
                                                                  park development costs. Coordinate this review
                                                                  and update with review of the residential
                                                                  development allocation point system.
HC-14
                                                                 M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Action HC-3.L HOA Park Conversion. If a Citywide assessment
              district or other funding method is adopted for
              long-term operations and maintenance, study the
              feasibility of converting appropriate private
              Homeowners Association (HOA) parks to public
              neighborhood parks, with HOAs that are
              interested in evaluating this opportunity.
Action HC-3.M Financial Assistance. Commit to increased
              funding and enhanced support for financial
              assistance programs to assist with program fees
              and equipment costs for low-income residents.
Action HC-3.N El Toro Trails. Continue the development of
              hiking trails on the open space/greenbelt areas of
              El Toro.
C ULTURE AND THE A RTS
GOAL HC-4     Support for culture and the arts as key assets for
              a unique and authentic community.
Policy HC-4.1 City Facilities. Use the Community & Cultural
              Center and other City facilities to provide low-
              cost space and admission for events, and
              performances and exhibits that highlight the
              community’s cultural, historic, and artistic
              diversity and history.
Policy HC-4.2 Accessibility. Provide arts education and
              programs that are accessible to all, including
              residents with special needs and limited incomes.
Policy HC-4.3 Cultural Awareness. Promote awareness of and
              celebrate Morgan Hill’s diverse cultures through
              events, festivals, leadership on public boards and
              commissions, staff training, and public art
              installations.
                                                                                                           HC-15

M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Policy HC-4.4 Historical     Awareness.      Acknowledge        the
                                                                  contribution that history, historical sites, people,
                                                                  objects, landscapes and areas have in creating the
                                                                  uniqueness of Morgan Hill and its environs.
                                                                  Promote awareness of and celebrate Morgan
                                                                  Hill’s history through leadership, staff training,
                                                                  celebrations, and events. Take a leading role in
                                                                  the collection and preservation of these things by
                                                                  providing for museums and other exhibit spaces
                                                                  to collect, exhibit, and interpret historical records
                                                                  and objects for community benefit.
                                                    Policy HC-4.5 Arts Promotion. Enhance Morgan Hill’s appeal to
                                                                  visitors and residents by publicizing local artists,
                                                                  providing space for and commissioning public
                                                                  art, hosting arts and cultural festivals and events,
                                                                  and encouraging preservation of the City’s artistic
                                                                  and cultural heritage.
                                                    Policy HC-4.6 Placemaking. Use public art and interpretive
                                                                  plaques to designate special and unique areas of
                                                                  the City, including the downtown, areas of
                                                                  historic and cultural significance, and community
                                                                  gathering places.
                                                    Policy HC-4.7 Villa Mira Monte. Promote awareness of Villa
                                                                  Mira Monte where the country home of Hiram
                                                                  Morgan Hill and his wife Diana is located along
                                                                  with the Morgan Hill Museum and the beautiful
                                                                  Centennial History Trail.
                                                    Policy HC-4.8 Civic Arts. Partner with local artists and art
                                                                  organizations to engage residents creatively in
                                                                  addressing community issues.
                                                    Policy HC-4.9 Conversions. Allow residential-to-commercial
                                                                  conversions to encourage art galleries and
                                                                  studios.
HC-16

                                                                   M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Action HC-4.A  Public Art Program. Study whether to require
               public art as part of new development and/or new
               City parks.
L IBRARIES
GOAL HC-5      Libraries that serve as community centers for
               education and culture while preparing residents
               for success in school, career, and life.
Policy HC-5.1  County Partnership. Partner with the Santa Clara
               County Public Library to maximize public use of
               libraries for community cultural and educational
               events and classes, particularly to support youth,
               seniors, job training, adult education, technology,
               literacy, and English as a second language.
Action HC-5.A  Joint Use. Evaluate the opportunity to partner
               with Morgan Hill schools to open school libraries
               to the community when not in use by students.
Action HC-5.B  Branch Library. Work with the Santa Clara
               County Public Library to provide a branch library
               on the east side of the city.
H EALTHY F OOD
GOAL HC-6      Options for residents at all income, education,
               and mobility levels to access healthy food and
               food education.
Policy HC-6.1  Garden Partnerships. Partner with public,
               nonprofit and private agencies and organizations
               to acquire, develop and operate community
               gardens.
Policy HC-6.2  School Gardens. Encourage schools to increase
               access by community residents to school gardens.
                                                                                                             HC-17
M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Policy HC-6.3 Zoning. Allow community gardens and small
                                                                  scale agriculture in any appropriate zoning
                                                                  designation.
                                                    Policy HC-6.4 Open Space Requirements. Classify community
                                                                  gardens as open space that meets requirements in
                                                                  new developments.
                                                    Policy HC-6.5 Food Education. Support education regarding
                                                                  healthy diets, healthy food preparation, and
                                                                  gardening.
                                                    Policy HC-6.6 Residential Gardens. Encourage residents to
                                                                  plant produce gardens and fruit trees at their
                                                                  homes.
                                                    Policy HC-6.7 Agricultural Retention. Encourage the retention
                                                                  of agriculture and food production and decrease
                                                                  costs associated with agriculture, according to
                                                                  policies in the Natural Resources and
                                                                  Environment Element.
                                                    Policy HC-6.8 School Wellness. Support incorporating school
                                                                  gardens into the Morgan Hill Unified School
                                                                  District Wellness Policy as an opportunity for
                                                                  nutrition education.
                                                    Action HC-6.A Open Space. Update the classification system in
                                                                  the Parks, Facilities, and Recreation Programming
                                                                  Master Plan to allow community gardens to count
                                                                  towards open space requirements.
                                                    Action HC-6.B Identify Sites. Identify publicly-owned and
                                                                  vacant or underutilized sites that would be
                                                                  appropriate for temporary or permanent
                                                                  community gardens.
HC-18
                                                                    M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                        H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Action HC-6.C   Zoning. Amend the Municipal Code to allow
                community gardens and small scale urban
                agriculture     in     any    appropriate    zoning
                designation.
Action HC-6.D   Home Gardens. Encourage the Santa Clara Valley
                Water District Landscape Rebate Program to
                include vegetable gardens with high-efficiency
                irrigation systems as an eligible landscape in the
                Landscape Rebate Program.
Action HC-6.E   Produce Carts. Amend the Municipal Code to
                allow mobile produce stands in residential and
                other appropriate neighborhoods.
A CCESS TO H EALTH C ARE
GOAL HC-7       Access for all residents to health care facilities
                and other important community health
                amenities.
Policy HC-7.1   Mental Health. Work with Santa Clara County
                Public Health and local providers to enhance
                access to and information about mental health
                services.
Policy HC-7.2   Professional Education. Encourage increased
                education      and      professional  development
                resources to support students and employees in
                the health care field.
Policy HC-7.3   Transit. Work with health care providers to
                ensure that there are transit stops within a ¼-mile
                of medical facilities.
Action HC-7.A   Medical Zoning. Maintain zoning designations
                that encourage medical facilities and providers to
                locate in the community.
                                                                                                              HC-19

M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
                                                    Action HC-7.B Job Training. Work with Gavilan Community
                                                                  College, Work2Future, and Santa Clara County
                                                                  Public Health to identify and address any gaps in
                                                                  education and training needed to provide
                                                                  adequate health care practitioners in Morgan Hill.
                                                    C ULTURAL AND H ISTORIC R ESOURCES
                                                    GOAL HC-8      Historic identity and cultural resources that are
                                                                  preserved for future generations.
                                                    Policy HC-8.1 Identify and Protect Resources. Identify and
                                                                  protect heritage resources from loss and
                                                                  destruction. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.09)
                                                    Policy HC-8.2 Historic Structures. Encourage the preservation
                                                                  and rehabilitation of the City's historic structures.
                                                    Policy HC-8.3 Demolition. Prior to approving demolition or
                                                                  alteration of historically significant buildings,
                                                                  evaluate     alternatives,   including      structural
                                                                  preservation, relocation or other mitigation, and
                                                                  demonstrate that financing has been secured for
                                                                  replacement use.
                                                    Policy HC-8.4 Tribal Consultation. Consult with Native
                                                                  American tribes that have ancestral ties to
                                                                  Morgan Hill regarding proposed new develop-
                                                                  ment projects and land use policy changes.
                                                    Policy HC-8.5 Mitigation. Require that if cultural resources,
                                                                  including tribal, archaeological, or paleontological
                                                                  resources, are uncovered during grading or other
                                                                  on-site excavation activities, construction shall
                                                                  stop until appropriate mitigation is implemented.
                                                    Action HC-8.A Update Inventory. Review and update the
                                                                  inventory of historic resources.
HC-20
                                                                M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
Action HC-8.B Technical Assistance. Provide clear and easily
              accessible information to property owners and
              developers about design guidelines, financing
              options, assistance programs, and other technical
              issues involved in preserving and restoring
              historic buildings.
                                                                                                          HC-21
M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
H E A L T H Y C O M M U N I T Y
HC-22
                                                                    7
The Transportation Element offers mechanisms for making
Morgan Hill a safe and efficient place to travel, whether by train,
bus, car, bike, or foot. The city’s transportation system is
envisioned as a coordinated combination of public transit, private
vehicles, biking, and walking. A key focus during the General
Plan horizon will be construction of new roadways and segments
that will fill in “missing links” and provide for increased
connectivity of the roadway system. There will also be an
increased emphasis on providing for choices in travel mode,
particularly for pedestrian and bicycle travel within Morgan Hill.
This element contains goals, policies, and actions aimed at making
the existing road network efficient and user-friendly,
implementing strategies to ensure safe and appropriate operation
of the transportation system, solving existing traffic and parking
problems, and expanding transit and non-motorized travel
opportunities. It provides some brief background information and
related goals, policies, and actions on the following topics:
     Circulation System and Complete Streets
     Local Roadways and Level of Service
     Parking
     Transit
     Bikeways
     Pedestrian Network
     Transportation Demand Management
     Regional Coordination

The California Complete Streets Act (AB 1358), passed in 2008,
requires all General Plan updates after January 1, 2011 to “plan for
a balanced, multimodal transportation network that meets the
needs of all users of streets, roads, and highways for safe and
convenient travel” and defines “users of streets, roads, and
highways” to include bicyclists, children, persons with
disabilities, motorists, pedestrians, users of public transportation,
and seniors.
Complete Streets not only make Morgan Hill safer for everyone,
but also contribute to the City’s goals of a high quality of life and a
healthy community by enhancing opportunities to walk, bike, or
roll along pleasant, interconnected streets. The policies and
actions in this Transportation Element are intended to meet the
requirements of the Complete Streets legislation, and all future
roadway improvements in Morgan Hill will need to consider
these principles.
Morgan Hill is served by an extensive roadway network of
freeways, arterials, and local roads. These roadways provide
access to the surrounding municipalities and to local destinations,
such as employment areas, shopping centers, schools, recreational
opportunities, and residential communities.
The City of Morgan Hill is responsible for planning, constructing,
and maintaining local roadways within the City limits. The
roadway configurations in this Transportation Element are
intended to accommodate projected travel demands in the year
2030, including local, sub-regional and regional traffic traveling
through Morgan Hill. Travel forecasts show that substantial
roadway improvements will be required in Morgan Hill to
provide for both connectivity and capacity.
Major features of the future circulation system are shown on
Figure TR-1 and the planned classifications and functions of these
key roadways are summarized below.

Figure TR-1 Future Circulation Syste
The functional classification system designates the purpose and
physical characteristics of the roadways, and is composed of the
following seven classifications, with the noted sub-classifications:
     State Freeway
     Two-Lane Arterial (minor, major and multi-modal)
     Four-Lane Arterial (major and multi-modal)
     Six-Lane Arterial
     Commercial/Industrial Collector (major and minor)
     Residential Collector (major and minor)
     Local Street
In the past, Morgan Hill had considered two-lane roads as
collectors and four-lane roads as arterials. This Transportation
Element provides two-lane arterial classifications for key north-
south corridors that function as arterials, and yet do not require
four-lane capacity. The “two-lane multi-modal arterial”
configuration includes on-street bike lanes but also incorporates a
Class 1 bikeway/pedestrian path within a linear park in the right-
of-way. A “two-lane minor arterial” is also multi-modal, but
requires less right-of-way, as bike lanes are only provided on-
street and standard sidewalks are provided rather than in a linear
parkway.
Level of Service (LOS) is a way of measuring how well a road is
operating based on average control delay per vehicle, and in some
analyses, based on the ratio of the volume of traffic to the capacity
of the road. LOS A is a free-flowing condition and LOS F is an
extreme congestion condition, with traffic volumes at or over
capacity.
The City’s LOS policies are designed to reduce the incentive for
regional travel to be drawn off the freeway and onto local streets,
protect neighborhoods, promote a vital downtown, and focus

transportation expenditures on priority improvements offering
high performance value. The Tiered LOS Policy, along with
completion of planned roadway improvements, are designed to
ensure that traffic does not spillover into residential
neighborhoods onto streets which are not designed to
accommodate sub-regional and regional traffic, as such spillover
would create safety and livability issues for local residents. The
planned roadway system will appropriately accommodate all
travel demands and will avoid spillover traffic in neighborhoods.
The planned City circulation system is designed to operate at LOS
D for most intersections and roadway segments, except that in the
Downtown, LOS F is acceptable as defined by Policy TR-3.4, and
LOS E is acceptable for certain intersections, freeway ramps/
zones, and segments as identified by Policy TR-3.4. Definitions of
the LOS levels that are used by Morgan Hill are the current
industry standards described in the Highway Capacity Manual
(HCM) used by transportation engineers, as they currently or may
later be defined. The definitions in use are contained within the
City’s “Guidelines for Preparation of Transportation Impact
Analyses.”
Congestion in Morgan Hill can be substantially affected by
regional traffic if Highway 101 capacity does not meet demand, as
regional travelers attempt to decrease travel times by using local
roads.
This Transportation Element encourages the widening of
Highway 101 to the extent needed to meet forecasted future
demand from commuter travel, and right-of-way for the City
roadway system is based on the assumption that Highway 101
will be eight lanes wide through Morgan Hill by the 2030
planning timeframe (two High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes
are assumed to be added to the existing six-lane freeway). City
road improvements would initially be constructed assuming
Highway 101 would be eight lanes wide in 2030. Design of certain
multi-modal arterials will accommodate the possibility of
converting some right-of-way to additional vehicular lanes in the

future in the event that Highway 101 is not widened to eight or
ten lanes, and to accommodate road capacities that may be
determined to be needed in the years beyond 2030.
The following is a summary description of major north-south
roadways.
    Highway 101. This Transportation Element encourages the
     widening of Highway 101 through Morgan Hill to the extent
     needed to meet future demand. For 2030, an eight-lane
     freeway is assumed.
    Monterey Road. The Circulation Plan shows Monterey Road
     as a four-lane arterial, except that between a point just north
     of Cochrane Road and the City limits, it is planned to be
     widened to six lanes (beginning where one southbound lane
     becomes an eastbound left-turn lane). The existing segment
     of Monterey Road that is only three lanes as it passes under
     the railroad corridor is planned to be widened to four lanes.
     This Transportation Element also provides the option for the
     City of Morgan Hill to narrow Monterey Road from its
     existing four lanes to a two-lane arterial through Downtown.
     The Master EIR for the Downtown Specific Plan and the EIR
     prepared for the 2010 Transportation Element Update
     contain information about impacts and LOS conditions
     under both scenarios. A two-lane configuration would allow
     the existing right-of-way to be used for bicycle lanes,
     widened sidewalks, on-street parking, median, bus turnouts
     and shelters, landscaping, and gateway entrances.
    Butterfield Boulevard. As of 2015, Butterfield Boulevard
     extends from Cochrane Road to Monterey Road. North of
     Cochrane Road, it is planned to be a two-lane arterial that
     connects to Madrone Parkway. While not analyzed or
     included in the Circulation Plan for 2030, future
     consideration should be given to extending Butterfield north
     of Madrone to connect to Burnett Avenue, perhaps then
     curving northwest to connect to Tilton Avenue.

   Hale/Santa Teresa Corridor. The Hale/Santa Teresa
    Corridor, which includes Santa Teresa Boulevard, Sunnyside
    Avenue, DeWitt Avenue, and Hale Avenue, is envisioned as
    a single continuous route. New segments and improvements
    within Morgan Hill are planned as a two-lane multi-modal
    arterial, with a separated Class 1 bikeway and pedestrian
    path in a linear parkway. The two-lane multi-modal
    segments would have sufficient right-of-way to enable a
    future four-lane configuration, if needed. Existing segments
    should be improved to the two-lane multi-modal standard as
    funding allows; grants should be pursued to add sidewalks
    and bicycle facilities. The City will work the County of Santa
    Clara to seek funding to improve the existing segments
    within the County to better accommodate bicyclists and
    pedestrians.
   Murphy Avenue/Mission View Drive Corridor. Murphy
    Avenue exists south of Diana Avenue. This Transportation
    Element plans for a northern extension of Murphy Avenue to
    connect with Mission View Drive, and designates the
    Murphy/Mission View Corridor as a two-lane multi-modal
    arterial (without the linear park component). While not
    analyzed or included in the Circulation Plan for 2030, future
    consideration should be given to extending Mission View
    Drive north to connect to Burnett Avenue.
   Hill/Peet Road Corridor. Hill Road exists between East Main
    Avenue and Maple Avenue. This Transportation Element
    encourages the northern extension of Hill Road to connect
    with Peet Road, and designates the Hill Road Corridor as a
    two-lane minor arterial.
   Condit Road. This Transportation Element designates
    Condit Road as a two-lane major collector.
The following is a summary description of major east-west
roadways.
   Cochrane Road. This Transportation Element designates
    Cochrane Road as a six-lane major arterial with no on-street

  parking from Monterey Road east across Highway 101 to
  Mission View Road, with four lanes from there east to Peet
  Road.
 Edmundson Avenue. This Transportation Element
  designates Edmundson Avenue as a four-lane arterial from
  Monterey Road to Piazza Way.
 Madrone Parkway. This Transportation Element designates
  Madrone Parkway as a two-lane minor arterial from Hale
  Avenue to Butterfield Boulevard. In the long term, it is
  planned to be grade-separated from the Union Pacific
  Railroad tracks However, as an alternate or interim
  improvement, the City may pursue a two-lane at-grade
  crossing in exchange for closing the existing two-lane at-
  grade crossing at San Pedro Avenue.
 Main Avenue. This Transportation Element designates Main
  Avenue as a two-lane arterial from Hale Avenue to Hill
  Road, except that it is planned for four lanes between Depot
  Street and Butterfield Boulevard. Where right-of-way allows,
  multi-modal improvements should be added as funding
  allows.
 Dunne Avenue. This Transportation Element designates
  Dunne Avenue as a four-lane major arterial, except that it is a
  two-lane arterial between Del Monte Avenue and Peak
  Avenue.
 Tennant Avenue. This Transportation Element designates
  Tennant Avenue as a six-lane major arterial between
  Highway 101 ramps and Butterfield Boulevard, and a four-
  lane major arterial from the Highway 101 ramps to Murphy
  Avenue.
 Watsonville Road. This Transportation Element designates
  Watsonville Road as a four-lane arterial from its connection
  with Butterfield Boulevard, over Monterey Road to La
  Alameda Drive, and a two-lane arterial thereafter.

Policies in this element reflect existing public transportation
service, support retention and expansion of Caltrain commuter
service in the South County, and encourage other alternative
transportation modes. The City encourages transit agencies to
expand express bus service to employment centers and the
Caltrain station, and to provide new bicycle and pedestrian
facilities at stations and transit stops.
Caltrain, operated by the Peninsula Joint Powers Authority,
provides commuter rail service along the Peninsula between San
Francisco and Gilroy. The Morgan Hill Caltrain Station is located
along the west side of Butterfield Boulevard, between Dunne
Avenue and Main Avenue, just east of the downtown area. At the
Morgan Hill Station, as of 2015, Caltrain provides three
northbound trains during the morning and three southbound
trains during the evening peak commute periods with
approximately 30- to 40-minute headways.
Morgan Hill is currently one of the least-used stations in the
Caltrain system, accounting for about one quarter of one percent
of total boardings. However, Caltrain forecasts of ridership
indicate that boardings at the Morgan Hill Caltrain station will
more than double to approximately 300 boardings by the year
2040, based on both an increase in Morgan Hill’s population and
an increase in the percentage of Morgan Hill’s population that
takes Caltrain. Within the timeframe of the General Plan, it is
likely that congestion on the freeway system will result in an
increase in demand for regional transit to and from the north.
While some double-tracking of the Caltrain corridor and
expanded service is planned, extension of light rail service to
Morgan Hill is not included in the 2035 Valley Transportation
Plan.

VTA operates bus service in all jurisdictions within Santa Clara
County. As of 2015, Morgan Hill is served by one local bus route
and one community bus route. In addition, two express buses
serve the City with limited stops.
In addition, the Monterey-Salinas Transit (MST) Bus Service
provides bus service between the Morgan Hill Caltrain Station
and the Monterey Transit Plaza in Monterey.
The Morgan Hill Transit Center, located at the northeast corner of
the intersection of Hale Avenue and Main Avenue, serves as a hub
for local and community bus routes and provides park-and-ride
facilities. The Morgan Hill Caltrain Station is served by two
express bus routes and one MST bus route, and also provides
park-and-ride facilities.
Morgan Hill provides an ideal environment for cycling. The City
is on relatively flat terrain and enjoys a moderate climate. As a
small city, virtually any area is accessible by bicycle. In addition,
the City is blessed with scenic surroundings, including many rural
roads that lead to the adjacent hills and agricultural lands, which
are frequented by recreational cyclists.
Bicycle facilities are provided throughout the City of Morgan Hill
on most arterials and major collectors, and the City adopted a
Bikeways Master Plan in 2008 to guide future implementation of a
citywide bikeway system (see Figure TR-2).
Morgan Hill has a well-established pedestrian network that
includes sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian signals, and off-street
paths. Sidewalks with raised curbs and gutters are typically
provided along arterials and collectors, as well as in newer
residential developments. Most major intersections in the City
Figure TR-2 Bikeway
have marked crosswalks and countdown pedestrian crossing
signals that can be activated by pedestrians.
Though the City does not identify minimum sidewalk widths,
minimum sidewalk widths of 5 feet are required to meet
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. Depending
on the land use type, wider sidewalks may be provided.
In 2008, California voters approved High-Speed Rail (HSR)
between San Francisco and Los Angeles. The approved route will
pass through Morgan Hill on its way up to the peninsula. The City
of Morgan Hill is working with the California High-Speed Rail
Authority (CaHSRA), other communities, and relevant agencies to
identify the best location for the HSR passing through Morgan
Hill. The two potential routes are:
     East of and almost parallel to Highway 101; or
     East of the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) tracks through
      Downtown.
The closest HSR station would be located in Gilroy. Timing of
implementation of the segment that includes South County is
uncertain, and it is also unknown whether the line would be at
grade or elevated/grade-separated from existing and planned
local roadways.
At the time of this General Plan publication, the location and
configuration of the HSR route has not been determined. As the
HSR route is identified, proper land uses for adjacent parcels will
be studied; future General Plan amendments may be needed to
best respond to final plans for HSR.
The maintenance, planning, and expansion of circulation facilities
are conducted by a number of local, regional, State, and federal
agencies.

The City of Morgan Hill is responsible for planning, constructing,
and maintaining local roadways within the city limits. Similarly,
the County of Santa Clara has similar responsibility for roads in
unincorporated areas and expressways throughout Santa Clara
County. Caltrans is the primary State agency responsible for
transportation issues. At the regional level, the Metropolitan
Transportation Commission (MTC) is the transportation planning,
coordinating, and financing agency for the nine-county Bay Area,
including Santa Clara County. It also functions as the federally-
mandated metropolitan planning organization (MPO) for the
region. MTC authors the regional transportation plan and has
established policies regarding the accommodation of pedestrians
and bicyclists, both of which apply to Morgan Hill.
The majority of federal, State, and regional financing available for
transportation projects is allocated at the regional level by MTC.
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) is the regional
planning Council of Governments (COG) agency for the nine-
county Bay Area, including Santa Clara County. It primarily deals
with land use, housing, environmental quality, and economic
development issues, which are often closely connected to
transportation.
The Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) is the
designated Congestion Management Agency (CMA) for Santa
Clara County and therefore administers the Congestion
Management Program (CMP).
The City will work with these other agencies to maintain a long-
range coordinated regional transportation system.
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) is the use of
strategies to reduce travel demand (particularly use of single-
occupant vehicles) and use transportation facilities more
efficiently. TDM strategies can include programs to provide non-
vehicular transportation options, smart technology to improve the
efficiency and efficacy of transportation facilities, efforts to shift
travel patterns to use existing facilities more efficiently, and other
techniques.
GOAL TR-1        A balanced, safe, and efficient circulation
                 system for all segments of the community,
                 meeting local needs and accommodating
                 projected regional and sub-regional traffic while
                 protecting neighborhoods.
                 System Efficiency. Plan, construct, and maintain
                 a coordinated and efficient system of local streets
                 and highways throughout the community,
                 meeting local needs and accommodating
                 projected regional and sub-regional traffic, while
                 protecting neighborhoods from cut-through
                 traffic.
                  Highway 101 Widening. Plan for roadway
                 system right-of-way based on the assumption that
                 Highway 101 will be widened through the city by
                 2035.
                 Transportation Safety. Implement strategies to
                 ensure safe and appropriate operation of all
                 components of the transportation system for all
                 users, such as programs to lower crash rates and
                 reduce the number of transportation-related
                 injuries in the city through education,
                 enforcement, engineering strategies, physical
                 improvements,        and    operational      systems.
                 Prioritize strategies that improve safety for
                 students, pedestrians, and bicyclists.
          Local Right-of-Way for Highway 101 Widening.
          Use techniques for ensuring that right-of-way for
          local roads is available at appropriate times and
          locations to accommodate traffic conditions
          associated with an eight-lane configuration for
          Highway 101, such as traffic impact fees, pursuit
          of grants, and prioritizing improvements through
          the Capital Improvement Program (CIP).
GOAL TR-2 A system designed for a healthy, active
          community based on complete streets, smart
          growth, and Sustainable Communities
          strategies; reflecting a balanced, safe, multi-
          modal transportation system for all users,
          especially in Downtown where pedestrian,
          bicycle, and transit facilities will be emphasized
          along with vehicular facilities.
          Multi-Modal System for All Users. A balanced
          multi-modal system offers viable choices for
          residents, employees, customers, visitors, and
          recreational users. Use smart growth and
          Sustainable Communities principles throughout
          the city to provide a balanced transportation
          system which assures access to all, and which
          integrates all appropriate modes of transportation
          into an effectively functioning system, including
          modes such as auto, ride sharing, public rail and
          bus transit, paratransit, bicycling, and walking.
          (South County Joint Area Plan 11.00 & 11.01)
          Integrated Land Use/Transportation Planning.
          Integrate     planning     for   land     use   and
          transportation development by ensuring that the
          timing, amount, and location of urban
          development is consistent with the development
          of the transportation system capacity. Promote
          environmental objectives that support smart
          growth and Sustainable Communities principles,
          such as safe and uncongested neighborhoods, a
          pedestrian-friendly vibrant downtown that
          emphasizes non-auto transportation modes,
          energy conservation, reduction of air and noise
          pollution, and the integrity of scenic and/or
          hillside areas. (South County Joint Area Plan 11.02
          & 11.05)
GOAL TR-3 A coordinated, continuous network of streets
          and roads.
          Funding and Expenditure System. Achieve and
          maintain an equitable, full-cost recovery funding
          and capital expenditure system to ensure that
          roadways are constructed or improved when
          needed. Use a variety of sources to ensure
          sufficient funding for roadways, including but not
          limited to impact fees, grants, and revenues from
          federal and State sources. Ensure eligibility of
          arterials and collectors for State and federal
          funding by updating the California Road System
          and other lists as appropriate.
          Safe and Complete Improvements. Avoid
          creating incomplete public improvements that
          create public safety hazards.
          Timing of Street Construction from Private
          Development. Require developers to provide for
          the construction of their portions of arterial and
          collector streets at the time of development.
          Level of Service Standards. As the Level of
          Service (LOS) policy and design criteria for
          roadway improvements, use a Tiered LOS
          Standard as follows:
              LOS F in the Downtown at Main/Monterey,
               along Monterey Road between Main and Fifth

  Street, and along Depot Street at First through
  Fifth Streets. This LOS standard in the
  Downtown recognizes the unique nature of
  and goals for Downtown Morgan Hill as the
  transit hub of the City and as a center for
  shopping, business, entertainment, civic and
  cultural events, and higher-density, mixed-
  use living opportunities. This standard does
  not preclude the City, developers, and
  property       owners      from     voluntarily
  implementing improvements and employing
  operational strategies to improve level of
  service, especially at the Main/Monterey
  intersection, if and when land uses redevelop.
 LOS D for intersections         and segments
  elsewhere; except
 Allow LOS E for identified freeway ramps/
  zones, road segments and intersections that
  (1) provide a transition to and are located on
  the periphery of downtown; (2) are freeway
  zone intersections; and/or (3) where achieving
  LOS D could result in interim intersection
  improvements which would be “over-built”
  once the City’s circulation network has been
  completed, and/or would involve unaccept-
  able impacts on existing buildings or existing
  or planned transportation facilities, including
  roads, sidewalks, bicycle and transit facilities;
  and/or would involve extraordinary costs to
  acquire land and existing buildings, and build
  the improvement in relation to benefits
  achieved; and/or the facility would be
  widened beyond requirements to serve local
  traffic, in that the facility accommodates a
  significant component of peak-hour sub-
  regional and regional through-traffic.
 In order to reduce the incentive for regional
  travel to be drawn off the freeway and onto
  local neighborhood streets, protect neighbor-

     hoods, avoid overbuilding intersections, and
     to create an incentive for using alternate
     modes of travel, LOS E during peak hours of
     travel is acceptable for the following
     identified freeway ramps, road segments, and
     intersections:
     Main Avenue and Del Monte Avenue
     Main Avenue and Depot Street
     Dunne Avenue and Del Monte Avenue
     Dunne Avenue and Monterey Avenue
     Dunne Avenue and Church Street; also
       until closed: Dunne Avenue and Depot
       Street
     Cochrane Road and Monterey Road
     Tennant Avenue and Monterey Road
     Tennant Avenue and Butterfield Boulevard
     Cochrane Road Freeway Zone: from
       Madrone Parkway/Cochrane Plaza to
     Cochrane/DePaul Drive
     Dunne Avenue Freeway Zone: from Walnut
       Grove/East Dunne to Condit/East Dunne
     Tennant Avenue Freeway Zone: from
       Butterfield/Tennant to Condit/Tennant
       Freeway Ramps
Projects shall pay the City’s standard traffic
impact fees imposed on new developments in
accordance with the adopted impact fee schedule.
Mitigation       and    Environmental     Review
Requirements. For roadway transportation
facilities, when future traffic studies determine
that an intersection, roadway segment, or freeway
ramp/zone level of service will fall below its
adopted standard, then the transportation studies
will identify appropriate mitigation measures to
ensure that the applicable level of service
standard is attained. If a proposed traffic
mitigation measure requires improvements for

vehicular transportation that are beyond the
jurisdiction of the City of Morgan Hill; and/or
lead to an over-built intersection; and/or would
have unacceptable impacts on existing buildings,
or existing or planned transportation facilities
and/or alternate modes of transportation,
including roads, sidewalks, bicycle and transit
facilities, the City may (but would not be required
to) impose alternative mitigation measures that
do not create the unacceptable impacts. If the
measures retain the “pre-project” level of service
standard for the affected facilities, then an
Environmental Impact Report may not be
required. However, it may be necessary for the
City to prepare and certify an Environmental
Impact Report, and adopt a Statement of
Overriding Considerations, if a project’s impacts
cannot be mitigated in an acceptable manner but
the City determines to approve the project. In this
situation, the City may still require feasible
mitigation measures and/or conditions of
approval to require contributions to improving
the City’s transportation system.
Unacceptable         Impacts    from     Mitigation
Measures. The types of impacts from identified
vehicular traffic mitigation measures that may be
determined by the City to be unacceptable
include, but are not limited to the following:
    Those that would encourage substantial
     neighborhood or community cut-through
     traffic;
    Those that would eliminate       or reduce the
     width of a sidewalk below       minimum City
     standard, where there is         not sufficient
     planned public right-of-way     to relocate the
     sidewalk;
    Those that would eliminate a bicycle lane or
     reduce its width below City standard, where

     there is not sufficient planned public right-of-
     way to relocate the bicycle lane;
    Those that would create unsafe pedestrian,
     bicycle, or vehicular operating conditions;
    Those that would eliminate a bus stop or a
     parking lane that accommodates a bus stop,
     which cannot be relocated;
    Those that would require acquisition of
     substantial    existing     buildings,   and/or
     extraordinarily high cost of land acquisition,
     or an extraordinarily high project cost in
     relation to benefits achieved.
Alternate Mitigation Measures and Conditions
of Approval. Alternate mitigation measures
and/or conditions of approval may include, but
not be limited to making improvements to other
facilities that assist with maintaining or
improving projected levels of service, payment of
an in-lieu fee to the City to be used to improve
other components of the City’s transportation
system, developer installation of transportation
improvements, and/or incorporation of physical
features and operational programs into a project
that support Trip Reduction/Travel Demand
Management goals.
Monitoring for Safety and Congestion
Improvements. While mitigation measures may
not be required because level of service would not
fall below an applicable LOS E or F standard, the
City, developers, property owners, and others are
not precluded from identifying and implementing
improvements and strategies to improve level of
service and reduce congestion. The City should
periodically monitor actual traffic conditions and
accident data and identify improvements and/or
operational strategies that would improve safety

and congestion levels, as practical and cost-
effective.
Monitoring for Signalization Projects. For
unsignalized intersections in the downtown area
and other key city locations, the City should
undertake regular or periodic monitoring of
actual traffic conditions and accident data, and
timely re-evaluation of the full set of warrants to
prioritize and program intersections for
signalization, as practical and cost-effective.
Priority Funding to Address Deficiencies. To the
maximum extent possible, fund those road
improvements that are required to correct existing
deficiencies from general road fund revenues, and
grant sources that may be available.
Arterial Roadways. Require the following streets
to be built to arterial standards in the locations
and at the number of lanes shown on Figure TR-1,
and encourage the County to improve county
arterial roadways to appropriate arterial
standards in unincorporated areas. As described
by the “Planned Transportation System (2030)”
description of the major planned roads in this
Transportation Element, the nature of the arterials
will range from a two-lane minor arterial, two-
lane major arterial, two-lane multi-modal arterial,
four-lane or six-lane major arterial, and four-lane
multi-modal arterial.
 North/South Arterial Roadways
   Butterfield Boulevard (Cochrane Road to
    Monterey Road)
   Hill/Peet Road Corridor (Cochrane Road to
    Tennant Avenue)
   Monterey Road (the current four-lane arterial
    may be narrowed to a two-lane arterial)

   Murphy       Avenue/Mission     View     Drive
    Corridor (Cochrane Road to Maple Avenue)
   Santa Teresa/Hale Corridor
 East/West Arterial Roadways
   Cochrane Road (Monterey Road to Peet Road)
   Dunne Avenue (Santa Teresa Corridor to
    Gallop Drive)
   Edmundson Avenue (Santa Teresa Corridor
    to Monterey Road)
   Main Avenue (Hale Avenue to Hill Road
    Corridor)
   Tilton Avenue/Burnett Avenue (west and east
    of Monterey Road)
   Llagas Road Connection (Hale/Santa Teresa
    Corridor to Monterey/Old Monterey)
   East Middle (Monterey Road to Murphy
    Avenue – outside City of Morgan Hill Sphere
    of Influence)
   Tennant Avenue (Monterey Road to Hill
    Road)
   Watsonville Road (connected to Butterfield
    Corridor)
Collector Roadways. Require the following
streets to be built to collector standards in the
locations designated on Figure TR-1 and
encourage the County to improve these roadways
to collector standards in unincorporated areas:
North/South Collector Roadways
   Church Street (Dunne Avenue to Tennant
    Avenue)
   Condit Road
   Del Monte Street (Llagas Road to Wright
    Avenue, Dunne Avenue to Cosmo Avenue)
   Depot Street

    DeWitt Avenue (Dunne Avenue to Spring
     Avenue)
    Foothill Avenue
    La Alameda Drive
    Murphy      Avenue/Mission     View    Drive
     Corridor (north of Cochrane Road)
    Old Monterey       Road   (Llagas  Road    to
     Monterey Road)
    Olive Avenue
    Olympic Drive
    Peak Avenue
    Saddleback Drive
    Serene Drive - East Lane
    Sutter Boulevard
    Trail Drive
    Vista de Lomas Avenue
    Walnut Grove Drive / Juan Hernandez
     (Tennant Avenue to Diana Avenue)
East/West Collector Roadways
    Barrett Avenue (Juan Hernandez Drive to
     Butterfield Boulevard and Church Street to
     Monterey Road)
    Burnett Avenue (Monterey Road to Vista de
     Lomas Avenue)
    Central Avenue (Butterfield Boulevard to East
     Lane)
    Cochrane Road (Peet Road to Malaguerra
     Drive)
    Cosmo Avenue
    Diana Avenue (Butterfield Boulevard to
     Laurel Road, Condit Road to Hill Road
     Corridor)
    East Dunne Avenue (Gallop Drive to Jackson
     Oaks Drive)

   West Dunne Avenue (Santa Teresa Corridor
    to DeWitt Avenue)
   Fountain Oaks Drive
   Half Road (Condit Road to Hill Road
    Corridor)
   Hill Road      (Tennant    Avenue    to  Maple
    Avenue)
   La Crosse Drive
   Llagas Road (Old          Monterey    Road  to
    Woodland Acres)
   Main Avenue (Hale Avenue to Peak Avenue)
   Native Dancer Drive
   San Pedro Avenue (Spring Avenue Connector
    to Laurel Road, Condit Road to Hill Road)
   Spring Avenue (Santa Teresa Corridor to San
    Pedro Avenue Connector)
   Tennant Avenue (Hill Road to Foothill
    Avenue)
   Vineyard Boulevard (La Crosse Drive to
    Tennant Avenue)
   Wright Avenue (Monterey Road to Peak
    Avenue)
Unsignalized Intersection Monitoring. As a
good practice measure to support pedestrian
safety and promote safe vehicular travel, the City
should carry out regular monitoring of the
unsignalized intersections in the Downtown area,
especially those at Monterey/Fifth, Monterey/
Fourth, and Monterey/Central, to evaluate the
possibility of restricting cross traffic movements
or implementing other restrictions supportive of
safe travel downtown.

Main/Monterey Intersection Improvements.
Work with property owners of the existing banks
on the southwest and southeast corners of the
Main/Monterey intersection to explore the
feasibility of redevelopment of those properties in
a manner that would allow for road and
operational improvements to improve traffic flow
at that key intersection.
Depot Street Rerouting and Extension. In order
to provide a continuous north-south travel route
to, from, and within Downtown, re-route Depot
Street south through the existing Community and
Cultural Center parking lot to connect to Church
Street, and explore the feasibility of extending
Depot Street north to curve over and connect to
McGlaughlin through to Central Avenue.
Private Development Access along Arterials.
Require development that occurs along arterial
streets to obtain access through a local street or
major entrance and not through curb cuts directly
onto the arterial street wherever possible.
Planned Development Access near Highway
101. Require Planned Developments (PDs) for
commercial, office, or industrial uses at the
intersections of Highway 101 and arterial streets
to take access from a public street intersecting
with the arterial street at a minimum distance of
600 feet from the freeway on and off ramps,
unless the City Engineer finds that direct access to
the arterial street or closer access will meet safety
standards, or that mitigating actions will be taken
to ensure safe access and minimum interference
with traffic flows.
Grade-Separated Railroad Crossings. Plan for
the construction of grade-separated crossings of
the Union Pacific railroad to improve emergency
vehicle response times and minimize conflicts
between railroad trains and on-road vehicles.
California Public Utilities Commission approval
is required to modify an existing highway rail
crossing or to construct a new crossing. Grade-
separated crossings should be encouraged at
Dunne Avenue (Depot Street to be re-routed
through the existing Community and Cultural
Center parking lot to create an intersection with
Church Street either prior to or in conjunction
with the grade separation project).
Monterey Road Functionality. Give special
consideration to the design of Monterey Road,
balancing its functions as an arterial street, a
“main      street”   accommodating       downtown
activities, and as an access road to the downtown
and the major commercial areas of the city.
Arterial Design and Landscaping. Require
development adjacent to arterial streets to
minimize the use of fences and walls wherever
possible. Strive to accommodate all modes of
travel on arterial streets, and improve the
Butterfield Corridor, Monterey Road Corridor,
and Hale/Santa Teresa Corridor to the extent
feasible     as    well-landscaped     multi-modal
boulevards. Continue to implement the program
for planting street trees and landscaping arterial
streets and major intersections.
Review of Speed Limits. Periodically review
speed limits on all City streets to ensure that
appropriate rates are set as the road network is
improved to avoid “speed traps” and to support
safe neighborhoods.

Future Transportation Facilities. Preserve
options for future transportation facilities in
advance of development by such means as
identification of routes, acquisition and/or
reservation of rights-of-way, setback of
development to accommodate future width lines,
and limiting access along future major arterials.
(South County Joint Area Plan 11.06)
General Plan Amendments. In accordance with
the City’s Guidelines for Preparation of
Transportation      Impact     Analyses,     require
proposals to amend the General Plan that would
result in an increase in traffic generation to
demonstrate that adopted applicable LOS
standards would be maintained or that mitigation
measures are adequate to maintain acceptable
LOS on the street system unless an EIR is
prepared and a Statement of Overriding
Considerations is adopted by the City, which
includes findings about the unacceptable effects
that would occur if the full mitigation measures
were required (see Policies and Actions under
Goal 3). The Findings and Statement of
Overriding      Considerations,     adopted     with
certification of the Final EIR for the 2010
Transportation Element Update in February 2010,
meets this policy for establishing the Tiered LOS
Standard for the Downtown and the road
segments, intersections, and freeway ramps/zones
identified in Policy TR-3.4.
Roadway Classification. Assign all roadways in
the City street system to a functional classification
(some with subclassifications), and develop
standard improvement designs for each
classification and subclassification.

Traffic Counting and Monitoring. Develop an
ongoing system of traffic counting and
monitoring to determine whether or not service
levels are being maintained throughout the
community and to ensure that the impacts of new
development are based on current traffic data.
Guidelines for Preparing Traffic Studies. Use
the adopted Guidelines for Preparation of
Transportation Impact Analyses in conjunction
with the Tiered LOS Policy Standard as the
standards and thresholds used by applicants,
consultants, and City staff in the preparation of
traffic studies and application of the LOS
standard.
Special    Analysis     Issues.    Consult    with
transportation planners to determine the
appropriate assumptions and methodology for
addressing traffic analysis for land uses with
special analysis issues. These land uses include
schools, churches, and recreational facilities
where certain transportation modes (e.g., bicycles
or pedestrians), or certain types of analyses (e.g.,
parking, off-peak periods, or weekend periods)
are important.
Fees and Assessments. Maintain, regularly
review, and update as necessary the system of
fees and assessments to cover the cumulative
impacts of new development and land acquisition
and construction cost changes on the overall road
system.
Priorities for Improvements. Use the transpor-
tation studies and Transportation Impacts
Analysis included in the Environmental Impact
Report prepared for the Morgan Hill 2035 Draft
EIR to establish a list of priorities for roadway
improvements and establish funding mechanisms
to ensure that roadway improvements can be
built when needed.
Repayment to Private Developers. Use financial
mechanisms such as assessment districts and
reimbursement districts for repayment to
developers for one-half street and other public
improvements not normally required with the
development.
Completion of Arterial Upgrades. Use City
capital funds, assessment district funds, and State
and federal grant funds to complete those
portions of arterial streets not upgraded by
developers. .
Murphy Avenue. Establish Murphy Avenue
connecting to Mission View Drive as a two-lane
arterial north-south route. Retain Condit Road as
a two-lane major collector.
Improvement Projects. Establish improvement
projects as necessary through assessment districts,
grants, and other appropriate sources for all or a
portion of the costs of Hale/Santa Teresa Corridor,
Butterfield Corridor, and Watsonville Road, and
for Monterey Road/Downtown Morgan Hill.
Development along Arterials and the Railroad.
Require parcels within 400 feet of each side of the
Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way and adjacent
to arterial streets (as shown on the Transportation
Element map) to develop in a manner that
minimizes interference with future grade
separations of the railroad tracks and the arterial
street.
Funding for Grade-Separated Crossings. Pursue
funding sources for conversion of existing at-
grade crossings to grade-separated crossings with
Union Pacific (e.g., as part of possible future track
improvements) and the California Public Utilities
Commission (e.g., through CPUC Code Section
1202.5).
Monterey Road Design. Where appropriate, the
street design for Monterey Road should include a
landscaped median with left-turn pockets at
intervals approved by the City; however, in the
downtown an alternate design may be approved
by the City Council as the result of a streetscape
planning process to implement Downtown goals.
Landscaping and Design along Dunne Avenue.
Through the Design Permit process, strive to
provide a coordinated design for improvements
of residential properties fronting on Dunne
Avenue in order to maximize the potential for
improved landscaping and design.
Landscaping in Rights-of-Way. Landscape and
include street trees in the public right-of-way
(exclusive of paved areas) and medians.
Extensions and Connections. Construct roadway
extensions and connections to complete the
roadway system. Require preservation of rights-
of-way between existing street portions in order
to aid in completing these streets.
Hill Road/Peet Road Connection. Prepare an
alignment study for the Hill – Peet Road corridor
to determine the most appropriate and efficient
way of connecting these discontinuous streets.

          Arterial Corridors East of Highway 101. Establish
          and maintain the right-of-way for two continuous
          arterial corridors east of Highway 101, generally
          utilizing the existing alignments of Murphy
          Avenue/Mission View Drive and Hill/Peet Roads,
          including a northerly new connection of Hill from
          Main Avenue to Half Road.
GOAL TR-4 Emphasis on transportation improvements in
          the Butterfield, Hale/Santa Teresa, and
          Monterey corridors.
          Right-of-Way      for    Butterfield   Boulevard.
          Establish, maintain, and implement an adequate
          right-of-way for a major multi-modal arterial
          along Butterfield Boulevard, with four lanes
          extending from Cochrane Road to its connection
          with Watsonville Road at Monterey Road in the
          south end of town; and with two lanes extending
          north of Cochrane Road to connect with Madrone
          Parkway.
          Monterey Road Extension. Connect Monterey
          Road to Butterfield Boulevard to the north end of
          town - generally in the vicinity of Cochrane Road
          at the north.
          Butterfield Boulevard Extension. Take actions to
          preserve and/or obtain right of way and funding
          to implement the Butterfield North connection to
          Madrone Parkway and to establish the Madrone
          Parkway Crossing of Monterey Road and the
          UPRR corridor to connect to the Santa Teresa/
          Hale Corridor. Study and possibly plan for a
          future extension of Butterfield north of Madrone
          to connect to Burnett Avenue, perhaps then
          curving northwest to connect to Tilton Avenue.
Monterey Road Streetscape Improvements
Outside of Downtown. For the Monterey
Corridor segments outside of Downtown, pursue
grants, developer, and other funding sources to
make streetscape improvements, including, but
not limited to filling in missing sidewalks,
undergrounding utilities, extending landscaped
medians between Dunne and Tennant Avenue,
and widening the Monterey Road underpass of
the UPRR bridge to accommodate 4 vehicular
travel lanes along with pedestrian and bicycle
facilities.
Monterey       Road     Downtown       Streetscape
Improvements. For the segment of Monterey
Road through the Downtown, the City should
carry out a streetscape design alternatives
planning process, and consider both the four-lane
and two-lane configurations as studied in the
2011 Callandar Study and the 2014/15 Complete
Streets Trial, prior to any City Council decision
about number of lanes and allocation of the right-
of-way to purposes such as vehicular lanes,
bicycle lanes, widened sidewalks, on-street
parking, median, bus turnouts and shelters,
landscaping, and gateway entrances.
Hale Avenue/Santa Teresa Boulevard Corridor
Completion. Construct the missing segments and
improve the Hale/Santa Teresa Corridor to
provide a single continuous route. New segments
and improvements within Morgan Hill are
planned as a two-lane multi-modal arterial, with a
separated Class 1 bikeway and pedestrian path in
a linear parkway. The two-lane multi-modal
segments would have sufficient right-of-way to
enable a future four-lane configuration, if needed.
The City will work the County of Santa Clara to
seek funding to improve the existing segments
          within the County to better           accommodate
          bicyclists and pedestrians.
          Arterial Corridors West of Highway 101.
          Establish and maintain the right-of-way for three
          continuous arterial corridors west of Highway
          101, generally utilizing the existing and planned
          alignments for Santa Teresa/Hale Corridor,
          Monterey Road, and Butterfield Boulevard
          Corridor, with planned connections to Madrone
          Parkway and Watsonville Road. These arterials
          will reflect different numbers of lanes and
          improvement standards, but each will provide
          continuous, linked arterial transportation routes.
          Hale      Avenue/Santa         Teresa    Boulevard
          Improvements. Obtain sufficient right-of-way for
          Hale/Santa Teresa Boulevard to accommodate on-
          street bike lanes, off-street sidewalks and Class 1
          Bikeway within a linear park, and medians with
          turn pockets for new segments, as a multi-modal
          two-lane arterial. Pursue funding to improve the
          unincorporated and existing portions of
          Hale/Santa Teresa with appropriate pedestrian
          and bicycle improvements as feasible.
GOAL TR-5 Adequate off-street parking.
          Adequate Parking Supply. Ensure that all
          developments provide adequate and convenient
          parking (also see Policy CD-13f). In the
          Downtown, implement the Parking Resources
          Supply and Management Strategy in order to
          monitor and ensure provision of a public parking
          supply adequate to serve non-residential uses,
          with no on-site requirement for non-residential
          development. Continue           to identify and
          implement policies and pricing strategies that
          encourage alternatives to single-occupant vehicle
          use.
          Linkage of Off-Street Parking Facilities. Design
          development projects with due consideration to
          linking off-street parking facilities where
          applicable.
          Parking Lot Connection. Require cross-
          connection of parking lots, where feasible and
          practical, at the time of design review for all
          commercial and industrial developments.
          Long-Term On-Street Parking Prohibition.
          Prohibit long-term on-street parking in the
          industrial and commercial areas of the city.
          Review of Parking Standards. Periodically
          review parking standards to ensure their
          adequacy.
          Review of Parking Standards. Review the
          existing parking standards and amend where
          needed to provide for adequate on- and off-street
          parking throughout the city.
          Shared Parking. Amend the City’s parking
          requirements to allow shared parking among
          multiple users.
GOAL TR-6 A safe and efficient transit system that reduces
          congestion by providing viable non-automotive
          modes of transportation.

Street Design for Improved Bus Service.
Coordinate with VTA to provide improved local
bus service and to encourage people to ride the
bus for local as well as longer trips (e.g., to Gilroy
and San Jose). The design of key arterial streets
such as Hale/Santa Teresa, the Butterfield
Corridor and Monterey Road should consider
incorporating bus curb lanes or duckouts,
enhanced stop amenities, transit signal priority,
and supporting pedestrian improvements.
Commuter Bus Service. Work with VTA to
increase commuter bus service to and from
Morgan Hill, including to access mass transit.
Transfer Center. Investigate the creation of an
integrated transit transfer center that would
provide convenient transfer between bus, auto,
bicycle, and rail.
Monterey Road Design for Commuter Bus
Service. Make existing and future commuter bus
service convenient and accessible. Coordinate
with the Monterey Road streetscape planning
process to plan for and implement optimal
locations for bus stops, shelters, and turnouts in
and near the Downtown area.
Local Shuttle Service. Promote improved local
transit service, including shuttle service through
the downtown, major shopping, and employment
centers.
Employer Support for Transit. Support County-
wide programs to encourage employers to
promote use of mass transportation.
Advanced Technologies. Use advanced technolo-
gies to enhance and improve transit safety and
mobility.
Transit for Changing Needs. Expand public
transit as needed to meet the changing needs of
the area for local and regional access, including
methods such as bus, dial-a-ride, paratransit, and
rail, where appropriate, for all users. (South
County Joint Area Plan 11.04)
Funding Partnerships. Encourage opportunities
for funding partnerships between the City,
private enterprises, developers, and VTA to
provide      enhanced       transit   services   or
infrastructure.
Transit     for      Senior     Citizens.    Expand
transportation opportunities for senior citizens by
exploring an active mobility management
program for older adults in Morgan Hill and
supporting a variety of methods, such as by
funding discounts for taxi fares, coordinating
transit systems to be shared by multiple senior
housing developments, supporting a volunteer
program to expand supply of drivers, and
creating a database of drivers and other transit
options. Encourage regional providers of senior
transportation services to develop specific plans
for providing service to Morgan Hill residents.
Transit for a Healthy and Active Community.
Expand transportation opportunities to support
community health by encouraging transit
agencies to locate stops that provide access to
health care facilities, community amenities, parks,
multi-use trails, and open spaces.
          Bus Shelters from Private Development. Require
          developers to install bus shelters compatible with
          City architectural standards, where appropriate.
          Caltrain. Encourage and support passenger rail
          service retention and expansion in Morgan Hill,
          including in the reverse commute direction and
          promote electrification of Caltrain from south of
          the Tamien station in San Jose through Morgan
          Hill to Gilroy.
          Access to Light Rail Stations. Work with VTA
          toward providing express and commuter bus
          service to connect Morgan Hill with light rail
          stations.
          Transit Information Center. Work with the Santa
          Clara County Valley Transportation Authority
          (VTA) to develop a transit information center
          where bus schedules are shown and transfer
          information is given.
          Enclosed Bus Shelters. Work with the VTA to
          install enclosed bus shelters at major bus stops.
GOAL TR-7 Well-planned High-Speed Rail service that
          minimizes negative local impacts.
          Planning for High-Speed Rail. Remain actively
          engaged in planning efforts for High-Speed Rail
          service to minimize local impacts and ensure that
          design is consistent with local plans and policies.
          Neighborhood Impacts. When examining
          potential impacts of High Speed Rail alternatives
          and proposals, attention shall be given to all
          Morgan Hill neighborhoods and mitigation
          measures shall be proportionate to identified
          impacts.
          Rail Crossings. The City recognizes that rail
          crossings are essential to provide connections
          from neighborhoods to destinations such as
          schools, parks, and services. The convenience of
          rail crossings shall be balanced with the need to
          minimize safety and circulation impacts.
          Preferred Alignment. The City supports the
          alignment of High-Speed Rail along Highway 101
          within the City of Morgan Hill. Placement of the
          High-Speed Rail Alignment through the
          Downtown would be contrary to the City’s vision
          and goals for its Downtown as expressed in the
          General Plan and the Downtown Specific Plan.
          High-Speed Rail Design Guidelines. Prepare
          design guidelines for the implementation of High-
          Speed Rail within Morgan Hill. Seek funding for
          this work from the High-Speed Rail Authority.
GOAL TR-8 A useable and comprehensive bikeway system
          that safely connects neighborhoods with
          workplaces and community destinations.
          Bikeways for All Abilities. The bikeways system
          shall recognize and reflect the needs and abilities
          of cyclists with a diverse range of age and
          experience, from children learning to ride bicycles
          to experienced adult commute cyclists.
          Bicycle Commuting. Encourage increased use of
          bicycles for adults commuting to work and for
          students traveling to school through a safe and
          efficient bikeways system, enhanced bicycle
          parking facilities, and bicycle safety and
          promotion programs, including showers for
          bicycle commuters at places of employment.

Alternative Routes. Establish alternative routes,
with direct routes on busy streets for experienced
cyclists, and less direct routes on bicycle paths
and quieter streets for less experienced and
recreational cyclists.
Coordinated Bicycle Planning. Coordinate
development of the bikeways system with the
Santa Clara Countywide Trails Master Plan, the
Santa Clara Countywide Bicycle Plan, the South
County Joint Area Plan, the Santa Clara County
Bicycle Technical Guidelines, and the California
Department of Transportation Highway Design
Manual.
Bicycle Facility Standards. Where feasible,
incorporate the Bicycle Technical Guidelines
prepared by the Valley Transportation Authority
into City standards for bicycle facility planning
and design, including intersection striping,
signalization, and railroad crossings.
Multi-Use Trail Accessibility. All multi-use
bicycle/pedestrian trails shall comply with State
and federal accessibility codes and standards,
such as those established by the Americans with
Disability Act (ADA) and California Access Code
(Title 24, California Code of Regulation).
Bikeways and Private Roads. Private roads shall
be designated as part of the bikeways plan only if
there is an agreement between the City and the
appropriate owner for such a designation.
Priorities for Bikeways Implementation. Where
feasible, implement the bikeways system
concurrent with adjacent development. Establish
priorities for bikeway implementation based on
improving safety and enhancing both commute
and recreational cycling. These priorities shall be
considered in directing resources and efforts to
obtain funding for implementation. Priorities
shall be regularly reviewed and updated as
implementation proceeds. Current priorities for
implementation of the bikeways plan include the
following:
    Live Oak High School Access
    Little Llagas Creek Trail
    Santa Teresa and Monterey           Highway
     Corridor Improvements
    East West Connection to Coyote Creek Trail
Emergency Services Review for Bikeways.
Incorporate emergency services (fire and police)
into the review process for new bikeways.
Safe Routes to Schools. Define safe pedestrian
and bicycle routes to all new schools (public and
private) during the planning and design process
so that these routes can be developed and in place
prior to opening the school.
Multi-Jurisdictional Bikeway Alignments. For
multi-jurisdictional      alignments,      develop
partnerships with Santa Clara County to plan,
finance, implement, and maintain the bikeways
system.
Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking and other
supportive facilities shall be provided at all
schools, parks, recreation facilities, commercial
centers, civic buildings (including the library),
transit centers, and work places based on the
recommendations and standards in the Bikeways
Master Plan.

Cul-de-Sac Connectivity. Where safety permits,
improve connectivity by requiring pedestrian and
bicycle public access from a cul-de-sac to an
adjacent public amenity, such as a park or school,
or from a cul-de-sac to an adjacent street.
Bikeways Master Plan. Implement and maintain
the City’s bikeways system based on standards
established in the Bikeways Master Plan.
Bicycle Outreach. Continue to encourage bicycle
safety and promotion programs, in partnership
with other agencies and organizations.
Bicycle Paths and Flood Control. Promote
extension of bicycle paths in conjunction with
flood control efforts.
Bicycle Outreach Program. Develop a bicycle
outreach program to promote community-wide
"bikeability" through safety programs, bicycle
tune-up clinics/training, partnerships with bicycle
advocacy groups and cycling clubs, and/or local
bicycle maps (e.g., "Bike Downtown").
Bikeways Master Plan Funding. Actively pursue
a variety of funding sources for implementation
of the Bikeways Master Plan, including develop-
ment impact fees, incorporating improvements
into larger transportation projects, requiring
improvements concurrent with development,
grants, and joint projects with other agencies.
Grant applications shall be focused on priority
projects where appropriate.

Bicycle Connections to Schools. Coordinate with
the Morgan Hill Unified School District (MHUSD)
and other schools where appropriate in applying
for “Safe Routes to School” and other school-
related grant programs to improve bicycle
connections to schools.
Development Review for Bicycle Facilities.
Establish a development review checklist for use
by City staff to evaluate development
applications and their consistency with the
Bikeways Master Plan, including bicycle parking
facilities and off-site improvements where
appropriate, such as roadway striping, signage,
and intersection improvements.
Bicycle Way-Finding. Develop a way-finding
system for the City’s bikeways network, including
signage along paths, lanes, and routes indicating
key destination points, and a public bikeways
map suitable for public distribution.
Bikeways Maintenance. Incorporate bikeways
maintenance tasks, such as street sweeping and
lane re-striping, into regularly-scheduled street
maintenance cycles.
Bicycle Safety and Promotion Programs.
Actively pursue bicycle safety and promotion
programs as outlined in the Bikeways Master
Plan, encouraging partnerships with the police
department, MHUSD, bicycle clubs, and other
interested agencies and organizations.

GOAL TR-9 Expanded pedestrian opportunities.
          Private Development Connections. Ensure
          adequate pedestrian access in all developments,
          with special emphasis on pedestrian connections
          in the downtown area, in shopping areas, and
          major work centers, including sidewalks in
          industrial areas in accordance with the Trails and
          Natural Resources Master Plan.
          Walking as an Alternate Mode. Promote walking
          as an alternate transportation mode for its
          contribution to health and the reduction of energy
          consumption and pollution. (South County Joint
          Area Plan 11.03)
          Pedestrian System for Diverse Users. The trails
          and pedestrian system shall recognize and reflect
          the needs and abilities of pedestrians with a
          diverse range of age and ability.
          Coordination      with    Pedestrian    Planning.
          Development of the trails and pedestrian system
          shall be coordinated with the City’s Bikeways
          Master Plan, City standard details, Santa Clara
          Countywide Trails Master Plan, the Santa Clara
          Countywide Bicycle Plan, the South County Joint
          Area Plan, the Santa Clara County Bicycle
          Technical Guidelines, and the California
          Department of Transportation Highway Design
          Manual.
          Trail Guidelines. Trails shall comply with the
          Trail Guidelines included in the Trails and
          Natural Resources Master Plan.

Pedestrian Facility Accessibility. All trails and
pedestrian access shall comply with State and
Federal accessibility codes and standards, such as
those established by the Americans with
Disability Act (ADA) and California Access Code
(Title 24, California Code of Regulation).
Concurrent Implementation. Where feasible,
implement the trails and pedestrian system
concurrent with adjacent developments.
Emergency Services Review for Trails.
Incorporate emergency services (fire and police)
into the review process for new trails.
Multi-Jurisdictional Trail Alignments. For multi-
jurisdictional alignments, develop partnerships
with Santa Clara County to plan, finance,
implement, and maintain the trail system.
Sidewalk Connectivity. Improve sidewalk
connectivity by installing new sidewalks where
they do not exist, consistent with the Trails and
Natural Resources Master Plan.
Trail System Standards. Implement and maintain
the City’s trails system based on standards
established in the Trails and Natural Resources
Master Plan.
Trails and Flood Control. Promote new trails and
extend existing trails in conjunction with flood
control efforts.

Trails and Natural Resources Master Plan
Funding. Actively pursue a variety of funding
sources for implementation of the Trails and
Natural Resources Master Plan, including the
development of impact fees, incorporating
improvements into larger transportation projects,
requiring     improvements      concurrent    with
development, grants, and joint projects with other
agencies. Grant applications shall be focused on
projects that provide the highest use and best
value for the residents of Morgan Hill.
Development Review for Pedestrian Facilities.
Establish a development review checklist for use
by City staff to evaluate development
applications and their consistency with the Trails
and Natural Resources Master Plan, including
staging and parking areas for trail access.
Pedestrian Facilities and Trails Maintenance.
Incorporate pedestrian facilities and trail
maintenance tasks into regularly-scheduled
maintenance cycles.
Partnerships for Pedestrian Safety. Actively
encourage      partnerships with the police
department, MHUSD, County of Santa Clara and
other interested agencies and local organizations
to develop safe pedestrian access and trail routes
throughout the City.
GOAL TR-10 A transportation system that incorporates
           strategies and technologies to manage traffic
           efficiently and reduce automotive vehicle trips.
           Transportation Demand Management. Provide
           informational resources to local business subject
           to SB 1339 and BAAQMD transportation demand
           management program requirements and en-
           courage additional voluntary participation in the
           program.
           TDM Monitoring. For projects that incorporate
           transportation demand management measures,
           require monitoring and submittal of annual
           reports to the Community Development Director
           and annual referrals to the Planning Commission.
           Flexible Work Hours. Encourage employers to
           provide a flexible set of working hours to ease
           traffic congestion.
           Carpooling. Support a Countywide car/vanpool
           matching program.
           Air Quality and Transportation Demand
           Management. Investigate opportunities for
           preparing and implementing Air Quality and
           Transportation Demand Management Plans by
           employers and developers of new residential and
           non-residential developments.
           Park and Ride. Investigate the possibility of
           locating park and ride facilities on the east side of
           Highway 101.
           Employee Use of Alternate Modes. Investigate
           methods of working with employers to encourage
           10 percent of employees to utilize carpools,
           transit, or other systems consistent with
           transportation demand management programs.
           Carpool Parking for Employees. Investigate
           methods of encouraging or requiring employers
           with 10 or more employees to provide parking
           with car and van pool spaces convenient to the
           employee entrance.
           Ride Sharing for Large Employers. Explore
           requiring all businesses with 100 or more
           employees to work with county and regional ride
           sharing associations to coordinate ride sharing
           programs.
           Transportation         Demand        Management
           Technologies. Work with VTA and the State to
           implement Transportation Demand Management
           technologies that can improve the performance,
           reliability, and safety of the transportation
           system, such as signal coordination, centralized
           traffic control, red-light and speed enforcement
           cameras, and real-time travel information.
GOAL TR-11 Coordinated transportation planning efforts
           with local, regional, State and federal agencies.
           Long-Range System. Work with the County,
           VTA, and Caltrans to maintain a long-range
           coordinated regional transportation system, using
           highways, commuter rail systems, High
           Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes on freeways,
           ramp metering, and other strategies.
Sub-Regional System. Work with the County
and other agencies to plan and develop an
effective sub-regional long-range transportation
system to link Morgan Hill with areas to the north
and south without promoting congestion in local
neighborhoods, particularly along Butterfield
Boulevard and Santa Teresa Boulevard.
Congestion on Monterey Road in Downtown
Morgan Hill will be tolerated in order to promote
a pedestrian-friendly character and favor transit-
oriented development.
Freeway Access. Work with the Santa Clara
County Valley Transportation Authority (VTA)
toward relieving congestion in the city by
improving access to the freeway.
Highway 101 Capacity. Work with VTA and
Caltrans to ensure widening of Highway 101 to
eight lanes by 2030 to accommodate expected
traffic volume, and to plan for and implement
appropriate strategies such as ramp metering,
speed harmonization, tolling, using available
transit and carpool lane capacity, High
Occupancy Toll Lanes, or other strategies.
Consider encouraging VTA and Caltrans to plan
for ten lanes as appropriate to accommodate
future traffic volume beyond 2030.
VTA Long-Term Transportation Planning.
Support the VTA Long Term Transportation
Planning efforts and actions.
Regional      Transportation      Plan/Sustainable
Communities Strategy Implementation. In
cooperation with the County, work with the
Association of Bay Area Governments, the
Metropolitan Transportation Commission, VTA,
Caltrans, and the U.S. Department of Transpor-
tation to implement regional transportation plans
and develop Sustainable Communities Strategies.
Transit Management Plan. Work with the VTA to
develop a Transit Management Plan addressing
multiple transportation modes as a means of
reducing vehicle trips during peak traffic hours.
Modeling. Ensure that the City’s transportation
model is kept up to date to reflect development as
it occurs, and schedule Morgan Hill traffic model
updates in conjunction with General Plan
Updates and/or to coincide with or incorporate
VTA model updates. Approximately every
5 years, strive to update the model with updated
land use and circulation network projections, and
to complete a comprehensive Future Improve-
ments Transportation Study to identify whether
amendments to the Circulation Plan are
warranted, and to provide information about the
priority and timing of needed transportation
improvements.
South County Transportation Planning. Improve
coordination and cooperation between the South
County Cities and the County on all South
County transportation planning. (South County
Joint Area Plan 11.07)

Approvals for Private Development. Conduct a
study to identify techniques to accomplish the
following objectives and incorporate the
techniques identified in the study into approvals
for future private development and Capital
Improvement Planning.
 1. Provide traffic calming on City streets as may
     be needed to enhance safety.
 2. Move traffic with destinations outside of
     Morgan Hill to Highway 101 efficiently on
     major and minor arterial streets, minimizing
     impacts on local neighborhood streets.
 3. Implement strategies to encourage regional
     commuter traffic to use Highway 101 for
     access to areas outside of Morgan Hill and to
     avoid using Morgan Hill local neighborhood
     streets for the purpose of commuting between
     the south and the north of Morgan Hill.
 4. Pursue        grants    and    other    funding
     opportunities to install sidewalks, bike lanes,
     and/or bicycle/pedestrian paths or lanes
     where such improvements do not presently
     exist in developed areas and along arterial
     streets, particularly for the Hale/Santa
     Teresa/DeWitt/Sunnyside corridor west of
     Highway 101 and the Murphy/Mission View
     corridor east of Highway 101.
Facilities South of Tennant Avenue and Hill
Road. In cooperation with the County, determine
what traffic facilities are needed south of Tennant
Avenue and the Hill Road area, with
consideration to the location of the City’s Urban
Growth Boundary and regional growth
projections.

Murphy Avenue and Hill Road Extension.
Cooperate with the County in efforts to connect
Murphy Avenue to Mission View Drive and
Burnett Avenue, and Hill Road to Peet Road.
Maximized Roadway and Transportation
Systems. Work with VTA in planning for
maximizing the local road and multi-modal
transportation infrastructure to support land uses
in a manner consistent with smart growth and
Sustainable Communities principles; completing
the planned vehicular roadway network while
also supporting policies and actions that enhance
access to and use of alternate modes of travel.

                                                                     8
NATURAL RESOURCES
AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER PURPOSE
The Natural Resources and Environment Element advocates
preserving open space, agricultural uses, hillsides, riparian areas,
wildlife habitat, and other natural features. Policies seek to
establish a greenbelt around the City, preserve El Toro, conserve
resources and protect the City’s cultural heritage, all to help
Morgan Hill retain its rural atmosphere as it continues to grow. A
number of policies in this element derive from the South County
Joint Area Plan, which addresses a variety of open space,
conservation, and regional planning concerns unique to the area
around Morgan Hill and Gilroy. This Element provides some brief
background information and related goals, policies, and actions
on the following topics:
    Open Space, Hillsides, and Scenic Features
    Agricultural Resources
    Biological Resources
    Water Quality and Conservation
    Air Quality
    Climate Change
    Energy Conservation
OPEN SPACE, HILLSIDES, AND SCENIC FEATURES
O PEN S PACE
The abundance of open space within and around Morgan Hill is a
key contributor to quality of life for City residents and visitors.
Preserving open space, including in conjunction with new
development, is essential to maintaining the uniqueness and
quality of life of Morgan Hill.
                                                                       NRE-1

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      H ILLSIDES AND S CENIC R ESOURCES
                                                      The slopes that flank Morgan Hill to the east and west play a
                                                      major role in shaping the character of the City. They provide a
                                                      scenic backdrop for the community and access to trails and open
                                                      spaces. Maintaining views of the hillsides from public rights of
                                                      way, as well as preserving their important resources, are City
                                                      priorities.
                                                      G REENBELTS
                                                      The Natural Resources and Environment Element identifies a
                                                      Greenbelt, which is intended to physically define the City and
                                                      separate it from San Jose and San Martin. The Greenbelt includes
                                                      both public open space and private properties as shown on Figure
                                                      NRE-1. Identification of areas as “Greenbelt” does not change the
                                                      development potential or restrictions imposed under Santa Clara
                                                      County development policies and regulations. Rather, it indicates
                                                      that the City will work with the County to minimize off-site visual
                                                      impacts of new development. In addition, the Greenbelt is
                                                      intended to identify areas where a targeted program of acquisition
                                                      of open space easements or fee title to land may occur.
                                                      Areas outside of the Urban Growth Boundary that have been
                                                      substantially subdivided into parcels smaller than 10 acres
                                                      generally are not included in the identified Greenbelt areas. Many
                                                      of the parcels in these areas are developed or are eligible for
                                                      construction of single-family homes. The existing and potential
                                                      density of development in these areas minimizes their value as
                                                      Greenbelt areas. However, the rural character of these areas does
                                                      help to define and distinguish the urbanized City area from other
                                                      urban and rural county areas.
                                                      AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES
                                                      Agriculture has been important to the City throughout its history
                                                      as an industry and employment generator, in addition to
                                                      contributing to the City’s rural character. The City’s economy once
                                                      depended on the cultivation of stone fruits, pears, apples, and
                                                      nuts. Although the local economy diversified, agriculture is still
NRE-2

                               M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                        N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-1 Greenbelts
                                                                           NRE-3
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      an important asset to the region, as evident by the surrounding
                                                      nurseries, orchards, and vineyards, which boost the region’s
                                                      economy and the local tourism industry.
                                                      Supporting agriculture requires finding innovative ways to help
                                                      farming and ranching operations become and remain competitive
                                                      in an increasingly global economic environment. Agricultural
                                                      development policies intend to retain the historic agricultural
                                                      character of lands surrounding Morgan Hill, and to minimize
                                                      conflicts between urban development and agricultural uses.
                                                      Agricultural land can be found within the Morgan Hill City limit
                                                      and within the Sphere of Influence (SOI). The Morgan Hill area
                                                      includes prime farmland, farmland of statewide importance,
                                                      farmland of local importance, unique farmland, and grazing land,
                                                      as classified by the State Department of Conservation. As shown
                                                      in Figure NRE-2, most of the prime farmland is located on the
                                                      eastern side of the City, east of Highway 101. However, the
                                                      Department of Conservation’s data reflect conditions as of 2010.
                                                      Since the time the State published the data, some limited pieces of
                                                      land may have been developed or may now be under
                                                      development review. Nevertheless, the data provide a broad
                                                      picture of the agricultural resources within Morgan Hill today.
                                                      The California Land Conservation Act of 1965, also known as the
                                                      Williamson Act, provides tax relief for landowners who preserve
                                                      their agricultural and open space property under Williamson Act
                                                      contracts. Under contract, the tax on a Williamson Act property is
                                                      assessed at a rate consistent with its actual use, rather than the
                                                      potential value. These contracts run for 10 years, are automatically
                                                      renewable on an annual basis, and may be terminated by the
                                                      initiative of either the property owner or the legislative body.
                                                      There are a number of parcels under Williamson Act contracts in
                                                      and around Morgan Hill.
NRE-4

                                       M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-2 Important Farmland
                                                                                   NRE-5
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
                                                      N ATURAL C OMMUNITIES
                                                      A natural community refers to a group of species that occurs in
                                                      the same habitat or area. Six natural communities and two non-
                                                      natural communities are present in the Morgan Hill City limits
                                                      and SOI (Figure NRE-3). The six natural communities include:
                                                           oak woodland (3,221 acres within the SOI),
                                                           grassland (2,518 acres within the SOI) chaparral and coastal
                                                            scrub (546 acres within the SOI),
                                                           riparian forest and scrub (236 acres within the SOI),
                                                           open water (181 acres within the SOI), and
                                                           wetland (13 acres within the SOI).
                                                      The two non-natural land cover types consist of developed land
                                                      (9,373 acres) and agricultural lands (3,486 acres).
                                                      S ENSITIVE N ATURAL C OMMUNITIES
                                                      The California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) has
                                                      identified several native plant communities that are rare and/or
                                                      diminishing within California. Although some of these
                                                      communities represent important biological resources and may be
                                                      unique to California, they have no legal protective status.
                                                      Nevertheless, substantial losses of some of these plant
                                                      communities may be considered “significant” under the California
                                                      Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Plant communities that
                                                      CDFW considers sensitive in the Morgan Hill City limits and SOI
                                                      (see Figure NRE- 4) include serpentine bunchgrass grassland,
                                                      valley oak woodland, and blue oak woodland. Areas of well-
                                                      developed riparian woodland and scrub, such as central
                                                      California sycamore alluvial woodland, as well as other wetlands,
                                                      are also considered sensitive because they are valuable to plant
                                                      and wildlife diversity and are diminishing.
NRE-6

                                        M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                 N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-3 Natural Communities
                                                                                    NRE-7
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-4          Fish Habitat
NRE-8
                                                                       M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
R IPARIAN A REAS AND A QUATIC H ABITAT
Five creeks traverse Morgan Hill: Coyote and Fisher Creeks drain
north to the San Francisco Bay, and Edmunson, Tennant and West
Little Llagas Creeks flow into Monterey Bay. The City creeks and
drainages can complement existing and new development by
providing recreational access, pedestrian and bicycle connections,
and places where people can go to appreciate the natural
environment. Efforts to retain and rehabilitate water courses and
adjacent banks will benefit the entire community.
A variety of aquatic species have the potential to occur within
Morgan Hill and the SOI. The creeks in Morgan Hill support
riverine habitats for fish and amphibian species. Five habitat types
are present within Morgan Hill as shown on Figure NRE-5:
     Cold Steelhead Habitat: This habitat is primarily located
      downstream of reservoirs. High stream flows (due to
      reservoir releases), sufficient sun, and high water clarity
      provide for suitable steelhead habitat conditions.
     Warm Potential Trout/Steelhead Habitat: This habitat is
      located further downstream of reservoirs and has higher
      water temperatures and/or lower stream flows than the cold
      steelhead habitat. Its high water temperatures increase
      steelhead food demands, but its low stream flows and poor
      turbidity characteristics often do not produce enough insects
      to feed the fish. Increasing stream flows or reducing water
      temperatures can make the habitat more suitable for
      steelhead. Warm-water fish often dominate in this habitat
      type.
     Warm Native Habitat: This habitat is suitable for native
      warm-water fish, such as Sacramento sucker, hitch or
      California roach, Sacramento pikeminnow, threespine
      stickleback, and prickly sculpin.
     Mixed Native and Introduced Habitat: This habitat has
      warm water temperatures, which provide suitable habitat
      conditions for native and introduced species, such as tule
      perch (Hysterocarpus traski).
                                                                                                                   NRE-9

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-5          Known Occurrences of Special Status Species
NRE-10
                                                                     M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                              N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
     Fish-Scarce Habitat: This habitat is mostly dry during
      summer and fall, but it can provide migration routes for
      steelhead and other fish or a reproductive habitat for
      amphibians.
P LANTS AND W ILDLIFE
Morgan Hill is home to federally and State listed special-status
species. The City is committed to protecting significant native
flora and fauna. Ensuring that development does not compromise
existing habitat will be a part of future land use decisions.
In addition to plant and animal species, a special-status habitat,
serpentine bunchgrass, has been identified in Morgan Hill. Figure
NRE- 6 illustrates the locations of known occurrences of special-
status species.
H ABITAT C ONSERVATION P LAN
In October 2012, the City of Morgan Hill adopted the Santa Clara
Valley Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), which is a regional
partnership between six Local Partners (the County of Santa
Clara, Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority, Santa Clara
Valley Water District, and the Cities of San Jose, Gilroy, and
Morgan Hill) and two Wildlife Agencies (the CDFW and the
USFWS), in order to protect special-status species. The HCP
provides a framework for promoting the protection and recovery
of natural resources, including endangered species, as well as
aims to streamline the permitting process for planned
development, infrastructure, and maintenance activities under the
jurisdictions of the County of Santa Clara (County), the Santa
Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD), the Santa Clara Valley
Transportation Authority (VTA) and the Cities of Gilroy, Morgan
Hill, and San José.
                                                                                                                NRE-11

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-6          Sensitive Natural Communities
NRE-12
                                                                    M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
WATER QUALITY AND CONSERVATION
R EGIONAL W ATERSHEDS
A watershed refers to the entire area that drains to a single
waterway, such as a stream, lake, aquifer, or the ocean. The
Morgan Hill City limits and SOI lie in two regional watersheds:
the Coyote Creek and Uvas-Llagas Watersheds. As illustrated in
Figure NRE-7, most of the City is located within the Uvas-Llagas
Watershed, part of the Pajaro River Watershed, which drains
southward towards Monterey Bay. The Coyote Creek Watershed,
the largest watershed in Santa Clara County, covers the northern
portions of the City. Coyote Creek originates in the Diablo Range
and flows to Anderson Reservoir and then northward towards
South San Francisco Bay through the flat Santa Clara Valley.
There are four reservoirs in the vicinity of Morgan Hill (Figure
NRE- 8). Two of them are part of the Coyote Creek Watershed:
Anderson Reservoir, located adjacent to the City’s eastern
boundary, and Coyote Reservoir, located 3 miles south of
Anderson Reservoir. Chesbro and Uvas Reservoirs are located on
the west side of the City within the Uvas-Llagas Watershed. The
southern portion of Chesbro Reservoir lies within the SOI.
L OCAL C REEKS AND D RAINAGE C HANNELS
As shown in Figure NRE- 7, several creeks traverse Morgan Hill.
Coyote and Fisher Creeks flow north to the San Francisco Bay.
Edmundson, Tennant, and West Little Llagas Creeks drain south
into Monterey Bay. While creeks in the hills remain generally
natural and provide riparian habitats, most creeks in developed
areas have been straightened and channelized to prevent flooding.
Engineered drainage channels running through the City include
Butterfield and Madrone Channels and some parts of West Little
Llagas Creek and Tennant Creek.
                                                                                                               NRE-13

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-7          Groundwater Basins
NRE-14
                               M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                        N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Figure NRE-8 Watersheds
                                                                          NRE-15
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      G ROUNDWATER
                                                      Morgan Hill lies within two groundwater subbasins: the Santa
                                                      Clara Subbasin and the Llagas Subbasin, as shown in Figure
                                                      NRE-7.
                                                      The City of Morgan Hill pumps groundwater from the Coyote
                                                      and Llagas Subbasins for its water supply. The Santa Clara Valley
                                                      Water District (SCVWD), of which the City of Morgan Hill is a
                                                      member agency, manages all groundwater basins in Santa Clara
                                                      County and utilizes a Groundwater Recharge Program to
                                                      maintain groundwater levels. According to Morgan Hill’s 2010
                                                      Urban Water Management Plan, the groundwater basins are not
                                                      in condition of overdraft, and groundwater levels are not expected
                                                      to drop.
                                                      AIR QUALITY
                                                      Morgan Hill is located within the San Francisco Air Basin, which
                                                      is managed by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District
                                                      (BAAQMD). The Air Basin comprises all of Alameda, Contra
                                                      Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, and Santa Clara
                                                      counties; the southern portion of Sonoma County; and the
                                                      southwestern portion of Solano County. Air quality in this area is
                                                      determined by such natural factors as topography, meteorology,
                                                      and climate, in addition to the presence of existing air pollution
                                                      sources and ambient conditions.
                                                      Air pollutants of concern in Morgan Hill include ozone (O3),
                                                      carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxide (NO2), and particulate
                                                      matter (PM). These pollutants originate from sources both within
                                                      and outside of Morgan Hill. Natural gas use for energy, heating
                                                      and cooking, vehicle trips, and area sources such as landscaping
                                                      equipment and consumer cleaning products are the primary
                                                      sources of air pollutants in Morgan Hill.
                                                      Sensitive receptors include those segments of the population that
                                                      are most susceptible to poor air quality, such as children, elderly
                                                      people, and sick people, as well as sensitive land uses, such as
                                                      schools, hospitals, parks, and residential communities. Air quality
NRE-16

                                                                       M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
problems intensify when sources of air pollutants and sensitive
receptors are located near one another. Since residential areas are
located throughout the city, as are schools, parks, and medical
facilities, the consideration of sensitive receptors is an important
aspect of the General Plan.
CLIMATE CHANGE
The earth’s atmosphere is composed of naturally occurring and
human-caused greenhouse gases (GHGs) that trap heat in the
atmosphere and affect the Earth’s temperature. This phenomenon,
known as the greenhouse effect, is responsible for maintaining a
climate suitable for human life. Human activities, including
burning fossil fuels and removing trees, have contributed to an
excessive release of carbon in the form of carbon dioxide into the
earth’s atmosphere. Consequently, the amounts of GHGs in the
atmosphere have increased, intensifying the natural greenhouse
effect. This intensified greenhouse effect has contributed to global
warming, which is an increased rate of warming of the earth’s
surface temperature. Warming of the earth’s lower atmosphere
induces large-scale changes in ocean circulation patterns,
precipitation patterns, global ice cover, biological distributions,
and other large-scale changes to the ecosystem.
In the State’s efforts to mitigate the effects of climate change, the
Governor of California signed Assembly Bill (AB) 32 in 2006,
codified under the Global Warming Solutions Act, into legislation.
The Act requires that California cap its GHG emissions at 1990
levels by 2020. This legislation requires the California Air
Resource Board (CARB) to establish a program for statewide GHG
emissions reporting, as well as monitoring and enforcement of
that program. CARB is also required to adopt rules and
regulations to achieve the maximum technologically feasible and
cost-effective GHG emission reductions.
Senate Bill (SB) 375 also responds to AB 32, and calls for the
automobile and light truck industry to produce reduced-emission
vehicles and requires metropolitan planning organizations
(MPOs) to prepare sustainable communities strategies, which will
                                                                                                                  NRE-17

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      demonstrate how a region will meet CARB’s GHG reduction
                                                      targets by reducing the amount of vehicle miles traveled.
                                                      ENERGY CONSERVATION
                                                      Conserving resources often depends on modifying established
                                                      behavior patterns. The plan intends to encourage residents and
                                                      businesses to conserve energy by supporting programs that are
                                                      easy to participate in.
                                                      GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
                                                      O PEN S PACE , H ILLSIDES , AND S CENIC F EATURES
                                                      GOAL NRE-1 Preservation of open space areas and natural
                                                                        features.
                                                      Policy NRE-1.1    Natural Features. Preserve outstanding natural
                                                                        features, such as the skyline of a prominent hill
                                                                        and rock outcroppings.
                                                      Policy NRE-1.2    Large Open Space Areas. Work with the County,
                                                                        the Open Space Authority, appropriate conserv-
                                                                        ancy organizations and land trusts, and property
                                                                        owners to preserve large open space areas, such
                                                                        as agricultural lands and outdoor recreation
                                                                        areas, to conserve natural resources and retain the
                                                                        City's unique identity.
                                                      Policy NRE-1.3    Designated Open Space. Maintain land
                                                                        designated as “Open Space” on the Morgan Hill
                                                                        General Plan Land Use Map (Figure CNF-3).
                                                      Policy NRE-1.4    South County Open Space. Preserve and
                                                                        maintain the wide variety of open spaces in the
                                                                        South County; including greenbelt areas, parks,
                                                                        and agricultural uses. (South County Joint Area
                                                                        Plan 16.00)
NRE-18

                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Policy NRE-1.5 Coordinated Action. Continue to coordinate with
               Gilroy and Santa Clara County to implement
               South County open space goals and objectives
               and participate in the development of regional
               open space preservation programs. (South
               County Joint Area Plan 16.19 & 16.20)
Policy NRE-1.6 Open Space Preservation Tools. Use a variety of
               open space preservation tools to protect open
               space, including public acquisition, land use
               regulation, urban development policy, economic
               incentives to landowners, open space easements,
               transfer of development rights, planned cluster
               development, assessment districts, and dedication
               of additional lands upon development. (South
               County Joint Area Plan 16.17)
Policy NRE-1.7 Priority Areas for Preservation. The South
               County includes a variety of open space areas,
               including the valley floor, stream corridors, lands
               around reservoirs, foothills, inter-mountain
               valleys, and mountain areas beyond the foothills.
               Of these geographic areas, stream corridors, lands
               around the reservoirs, lands which provide
               greenbelts, and significant hillside features should
               receive highest priority for preservation as open
               space and future regional park location. (South
               County Joint Area Plan 16.01 & 16.02)
Policy NRE-1.8 County Parks and Open Space Programs.
               Support County programs to:
                a) acquire and develop regional parks in the
                South County, providing just compensation for
                the taking of private lands;
                b) protect open space resources by prohibiting
                the introduction of uses incompatible with open
                space resource preservation, and preserve open
                space through planning, regulation, acquisition
                and/or development rights transfer programs;
                                                                                                                 NRE-19
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                                       c) plan and regulate land use to avoid hazardous
                                                                       areas and protect critical natural resources; and
                                                                       d) continue to provide property tax relief via the
                                                                       Williamson Act to land owners who agree to
                                                                       maintain their lands in open space uses. (South
                                                                       County Joint Area Plan 16.21)
                                                      Policy NRE-1.9  Poppy Jasper. Preserve Poppy Jasper as a natural
                                                                      resource unique to Morgan Hill.
                                                      Policy NRE-1.10 Wetland Delineation and Mitigation. Require
                                                                      wetland delineation and mitigation as part of the
                                                                      environmental review of future development.
                                                      Policy NRE-1.11 Wetlands Enhancement. Encourage enhancement
                                                                      of sensitive wetlands as part of future
                                                                      development.
                                                      Action NRE-1.A  Identification of Lands to Preserve. Identify
                                                                      appropriate lands to preserve as open space.
                                                      Action NRE-1.B  Open Space Acquisition and Maintenance.
                                                                      Formulate a program for open space acquisition
                                                                      and maintenance that could involve a variety of
                                                                      funding sources and stewardship agencies.
                                                      Action NRE-1.C  Orderly Development. Retain important open
                                                                      space lands through planning for orderly, staged
                                                                      urban development. (South County Joint Area
                                                                      Plan 16.20)
                                                      Action NRE-1.D  Prohibition of Poppy Jasper Mining. Work
                                                                      cooperatively with the County to ensure that
                                                                      County regulations prohibit the mining of Poppy
                                                                      Jasper.
NRE-20
                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
GOAL NRE-2 Preservation of hillside areas as open space and
               scenic features.
Policy NRE-2.1 Hillside and Ridgeline Views. Protect views of
               hillsides, ridgelines, and prominent natural
               features surrounding the City. These features help
               define the City’s historic rural character, sense of
               place, image and identity.
Policy NRE-2.2 El Toro Mountain as Landmark Feature. Retain
               the City's unique identity by preserving its
               landmark natural feature, El Toro Mountain.
Policy NRE-2.3 Scenic Hillside Preservation. Preserve scenic
               hillsides around the City in an undeveloped state,
               wherever feasible. Provide for retention of hillside
               areas as open space through the dedication and/or
               purchase of scenic easements and/or open space
               easements, transfer of development rights and
               other appropriate measures.
Policy NRE-2.4 Building Distance below Ridgelines. Limit all
               building pads located within the hillside areas to
               an elevation at or below the 80-foot vertical drop
               from the ridgeline.
Action NRE-2.A Rural Hillsides. Limit the hillside/mountain areas
               to the east and west to low-intensity rural uses
               compatible with open space in order to maintain
               their integrity as the South County's major scenic
               and natural resources. (South County Joint Area
               Plan 16.08)
Action NRE-2.B El Toro Mountain Preservation. Preserve El Toro
               Mountain in open space above the 500-foot
               contour line on all sides, with the exception of the
               Llagas and Paradise Valleys (where all land above
               the 600-foot contour elevation should be
               preserved).
                                                                                                                 NRE-21

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Action NRE-2.C  Purchase of Easements. Purchase lands and/or
                                                                      open space easements on El Toro Mountain
                                                                      through funds provided by a general bond
                                                                      election and/or grants from State, federal, and
                                                                      private sources.
                                                      Action NRE-2.D  El Toro Mountain and Santa Clara County
                                                                      Parks. Work with Santa Clara County Parks and
                                                                      Recreation Department and/or the Open Space
                                                                      Authority of Santa Clara Valley (OSA) to
                                                                      incorporate a portion of El Toro Mountain into
                                                                      the County park system or into the OSA managed
                                                                      system of open space.
                                                      Action NRE-2.E  Hillside Ordinance. All hillside areas with an
                                                                      average slope of 10 percent or greater shall be
                                                                      regulated by the Hillside Ordinance.
                                                      G REENBELTS
                                                      GOAL NRE-3 A stable, long-term City boundary reinforced by
                                                                      a greenbelt
                                                      P OLICIES R EGARDING C REATION OF THE G REENBELT
                                                      Policy NRE-3.1  Greenbelt as a Community Separator. Maintain a
                                                                      greenbelt to separate the northern and southern
                                                                      boundaries of the City from surrounding rural
                                                                      lands and the urbanized areas of San Jose and San
                                                                      Martin.
                                                      Policy NRE-3.2  San Jose Coyote Valley Greenbelt. Work with
                                                                      the City of San Jose and Santa Clara County to
                                                                      ensure that the San Jose Coyote Valley Greenbelt,
                                                                      which includes the area south of Palm Avenue
                                                                      and north of the Morgan Hill City limits and is
                                                                      located within the San Jose Sphere of Influence,
                                                                      shall continue to provide the non-urban buffer for
                                                                      the north side of Morgan Hill.
NRE-22
                                                                       M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Policy NRE-3.3  Greenbelt Easements. Acquire easements on
                properties using an approach that would
                maintain     some      appropriate      development
                potential, maximize the use of available funds for
                greenbelt and open space protection, and
                minimize land management and maintenance
                costs.
Policy NRE-3.4  Land in Fee Title for Greenbelts. Acquire land in
                fee title when the City’s objectives include
                allowing public access to the site for recreational
                or related activities.
Policy NRE-3.5  “Willing Seller” Greenbelt Acquisition. Acquire
                properties and easements on a “willing seller”
                basis.
P OLICIES R EGARDING U SES WITHIN THE G REENBELT
Policy NRE-3.6  No      Commercial/Industrial       Uses      within
                Greenbelts. Support County policies prohibiting
                commercial and industrial uses (excluding
                agricultural industry) in the unincorporated and
                greenbelt areas surrounding the City.
Policy NRE-3.7  Appropriate Greenbelt Land Uses. Encourage
                land uses appropriate within a greenbelt, which
                might include: a) low-density residential
                development on lots 10 acres or more in size; b)
                public parks and recreational areas; c) privately
                operated recreation areas (e.g., golf courses and
                riding stables); and, d) agriculture. (South County
                Joint Area Plan 16.16)
                                                                                                                  NRE-23

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-3.8 Appropriate Greenbelt Land Uses. Require
                                                                     appropriate uses within Greenbelt areas such as
                                                                     parks and other designated open spaces,
                                                                     scenic/open space easements, golf courses, low
                                                                     intensity public facilities involving minimal
                                                                     permanent improvements and agricultural
                                                                     activities are appropriate uses. Existing residential
                                                                     may remain and new residential uses should be
                                                                     located and designed to have minimal visual and
                                                                     other environmental impacts.
                                                      Policy NRE-3.9 Greenbelt Areas on Private Land. Greenbelt
                                                                     areas which are privately owned are not intended
                                                                     for public recreational use.
                                                      A CTIONS R EGARDING C REATION OF THE G REENBELT
                                                      Action NRE-3.A Tools to Create a Greenbelt. Use a variety of
                                                                     tools to create a greenbelt, including public
                                                                     acquisition, land use regulation, urban develop-
                                                                     ment policy, economic incentives to landowners,
                                                                     open space easements, transfer of development
                                                                     rights, planned cluster development, assessment
                                                                     districts, and dedication of additional lands upon
                                                                     development.
                                                      Action NRE-3.B Greenbelt Acquisition Program. Pursue a
                                                                     targeted program for acquisition of Greenbelt
                                                                     land in fee title or conservation easements.
                                                                     Prioritize undeveloped properties that are most
                                                                     threatened with development which, if acquired,
                                                                     would provide significant public benefit.
                                                      Action NRE-3.C Greenbelt Monitoring Program. Develop a
                                                                     comprehensive program for monitoring land uses
                                                                     and acquiring and maintaining certain Greenbelt
                                                                     areas. Components of the program should include
                                                                     staffing and/or contract resources, identification
                                                                     of and securing funding for acquisition of
NRE-24
                                                                     M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                              N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
               easements and fee title to         property,    and
               administration of the program.
Action NRE-3.D Regional Approach to Form a Greenbelt. Work
               with San Jose and Santa Clara County to establish
               and preserve a defined, permanent greenbelt
               between Morgan Hill and San Jose in the southern
               Coyote Valley, comprised of agricultural uses,
               rural estates, and the Coyote Park chain. (South
               County Joint Area Plan 16.13 & 16.14)
Action NRE-3.E Regional Greenbelt Plan Implementation. Work
               with San Jose, Gilroy and Santa Clara County to
               implement plans for the preservation of
               greenbelts between the cities. (South County Joint
               Area Plan 16.22)
Action NRE-3.F Greenbelt Funding Source. Work with San Jose,
               Gilroy and the County to identify and establish a
               viable source of funding for acquiring and
               developing regional parks, pathways, and open
               space. (South County Joint Area Plan 16.22)
Action NRE-3.G Greenbelt Priority Areas. The highest priority
               areas for Greenbelt preservation include the east
               side of El Toro, the Edmundson/DeWitt/Sunset
               area, and the foothills on the eastern side of the
               valley north of Dunne Ave.
Action NRE-3.H Greenbelt Secondary Priority Areas. The second
               highest priority areas for Greenbelt preservation
               include the west side of El Toro and the hill area
               south of Edmundson.
Action NRE-3.I Greenbelt Tertiary Priority Areas. The third
               highest priority areas for Greenbelt preservation
               include the west side of Paradise Valley, the Baird
               Ranch (north of Llagas Road), and the Boy’s
               Ranch/Coyote Creek Park area.
                                                                                                                NRE-25

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Action NRE-3.J Fair Market Value. When acquiring fee title or
                                                                     easements, offer property owners fair market
                                                                     value using industry standard appraisal
                                                                     techniques.
                                                      A CTIONS R EGARDING U SES WITHIN THE G REENBELT
                                                      Action NRE-3.K Land Uses that Supports Greenbelts. Support the
                                                                     County maintaining low densities and large
                                                                     minimum lot size requirements for undeveloped
                                                                     areas not planned for urbanization and lands
                                                                     identified as Greenbelt.
                                                      Action NRE-3.L City Influence in Unincorporated Areas.
                                                                     Actively work with the County to find
                                                                     mechanisms that would provide the City with
                                                                     greater influence over development in the
                                                                     unincorporated areas of the City’s Sphere of
                                                                     Influence.
                                                      Action NRE-3.M Low Impact Development in Hillside Greenbelt
                                                                     Areas. Subject new development within City
                                                                     hillside Greenbelt areas to a site and design
                                                                     review process that encourages minimizing
                                                                     environmental impacts including minimizing the
                                                                     amount of grading and encouraging location of
                                                                     structures in areas where they are least visible
                                                                     from the valley floor.
                                                      Action NRE-3.N Visibility of Structures within Greenbelts.
                                                                     Encourage the evaluation and update of the basic
                                                                     Santa Clara County development review process
                                                                     to achieve greater restriction on visibility, from
                                                                     the valley floor and major transportation
                                                                     corridors, of structures in the hillside Greenbelt
                                                                     areas. This updated review process should result
                                                                     in a minimal review process for structures that are
                                                                     not visible from the valley floor and major
NRE-26

                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
               transportation corridors, and an extensive review
               process for structures that are visible.
A GRICULTURAL R ESOURCES
GOAL NRE-4 A viable agricultural industry.
Policy NRE-4.1 Agriculture Retention and Transition to Urban
               Uses. Support programs and techniques,
               including conservation easements and purchase
               of development rights to encourage the retention
               of agricultural activities and to minimize conflicts
               in the transition from agriculture to urban uses.
Policy NRE-4.2 Support for Agricultural Activity. Support
               agricultural activity by encouraging agriculture-
               related    industry,     commercial      uses,   and
               community events within the urban area, and
               expanding       opportunities     for     small-scale
               agriculture.
Policy NRE-4.3 Agriculture in the Sphere of Influence. Support
               significant agricultural activity within the Sphere
               of Influence by providing a market for
               agricultural products (e.g., farmers’ markets) and
               decreasing the costs associated with agriculture
               by allowing such uses to occur in the Sphere of
               Influence.
Policy NRE-4.4 Farming Cooperatives in Buffer Areas. Support
               use of farming cooperatives within agricultural
               buffer areas.
Policy NRE-4.5 Local Agricultural Products. Purchase locally-
               produced agricultural products for City functions
               and encourage Morgan Hill Unified School
               District and other local agencies to do the same,
               whenever feasible.
                                                                                                                 NRE-27

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-4.6  Agricultural Education. Support programs to
                                                                      foster agricultural education.
                                                      Policy NRE-4.7  Long-Term       Maintenance      of     Agriculture.
                                                                      Continue to support the long-term maintenance
                                                                      of agricultural land uses and agriculture,
                                                                      including vineyards and wineries, as an economic
                                                                      enterprise in South County. (South County Joint
                                                                      Area Plan 14.00)
                                                      Policy NRE-4.8  Policy Support for Agriculture. Take positive
                                                                      action to encourage agriculture by supporting
                                                                      local, county, and State policies favorable to
                                                                      agriculture. (South County Joint Area Plan 14.01)
                                                      Policy NRE-4.9  Urban Encroachment. Require new urban
                                                                      development adjacent to an existing agricultural
                                                                      operation to create an appropriate buffer area, on
                                                                      land within the proposed development, between
                                                                      urban uses and agricultural activities.
                                                      Policy NRE-4.10 Land Use to Support Agricultural Viability.
                                                                      Maintain the economic viability of agriculture
                                                                      using a variety of methods, such as:
                                                                        Designating land outside urban areas as
                                                                         agricultural;
                                                                        Requiring minimum lot sizes in agricultural
                                                                         areas;
                                                                        Requiring land uses that support agricultural
                                                                         activities;
                                                                        Marketing the benefits of agricultural uses to
                                                                         the public. (South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                         14.02)
                                                      Policy NRE-4.11 Agricultural Mitigation. Enforce the agricultural
                                                                      mitigation requirement of requiring the
                                                                      preservation of a minimum of 1 acre of
                                                                      agricultural land for each acre of agricultural land
NRE-28

                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                changed to a non-agricultural use, consistent with
                the City’s Agricultural Lands Preservation
                Program.
Policy NRE-4.12 Permanent Preservation of Agriculture. Establish
                areas for the permanent preservation of
                agricultural lands and programs to accomplish
                that objective, such as exclusive agricultural
                zoning, transfer of development rights (TDR)
                programs, and right-to-farm legislation. (South
                County Joint Area Plan 14.03)
Policy NRE-4.13 Urban Growth. Wherever existing development
                patterns and existing and planned roads and
                other public facilities permit, concentrate urban
                development adjacent to existing developed areas
                in order to minimize the impact of development
                on agricultural land. Plan for further urban
                growth to occur in areas which will avoid
                encroachment into those agricultural lands with
                the greatest long-term potential to remain
                economically viable. (South County Joint Area
                Plan 14.07)
Policy NRE-4.14 LAFCO Policies. Support policies of the Local
                Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) which
                would guide urban development away from
                those agricultural areas with the greatest potential
                for long-term economic viability. Use policies for
                Urban Service Area extensions and utility
                extensions to guide urban growth away from
                long-term agricultural areas. (South County Joint
                Area Plan 14.09 & 14.10)
Policy NRE-4.15 Conversion to Urban Use. Convert agricultural
                land that has been designated for urban growth in
                an orderly manner to retain the stability and
                viability of remaining agricultural lands as long
                as possible. (South County Joint Area Plan 14.08)
                                                                                                                 NRE-29

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-4.16 Prioritization of Agricultural Land. Prioritize
                                                                      protection of existing agriculture lands in the
                                                                      Sphere of Influence, outside the Urban Growth
                                                                      Boundary.
                                                      Policy NRE-4.17 Williamson Act Contracts. Support the
                                                                      preservation of land under Williamson Act
                                                                      contracts within the Morgan Hill Sphere of
                                                                      Influence.
                                                      Policy NRE-4.18 Agricultural Operations Disclosure. In areas
                                                                      where residential development is adjacent to
                                                                      agricultural operations, require a disclosure to
                                                                      residents that agricultural operations happen
                                                                      nearby and that they will be exposed to impacts
                                                                      from such operations, such as dust, noise, and
                                                                      odors.
                                                      Policy NRE-4.19 Agricultural Lands Preservation Program. Use a
                                                                      wide variety of funding sources to support the
                                                                      Agricultural Lands Preservation Program,
                                                                      including     land     use    regulation,   urban
                                                                      development policy, conservation easements
                                                                      (with matching grant funds from appropriate
                                                                      agencies, where possible), transfer or purchase of
                                                                      development rights, increased transfer fees,
                                                                      Residential Development Control funds, or
                                                                      Homeowners       Association     fees   for   new
                                                                      development.
                                                      Action NRE-4.A  Agricultural Marketing. Participate in direct
                                                                      marketing of locally produced agricultural
                                                                      products, as appropriate.
                                                      Action NRE-4.B  Buffer Area Requirements. Develop and adopt
                                                                      buffer area requirements that address the width,
                                                                      location, and allowed uses in buffer areas, and
                                                                      address the right to farm.
NRE-30
                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Action NRE-4.C  Buffer Area Uses. Limit activities in these buffer
                areas to uses which are compatible with both
                agricultural and urban activities, such as parks,
                playing fields, and/or alternative energy facilities.
                (South County Joint Area Plan 14.11)
Action NRE-4.D  South County Agricultural Areas. Determine the
                range of activities permitted in agricultural areas
                of South County through an intergovernmental
                process, where the range of allowed uses reflects
                the activities which are necessary to promote the
                continued economic viability of agriculture in
                South County. (South County Joint Area Plan
                14.12)
Action NRE-4.E  Small-Scale Agriculture. Explore techniques to
                support small-scale agricultural operations, such
                as amendments to the Zoning Code to reduce
                minimum lot sizes for agricultural uses or allow a
                greater range of agricultural activities in
                residential and other urban areas. Consider
                amending the Zoning Code to allow beekeeping.
B IOLOGICAL R ESOURCES
GOAL NRE-5 Preservation and reclamation of streams and
                riparian areas as open space.
Policy NRE-5.1  Reclamation of Streams and Riparian Areas.
                Encourage reclamation of degraded streams and
                riparian areas.
Policy NRE-5.2  Other Agencies and Environmental Review.
                Coordinate with jurisdictional agencies, as
                required, as part of the environmental review
                process for development projects.
                                                                                                                 NRE-31
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-5.3  Natural State of Streamside and Riparian Areas.
                                                                      Retain natural streamside and riparian areas in
                                                                      their natural state in order to preserve their value
                                                                      as percolation and recharge areas, natural habitat,
                                                                      scenic resources, and recreation corridors, and to
                                                                      stabilize banks. (South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                      15.08)
                                                      Policy NRE-5.4  Development Impacts in Riparian Areas.
                                                                      Consider development impacts upon wildlife in
                                                                      riparian areas and mitigate those environmental
                                                                      impacts.
                                                      Policy NRE-5.5  Flood Control Projects. Where flood control
                                                                      projects are needed to protect existing
                                                                      development, minimize disruption of streams and
                                                                      riparian systems, maintaining slow flow and
                                                                      stable banks through design and other
                                                                      appropriate mitigation measures. (South County
                                                                      Joint Area Plan 15.08)
                                                      Policy NRE-5.6  Stream Channel Protection. Protect existing
                                                                      stream channels and riparian vegetation by
                                                                      requiring buffering or landscaped setbacks and
                                                                      storm runoff interception as specified in Table
                                                                      NRE-1.
                                                      TABLE NRE-1    REQUIRED STREAM SETBACK DISTANCES
                                                                                                        Category 2 Streams
                                                                                                      (Water Present During
                                                                          Category 1 Streams           the Wet Season Only
                                                                       (Water Present Year Round          During Normal
                                                                       During Normal Rain Years)            Rain Years)
                                                                     Inside Urban     Outside Urban       Inside/Outside
                                                      Slope          Service Area      Service Area     Urban Service Area
                                                      0-30%             100 feet         150 feet
                                                                                                               35 feet
                                                      >30%              150 feet         200 feet
NRE-32
                                                                    M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Policy NRE-5.7 Creek Visibility. Require creek areas in new
               developments to be visible from the public right-
               of-way to ensure safety, maintenance, access, and
               integration into the neighborhood.
Policy NRE-5.8 Creeks Access. Access to creeks should be of
               sufficient width to accommodate trails, flood
               control access, and protection of riparian habitat.
               (South County Joint Area Plan 16.11)
Action NRE-5.A West Little Llagas Creek. A proposed streamside
               park along West Little Llagas Creek should be
               actively implemented and connected to the
               County trail system. (South County Joint Area
               Plan 16.10 & 16.12)
Action NRE-5.B Design Guidelines for Riparian Features.
               Develop Design Guidelines for preserving,
               reclaiming and incorporating riparian features
               into development.
Action NRE-5.C Riparian     Preservation     and     Reclamation
               Programs. Develop programs for the preservation
               and reclamation of degraded riparian areas.
GOAL NRE-6 Protection of native plants, animals, and
               sensitive habitats.
Policy NRE-6.1 Natural State of Habitat. Preserve all fish and
               wildlife habitats in their natural state whenever
               possible. Consider development impacts upon
               wildlife and utilize actions to mitigate those
               environmental impacts.
Policy NRE-6.2 Habitat Conservation Plan. Support the
               implementation of the Santa Clara Valley Habitat
               Plan to protect wildlife, rare and endangered
               plants and animals, and sensitive habitats from
               loss and destruction.
                                                                                                               NRE-33
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-6.3 Urban Expansion Impacts. Minimize impacts
                                                                     upon wildlife when considering annexations,
                                                                     urban service area extensions, and other
                                                                     governmental actions that permit urban
                                                                     development        of   previously     undeveloped
                                                                     property.
                                                      Policy NRE-6.4 Tree Preservation and Protection. Preserve and
                                                                     protect mature, healthy trees whenever feasible,
                                                                     particularly native trees, historically significant
                                                                     trees, and other trees which are of significant size
                                                                     or of significant aesthetic value to the immediate
                                                                     vicinity or to the community as a whole.
                                                      Policy NRE-6.5 Soil and Erosion. Require development to be
                                                                     designed to conserve soil and avoid erosion.
                                                                     (South County Joint Area Plan 13.06)
                                                      Policy NRE-6.6 Use of Native Plants. Encourage use of native
                                                                     plants, especially drought-resistant species, in
                                                                     landscaping.
                                                      Policy NRE-6.7 Habitat Protection and Enhancement. Encourage
                                                                     the protection, restoration, and enhancement of
                                                                     remaining native grasslands, oak woodlands,
                                                                     marshlands, and riparian habitat.
                                                      Action NRE-6.A Standard Measures for Construction Activities.
                                                                     Develop a set of standard measures requiring
                                                                     construction activities to avoid disturbance to
                                                                     natural features to the extent feasible.
NRE-34
                                                                     M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                              N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
W ATER Q UALITY AND C ONSERVATION
GOAL NRE-7 Conservation of water resources.
Policy NRE-7.1 Water Standards for Private Development.
               Promote water conservation and efficient water
               use in all private development projects. Require
               development to exceed State standards for the use
               of water.
Policy NRE-7.2 Water Standards for Public Development.
               Promote water conservation and efficient water
               use in all public development projects. All new
               public buildings shall be designed to exceed State
               standards for water efficiency.
Policy NRE-7.3 Water Efficiency and Landscaping. Promote
               water conservation and efficient water use in all
               public and private landscaping plans.
Policy NRE-7.4 Non-Potable Water for Irrigation. Encourage use
               of non-potable water for landscape irrigation.
Policy NRE-7.5 Dual Plumbing. Explore installation of dual
               plumbing in large, new commercial and/or
               residential developments to enable future use of
               recycled non-potable water generated on- or off-
               site.
Action NRE-7.A Infrastructure Maintenance. Correct known
               deficiencies in the City’s sewer, storm drain, and
               water systems and work toward environmentally
               sustainable systems. Maintain the City’s
               infrastructure to ensure that facilities are up to
               date and incorporate efficiency and conservation
               mechanisms.
                                                                                                                NRE-35

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Action NRE-7.B Drought-Tolerant Landscaping. Develop local
                                                                     ordinances that require new commercial and
                                                                     industrial development to use only drought-
                                                                     tolerant landscaping and that increase the use of
                                                                     drought-tolerant landscaping in new residential
                                                                     development.
                                                      Action NRE-7.C Water Fixture Retrofitting. Create incentives for
                                                                     homeowners of older residential buildings to
                                                                     retrofit water fixtures to improve water efficiency
                                                                     and conservation. Explore ways to link
                                                                     homeowners with incentive programs offered by
                                                                     other agencies or organizations. Options for
                                                                     creating a City-sponsored retrofit program could
                                                                     include using Residential Development Control
                                                                     Funds or creating Citywide fees for water usage.
                                                                     Work with utility providers and City departments
                                                                     to market the program owners who own older
                                                                     homes, are undertaking renovations, or are new
                                                                     owners.
                                                      Action NRE-7.D Water Efficiency at City Facilities. Develop a
                                                                     comprehensive strategy for using water efficiently
                                                                     at all City facilities.
                                                      GOAL NRE-8 Protection of water quality from contamination
                                                                     associated with urbanization.
                                                      Policy NRE-8.1 Contamination from Toxic Chemicals. Protect
                                                                     water quality from contamination, and monitor it
                                                                     to assure that present policies and regulations are
                                                                     adequate. Prohibit such uses as waste facilities,
                                                                     septic systems, and industries using toxic
                                                                     chemicals where polluting substances may come
                                                                     in contact with groundwater, floodwaters, and
                                                                     creeks or reservoir waters. (South County Joint
                                                                     Area Plan 8.00)
NRE-36
                                                                     M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                              N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Policy NRE-8.2 Septic Systems. Continue land use policies that
               limit the number of individual septic systems in
               areas vulnerable to groundwater contamination,
               because of the potential for cumulative
               degradation of water quality. (South County Joint
               Area Plan 8.01)
Policy NRE-8.3 Water Quality Monitoring. Continue to monitor
               groundwater and surface water quality conditions
               to determine if changes in regulations regarding
               septic systems and land use are needed. (South
               County Joint Area Plan 8.04)
Policy NRE-8.4 Sewer Service for Future Development. In areas
               where future development is expected to be
               served by sewers, continue large lot policies
               which allow minimal development and limited
               numbers of septic systems. (This approach
               increases the feasibility of designing future urban
               density subdivisions with smaller lots, which are
               more efficient for sewers in terms of service and
               cost.) (South County Joint Area Plan 8.02)
Policy NRE-8.5 Hazardous Waste Facilities. Site and operate
               hazardous waste disposal facilities and transfer
               stations so as to minimize hazards to ground and
               surface water quality. (South County Joint Area
               Plan 8.07)
Policy NRE-8.6 Percolation Rates. Protect properties located in
               areas that have soils with rapid water percolation
               from future development in order to ensure
               existing water quality. Permit development
               (including commercial and industrial uses) in
               such areas only under strict safety limitations
               according to the City's Hazardous Materials
               Storage Ordinance section specifically related to
               high percolation rates. (South County Joint Area
               Plan 8.11 & 8.12)
                                                                                                                NRE-37
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-8.7 Aquifer Protection. In order to provide greater
                                                                     protection of the aquifers which supply drinking
                                                                     water to the South County, give special
                                                                     consideration to the management of contaminants
                                                                     (e.g., hazardous materials, sanitary effluents) in
                                                                     groundwater recharge areas where no protective
                                                                     aquitard layer exists. (South County Joint Area
                                                                     Plan 8.13)
                                                      Policy NRE-8.8 Water Quality Compliance. Implement Best
                                                                     Management Practices to improve water quality,
                                                                     in conformance with the South Santa Clara
                                                                     County and City of Morgan Hill Total Maximum
                                                                     Daily Load (TMDL) Monitoring Plan for the
                                                                     Pajaro River Watershed (2015) and findings in
                                                                     subsequent annual status updates, as required for
                                                                     compliance with community standards and
                                                                     applicable State and federal provisions.
                                                      GOAL NRE-9 Cooperative efforts to ensure regional water
                                                                     quality.
                                                      Policy NRE-9.1 Interjurisdictional Coordination. Maintain close
                                                                     coordination with the following agencies and
                                                                     organizations which share jurisdiction and
                                                                     interest relative to South County's water supply
                                                                     and water quality: the Regional Water Quality
                                                                     Control Boards, Santa Clara Valley Water District,
                                                                     Santa Clara County, City of Gilroy Planning
                                                                     Department,      and    San    Martin    Planning
                                                                     Committee. (South County Joint Area Plan 10.02)
                                                      Policy NRE-9.2 Water Board Standards. Encourage the two
                                                                     Regional Water Quality Control Boards which
                                                                     have jurisdiction in South County to agree upon
                                                                     compatible water quality standards and
                                                                     consistent approaches to implementing the State
                                                                     Board's nondegradation policy, so as not to
                                                                     confuse developers and jurisdictions which must
NRE-38
                                                                     M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                              N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
               carry out the Board's regulations. (South County
               Joint Area Plan 10.01)
Policy NRE-9.3 Solid Waste Facility Impacts and Benefits. Work
               jointly with Gilroy and Santa Clara County to
               achieve a balance between potential negative
               impacts and the benefits associated with the
               location of solid waste disposal sites and transfer
               stations. (South County Joint Area Plan 8.10)
Policy NRE-9.4 Compatibility       of     Regulations.      Where
               appropriate, the Regional Water Quality Boards,
               Cities, County and other local agencies should
               adopt compatible ordinances (i.e., Hazardous
               Materials     Storage     Ordinance’s      HMSOs),
               standards (i.e., septic tank and alternative
               treatment     and    disposal    methods),      and
               enforcement procedures (i.e., implementing AB
               2185, California Health and Safety Code Chapter
               6.95, Division 20, Section 25500 et seq.) regarding
               water quality so that there is no advantage for a
               company to locate in an area with lower
               standards. (South County Joint Area Plan 10.03)
Action NRE-9.A Intergovernmental       Coordination.      Consider
               intergovernmental coordination between the
               Cities, the County, and local agencies as an
               effective means of resolving issues of concern and
               investigating the feasibility of compatible
               standards,     ordinances,     and     enforcement
               procedures. (South County Joint Area Plan 10.00)
                                                                                                                NRE-39

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      A IR Q UALITY
                                                      GOAL NRE-10 Reduced air pollution emissions.
                                                      Policy NRE-10.1 Regional       and    Subregional    Cooperation.
                                                                      Cooperate with regional agencies in developing
                                                                      and implementing air quality management plans.
                                                                      Support subregional coordination with other
                                                                      cities, counties, and agencies in the Santa Clara
                                                                      Valley and adjacent areas to address land use,
                                                                      jobs/housing      balance,    and   transportation
                                                                      planning issues as a means of improving air
                                                                      quality.
                                                      Policy NRE-10.2 State and Federal Regulation. Encourage
                                                                      effective regulation of mobile and stationary
                                                                      sources of air pollution and support State and
                                                                      federal regulations to improve automobile
                                                                      emission controls.
                                                      Policy NRE-10.3 Automobile Emissions. Encourage the use of and
                                                                      infrastructure for alternative fuel, hybrid, and
                                                                      electric vehicles. Encourage new and existing
                                                                      public and private development to include
                                                                      electric vehicle charging stations.
                                                      Policy NRE-10.4 Reduced Automobile Use. To reduce air
                                                                      pollution the frequency and length of automobile
                                                                      trips and the amount of traffic congestion by
                                                                      controlling sprawl, promoting infill development,
                                                                      and encouraging mixed uses and higher density
                                                                      development near transit. Support the expansion
                                                                      and improvement of alternative modes of
                                                                      transportation. Encourage development project
                                                                      designs that protect and improve air quality and
                                                                      minimize direct and indirect air pollutant
                                                                      emissions by including components that reduce
                                                                      vehicle trips.
NRE-40
                                                                    M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Action NRE-10.A Municipal Vehicle Fleet. Reduce air emission
                from municipal vehicles by increasing the City’s
                alternative fuel vehicle fleet.
Action NRE-10.B Public Employees. Develop programs to reduce
                vehicle use by City employees.
Action NRE-10.C City Regulation. Review and evaluate ion the
                effectiveness of the City’s site design measures,
                transit incentives, and new transportation
                technologies and encourage those that most
                successfully reduce air pollutant emissions.
GOAL NRE-11 Minimized exposure of people to toxic air
                contaminants such as ozone, carbon monoxide,
                lead, and particulate matter.
Policy NRE-11.1 TACs and Proposed Sensitive Uses. Require
                modeling for sensitive land uses, such as
                residential development, proposed near sources
                of pollution such as freeways and industrial uses.
                Require new residential development and
                projects categorized as sensitive receptors to
                incorporate effective mitigation measures into
                project designs or be located adequate distances
                from sources of toxic air contaminants (TACs) to
                avoid significant risk to health and safety.
Policy NRE-11.2 TACs and Existing Sensitive Uses. Encourage
                the installation of appropriate air filtration
                mechanisms at existing schools, residences, and
                other sensitive receptors adversely affected by
                existing or proposed pollution sources.
Policy NRE-11.3 Health Risk Assessments. For proposed
                development that emits toxic air contaminants,
                require project proponents to prepare health risk
                assessments in accordance with Bay Area Air
                Quality Management District procedures as part
                                                                                                               NRE-41

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                                      of environmental review and implement effective
                                                                      mitigation measures to reduce potential health
                                                                      risks to less-than-significant levels. Alternatively,
                                                                      require these projects to be located an adequate
                                                                      distance from residences and other sensitive
                                                                      receptors to avoid health risks. Consult with the
                                                                      Bay Area Air Quality Management District to
                                                                      identify stationary and mobile toxic air
                                                                      contaminant sources and determine the need for
                                                                      and requirements of a health risk assessment for
                                                                      proposed developments.
                                                      Policy NRE-11.4 Truck Routes. For development projects
                                                                      generating significant heavy duty truck traffic,
                                                                      designate truck routes that minimize exposure of
                                                                      sensitive receptors to toxic air contaminants and
                                                                      particulate matter.
                                                      Policy NRE-11.5 Truck Idling. For development projects
                                                                      generating significant truck traffic, require
                                                                      signage to remind drivers that the State truck
                                                                      idling law limits truck idling to five (5) minutes.
                                                      Policy NRE-11.6 Vegetation Buffers. Encourage the use of
                                                                      pollution-absorbing trees and vegetation in buffer
                                                                      areas between substantial sources of toxic air
                                                                      contaminants and sensitive receptors.
                                                      GOAL NRE-12 Minimized air pollutant emissions from
                                                                      demolition and construction activities.
                                                      Policy NRE-12.1 Best Practices. Requirement that development
                                                                      projects implement best management practices to
                                                                      reduce air pollutant emissions associated with
                                                                      construction and operation of the project.
NRE-42
                                                                    M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Policy NRE-12.2 Conditions of Approvals. Include dust,
                particulate matter, and construction equipment
                exhaust control measures as conditions of
                approval for subdivision maps, site development
                and planned development permits, grading
                permits, and demolition permits. At a minimum,
                conditions shall conform to construction
                mitigation measures recommended in the current
                Bay Area Air Quality Management District CEQA
                Guidelines.
Policy NRE-12.3 Control Measures. Require construction and
                demolition projects that have the potential to
                disturb asbestos (from soil or building material)
                to comply with all the requirements of the
                California Air Resource Board’s air toxics control
                measures (ATCMs) for Construction, Grading,
                Quarrying, and Surface Mining Operations.
Policy NRE-12.4 Grading. Require subdivision designs and site
                planning to minimize grading and use landform
                grading in hillside areas.
Action NRE-12.A Standard Measures for Demolition and Grading.
                Adopt and periodically update dust, particulate
                matter, and exhaust control standard measures
                for demolition, grading, and construction
                activities to include on project plans mitigation
                measures as conditions of approval based Bay
                Area Air Quality Management District CEQA
                Guidelines. Include measures to prevent silt
                loading on roadways that generates particulate
                matter air pollution by prohibiting unpaved or
                unprotected access to public roadways from
                construction sites.
                                                                                                               NRE-43

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Action NRE-12.B Grading Ordinance. Revise the grading
                                                                      ordinance and condition grading permits to
                                                                      require that graded areas be stabilized from the
                                                                      completion of grading to commencement and
                                                                      construction.
                                                      GOAL NRE-13 Use of green building practices in new and
                                                                      existing development to promote a healthful
                                                                      indoor environment.
                                                      Policy NRE-13.1 Building Materials. Promote the use of building
                                                                      materials that maintain healthful indoor air
                                                                      quality in an effort to reduce irritation and
                                                                      exposure to toxins and allergens for building
                                                                      occupants.
                                                      Policy NRE-13.2 Construction and Pre-Occupancy Practices.
                                                                      Encourage construction and pre-occupancy
                                                                      practices to improve indoor air quality for new
                                                                      development upon occupancy of the structure.
                                                      Action NRE-13.A Building Materials Ordinance. Develop and
                                                                      implement ordinances to promote the use of
                                                                      building materials, furniture, and paint that
                                                                      maintain healthful indoor air quality and to
                                                                      discourage the use of materials that degrade
                                                                      indoor air quality.
                                                      Action NRE-13.B Construction and Pre-Occupancy Practices
                                                                      Ordinance. Develop and implement ordinances
                                                                      to promote construction and pre-occupancy
                                                                      practices beneficial to indoor air quality, such as
                                                                      sealing of the HVAC system during construction,
                                                                      air flush outs prior to occupancy, and/or air
                                                                      quality testing and corrections prior to occupancy.
NRE-44
                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
GOAL NRE-14 Minimum exposure of residents to objectionable
                odors.
Policy NRE-14.1 New Odor Sources. For new, expanded, or
                modified facilities that are potential sources of
                objectionable odors require an analysis of possible
                odor impacts and the provision of odor
                minimization and control measures as mitigation.
Policy NRE-14.2 Odors and Proposed Sensitive Uses. Require
                new residential development projects and projects
                categorized as sensitive receptors to be located an
                adequate distance from facilities that are existing
                or potential sources of odor. Determine the
                adequate separation distance based on the type,
                size, and operations of the facility.
C LIMATE C HANGE
GOAL NRE-15 An adaptive and resilient community that
                responds to climate change.
Policy NRE-15.1 Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Targets.
                Maintain a greenhouse gas reduction trajectory
                that is consistent with the greenhouse gas
                reduction targets of Executive Orders B-30-15 (40
                percent below 1990 levels by 2030) and S-03-05 (80
                percent below 1990 levels by 2050) to ensure the
                City is consistent with statewide efforts to reduce
                greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy NRE-15.2 Linking Land Use and Transportation.
                Encourage land use and transportation patterns
                that reduce dependence on automobiles.
Policy NRE-15.3 Climate Action Plan. Utilize policies in this
                General Plan denoted with the green leaf symbol
                as the City’s greenhouse gas emissions reduction
                strategy.
                                                                                                                 NRE-45

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-15.4  Sustainable Land Use. Promote land use patterns
                                                                       that reduce the number and length of motor
                                                                       vehicle trips.
                                                      Policy NRE-15.5  Jobs Housing Balance. To the extent feasible,
                                                                       encourage a balance and match between jobs and
                                                                       housing.
                                                      Policy NRE-15.6  Residential Near Transit. Encourage higher
                                                                       density residential and mixed-use development
                                                                       adjacent to commercial centers and transit
                                                                       corridors – the land along or within walking
                                                                       distance of a street served by transit.
                                                      Policy NRE-15.7  Mix of Uses in Employment Centers. Encourage
                                                                       employment areas to include a mix of support
                                                                       services to minimize the number of employee
                                                                       trips.
                                                      Policy NRE-15.8  Walkable City. Encourage retail and office areas
                                                                       to be located within walking and biking distance
                                                                       of     existing    and      proposed     residential
                                                                       developments.
                                                      Policy NRE-15.9  Urban Forest. Support development and
                                                                       maintenance of a healthy, vibrant urban forest
                                                                       through outreach, incentives, and strategic
                                                                       leadership.
                                                      Policy NRE-15.10 VMT Reduction. Continue to work with the
                                                                       Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority on
                                                                       regional transportation solutions that will reduce
                                                                       vehicle miles traveled and greenhouse gas
                                                                       emissions.
                                                      Policy NRE-15.11 Green Building. Promote            green   building
                                                                       practices in new development.
NRE-46

                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Policy NRE-15.12 Municipal Fleet Alternative Fuel Vehicles. Shift
                 municipal vehicle fleet from gasoline- and diesel-
                 powered vehicles to alternative fueled vehicles, to
                 the extent possible.
Action NRE-15.A  Long-term      GHG       Reduction    Monitoring.
                 Regularly monitor progress made towards the
                 City’s 2035 and additional future targets through
                 inventory updates and review of implementation
                 success related to statewide actions.
E NERGY E FFICIENCY
GOAL NRE-16 Conservation of energy resources.
Policy NRE-16.1  Energy Standards for New Development. New
                 development, including public buildings, should
                 be designed to exceed State standards for the use
                 of energy.
Policy NRE-16.2  Energy      Conservation.      Promote      energy
                 conservation techniques and energy efficiency in
                 building design, orientation, and construction.
Policy NRE-16.3  Energy Use Data and Analysis. Provide
                 information to increase building owner, tenant,
                 and operator knowledge about how, when, and
                 where building energy is used.
Policy NRE-16.4  Retrofit Financing. Promote existing and support
                 development of new private financing options for
                 building retrofits and renewable energy
                 development.
Policy NRE-16.5  Energy Efficiency. Encourage development
                 project designs that protect and improve air
                 quality and minimize direct and indirect air
                 pollutant emissions by including components that
                 promote energy efficiency.
                                                                                                                 NRE-47

M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                      Policy NRE-16.6 Landscaping         for   Energy      Conservation.
                                                                      Encourage       landscaping     plans    for    new
                                                                      development to address the planting of trees and
                                                                      shrubs that will provide shade to reduce the need
                                                                      for cooling systems and allow for winter
                                                                      daylighting.
                                                      Policy NRE-16.7 Renewable Energy. Encourage new and existing
                                                                      development to incorporate renewable energy
                                                                      generating features, like solar panels and solar hot
                                                                      water heaters.
                                                      Policy NRE-16.8 Residential Development Code. Emphasize
                                                                      energy conservation building techniques for new
                                                                      residential       construction     through       the
                                                                      implementation of Chapter 18.78 of the Municipal
                                                                      Code.
                                                      Policy NRE-16.9 Subdivision Design. In compliance with Section
                                                                      66473.1 of the State Subdivision Map Act,
                                                                      promote subdivision design that provides for
                                                                      passive solar heating and natural cooling through
                                                                      the Development Review Committee subdivision
                                                                      review procedures.
                                                      Action NRE-16.A Community Choice Aggregation. Partner with
                                                                      other Santa Clara County jurisdictions to
                                                                      determine the feasibility for development of a
                                                                      regional CCA program, including identification of
                                                                      the geographic scope, potential costs to
                                                                      participating jurisdictions and residents, and
                                                                      potential liabilities.
NRE-48
                                                                      M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
Action NRE-16.B Municipal Energy Audit. In cooperation with
                PG&E, subject all municipal buildings to an
                energy audit and perform practicable energy
                conservation alterations on municipal buildings.
                Such alterations can include modifying automatic
                heating, cooling, and lighting systems, and
                installing natural ventilation methods and solar
                hot water systems, etc.
Action NRE-16.C Local Energy Ordinances. Develop local
                ordinances that promote energy conservation and
                efficiency. Examples of such ordinances include:
                energy audits, solar access, solar swimming pool
                heating, insulation and solar retrofit, and solar
                water heating.
Action NRE-16.D Energy Efficiency Plan. Develop a compre-
                hensive strategy for using energy efficiently at all
                City facilities.
                                                                                                                 NRE-49
M O R G A N H I L L 2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L P L A N
N A T U R A L R E S O U R C E S A N D E N V I R O N M E N T
NRE-50
                                                                    9
SAFETY, SERVICES,
AND INFRASTRUCTURE
CHAPTER PURPOSE
This Element contains policies and actions that address the
interrelated topics of public safety, police and fire services, and
critical infrastructure needed to serve existing and future
development in Morgan Hill.
The Safety, Services, and Infrastructure Element aims to protect
the community from unreasonable risk by identifying the
following hazards and establishing policies and actions to avoid
or minimize those hazards:
     Geologic and Seismic Hazards
     Fire Hazards
     Hazardous Materials
     Flood Control
     Airport Hazards
     Noise
     Impacts from Climate Change
This Element also addresses the City’s responsibility to continue
to provide high-quality services and infrastructure and plan for
logical, orderly, and innovative extension of the following
services:
     Police and Fire
     Emergency Response
     Adaptive Infrastructure
     Water Supply
     Wastewater
     Stormwater
                                                                      SSI-1

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                                   Solid Waste
                                                                   Telecommunications
                                                                   Adaptive Infrastructure
                                                            GEOLOGIC AND SEISMIC HAZARDS
                                                            Several faults have been mapped or are inferred to underlie the
                                                            eastern portion of the city (see Figure SSI-1), and movement
                                                            associated with more distant and major faults historically has
                                                            affected Morgan Hill. Hillside areas with landslide potential are of
                                                            particular concern. Slope stability also requires appropriate
                                                            treatment of vegetative cover during and after development.
                                                            FIRE HAZARDS
                                                            This Element addresses both structural and wildland fires. A
                                                            number of serious wildfires have highlighted the need for
                                                            regulating development in wildland/urban interface areas.
                                                            Precautions are proposed to protect hillside and developed areas
                                                            from wildfire potential.
                                                            As required by State law, Figure SSI-2 shows fire hazard severity
                                                            zones as mapped by the California Department of Forestry and
                                                            Fire Protection (CAL FIRE), and indicates State Responsibility
                                                            Areas (SRAs) for which the State of California has fiscal
                                                            responsibility for wildland fire protection services and Local
                                                            Responsibility Areas (LRAs) in which local jurisdictions have
                                                            fiscal responsibility. Figure SSI-3 shows land uses under the
                                                            General Plan that are within SRAs and very high fire hazard
                                                            severity zones.
                                                            HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
                                                            Some businesses and activities in the city involve the transport,
                                                            storage, or use of toxic or hazardous chemicals, which are
                                                            carefully regulated by State and federal agencies. Hazardous
SSI-2

                                         M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                               S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-1 Earthquake Faults
                                                                                            SSI-3
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-2             Fire Hazard Severity Zones
SSI-4
                                                                                    M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                          S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-3 General Plan Land Use within State Responsibility Area and Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                       SSI-5
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            materials that pose a potential threat to human health include
                                                            paint solvents, refrigerants, gasoline, pesticides, and household
                                                            cleaning products, which are routinely transported on Highway
                                                            101 and local roadways.
                                                            The City seeks to protect citizens as much as possible from
                                                            hazardous materials by reducing the potential for incidence or
                                                            damage in the event of accidents or spills, and ensuring that the
                                                            appropriate agencies are adequately prepared to deal with a
                                                            hazardous material emergency.
                                                            FLOOD HAZARDS
                                                            All of the creeks in the city have flooding potential. Federal
                                                            Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) standards govern
                                                            development in the 100-year floodplain (see Figure SSI-4) and
                                                            floodways. A 100-year floodplain is the area next to a river or
                                                            stream with a 1 percent or greater chance of being flooded in any
                                                            year. A 500-year floodplain is the area next to a river or stream
                                                            with a 0.2 percent chance of being flooded in any year. A
                                                            floodway, a smaller area within the floodplain, is a river or stream
                                                            and the area within immediate proximity of a river or stream that
                                                            is capable of conveying the 100-year flood with no more than a
                                                            1-foot rise in water.
                                                            Development in the floodplain and floodway must be controlled
                                                            because it can increase flooding hazards by raising water levels
                                                            upstream and by adding flow, velocity, and debris downstream.
                                                            Figure SSI-4 shows both 100-year and 500-year FEMA flood zones,
                                                            and Figure SSI-5 shows historic flooding as well as the major
                                                            waterways that accommodate floodwater.
                                                            Additionally, as illustrated in Figure SSI-6, much of Morgan Hill is
                                                            subject to potential dam inundation from the Anderson and
                                                            Chesbro Reservoirs. To address this hazard, the SCVWD has
                                                            begun an extensive retrofit project on Anderson Dam. This retrofit
                                                            project will strengthen the foundation of the dam and replace
                                                            outlet pipes underneath the dam. The SCVWD anticipates that
                                                            construction of the project will start in early 2018. Meanwhile, the
SSI-6
                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-4 FEMA Flood Zones
                                                                                           SSI-7
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-5             Historic Flooding
SSI-8
                                            M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                  S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-6 Dam Inundation Areas
                                                                                               SSI-9
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            SCVWD has lowered the water level to 68 percent of the
                                                            Anderson Reservoir’s capacity to significantly reduce the risk of
                                                            dam failure or water overtopping the dam during a major
                                                            earthquake.
                                                            AIRPORT HAZARDS
                                                            A small portion of Morgan Hill and its Sphere of Influence (SOI)
                                                            extends into the Airport Influence Area (AIA) of the South County
                                                            Airport, which is located in the unincorporated community of San
                                                            Martin between Morgan Hill and Gilroy. The airport is operated
                                                            by Santa Clara County, and is used for general aviation, which
                                                            includes all aviation activities other than commercial passenger
                                                            flights, commuter/air taxi, and military uses. General aviation
                                                            activity typically includes single-engine and small twin-engine
                                                            aircraft holding six or fewer people. The South County Airport is
                                                            the smallest and least active airport in the county.
                                                            The AIA includes all areas surrounding the airport that are
                                                            affected by noise, height, and safety considerations. All
                                                            development projects within the AIA must be reviewed by the
                                                            Santa Clara County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) to
                                                            ensure consistency with the Airport Comprehensive Land Use
                                                            Plan (ACLUP). The ACLUP establishes height restrictions for
                                                            structures within the portion of the Morgan Hill City limits and
                                                            SOI that extends into the AIA. The Morgan Hill City limits and
                                                            SOI are located outside of the airport’s noise contours and safety
                                                            zones.
                                                            NOISE
                                                            Defined as unwanted sound, noise can cause physiological or
                                                            psychological damage and/or interfere with communication,
                                                            work, rest, recreation, or sleep. Noise is especially a concern in the
                                                            vicinity of noise-sensitive uses, which are generally defined as
                                                            locations where people reside or where the presence of unwanted
                                                            sound could adversely affect the use of land, such as residences,
                                                            schools, and hospitals. State law requires the General Plan to
                                                            include policies and actions to minimize the effects of noise on the
                                                            community. Major noise sources in Morgan Hill in the year 2035
SSI-10

                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
will include Highway 101, railroad activity, and traffic on major
streets (see Figures SSI-7). Commercial and industrial sources in
Morgan Hill contribute very little noise to the community.
The California Office of Noise Control has prepared a land use
compatibility chart for community noise to provide urban
planners with a tool to gauge the compatibility of land uses
relative to existing and future ambient noise levels as shown in
Table SSI-1. This land use compatibility chart identifies ‘normally
acceptable’, ‘conditionally acceptable’, and ‘clearly unacceptable’
noise levels for various land uses. A conditionally acceptable
designation implies new construction or development should be
undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
requirements for each land use is made and needed noise
insulation features are incorporated in the design. By comparison,
a normally acceptable designation indicates that standard
construction can occur with no special noise reduction
requirements.
A decibel (dB) is a measure based on the relative amplitude of a
sound. Ten on the decibel scale marks the lowest sound level that
the healthy, unimpaired human ear can detect. Sound levels in
decibels are calculated on a logarithmic basis such that each 10-dB
increase is perceived as a doubling of loudness. The California
A-weighted sound level, or dBA, gives greater weight to sounds
to which the human ear is most sensitive.
Sensitivity to noise increases during the evening and at night
because excessive noise interferes with the ability to sleep.
Twenty-four-hour descriptors have been developed that
emphasize quiet-time noise events. The Day/Night Average
Sound Level, Ldn, is a measure of the cumulative noise exposure in
a community. It includes a 10 dB addition to noise levels from
10:00 pm to 7:00 am to account for human sensitivity to night
noise.
                                                                                                                         SSI-11

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-7             Future Noise Contours
SSI-12
                                                                                                     M O R G A N     H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                           S A F E T Y ,  S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
TABLE SSI-1             STATE OF CALIFORNIA L AND USE COMPATIBILITY GUIDELINES FOR COMMUNITY NOISE
                        ENVIRONMENTS
                                                                                                         CNEL (dBA)
Land Uses                                                                               55      60       65      70         75     80
Residential – Low Density Single-Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes
Residential – Multiple-Family
Transient Lodging, Motels, Hotels
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Businesses, Commercial and Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agricultural
               Normally Acceptable:                                               Normally Unacceptable:
               Specified land use is satisfactory based                           New construction or development should generally
               upon the assumption that any buildings                             be discouraged. If new construction does proceed,
               involved are of normal conventional                                a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
               construction, without any special noise                            requirements must be made and needed noise
               insulation requirements.                                           insulation features included in the design.
               Conditionally Acceptable:                                          Clearly Unacceptable:
               New construction or development                                    New construction or development generally should
               should be undertaken only after a                                  not be undertaken.
               detailed analysis of the noise reduction
               requirements is made and the needed
               noise insulation features included in the
               design. Conventional construction, but
               with closed windows and fresh air
               supply systems or air conditioning will
               normally suffice.
Source: Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, General Plan Guidelines 2003.
                                                                                                                                                       SSI-13

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY IMPACTS FROM CLIMATE CHANGE
                                                            This Element addresses the dangers the City may face as a result
                                                            of climate change. Policies and actions the City can take to
                                                            minimize local contributions to climate change are in the Natural
                                                            Resources Element.
                                                            Changes in climate and precipitation patterns can cause extreme
                                                            weather events (e.g., longer dry periods or heavier rainfall) and
                                                            impact forests and other ecosystems. Extreme weather events can
                                                            also exacerbate problems caused by droughts and storm events,
                                                            such as water shortages and flooding. In addition, warmer
                                                            temperatures can accelerate melting of the earth’s ice cover,
                                                            contributing to sea level rise.
                                                            Although Morgan Hill is not vulnerable to sea level rise, climate
                                                            change has the potential to worsen the existing flood or wildfire
                                                            hazards in Morgan Hill. In addition, Morgan Hill and the broader
                                                            county or regional area could experience increased periods of
                                                            drought leading to impacts on water supplies, and hazardous heat
                                                            conditions in the summer months, including increased risk of
                                                            wildfire and a longer fire season. Climate change also has the
                                                            potential to increase the duration, intensity, and extent of
                                                            agricultural pest infestations, which could affect Morgan Hill’s
                                                            local economy.
                                                            Extreme heat results in greater demands on energy, which in turn
                                                            leads to increased air pollution and GHG emissions, and increases
                                                            the likelihood of energy brownouts, which leave residents without
                                                            air conditioning and refrigeration.
                                                            These extreme weather events can severely impact the health of
                                                            residents; extreme heat can lead to heat exhaustion and heat
                                                            stroke, worsen chronic health conditions including asthma
                                                            through increased air particulate and mold, and spread
                                                            waterborne disease. Costs for basic needs such as water, food and
                                                            energy may increase in response to scarcity and demand caused
                                                            by climate change. Low-income residents who already have high
                                                            costs proportional to their income will be disproportionately
                                                            affected by rising costs.
SSI-14

                                                                       M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                             S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
POLICE AND FIRE
The City of Morgan Hill provides police and fire services to
protect residents, workers, visitors, and businesses. Adequate
staffing and timely response are necessities for police, fire, and
emergency medical services. These objectives can be defined,
achieved, and maintained through implementation of master
plans for these services.
Other important City services, including parks, recreation, and
youth and senior services, are addressed in the Healthy
Communities Element.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
The City’s Office of Emergency Services (OES) operates under
Police Administration and serves the entire City of Morgan Hill.
OES provides educational services to prevent, prepare, respond
and recover from emergencies and disasters, both natural and
man-made.
The City has an Emergency Operations Plan, maintained and
administered by OES staff, which guides the City’s response to a
natural or man-made emergency. During an emergency, the City's
primary goal is to ensure public safety, minimizing injury and
property damage, while after an emergency the focus shifts to
recovery and restoring services back to normal.
ADAPTIVE INFRASTRUCTURE
Morgan Hill is minimizing its contributions to climate change
through green policies and practices, including policies in this
General Plan. However, the impacts of climate change that are
already beginning to impact the region require that the
community adapt its infrastructure to keep its residents healthy
and safe. Climate change brings a potential increase in storms,
flooding, and heat events. Existing infrastructure such as water
systems, energy and communications networks, and
transportation systems is vulnerable to extreme weather events
and ongoing impacts of climate change such as saltwater intrusion
                                                                                                                        SSI-15

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            into aquifers. New and existing infrastructure can benefit from
                                                            evolving design and maintenance standards, system redundancy,
                                                            and better monitoring and modeling systems to predict and
                                                            respond to such events.
                                                            Planning for and responding to climate change requires upgrades
                                                            and programs that can be addressed via long-term capital
                                                            improvement plans, emergency response plans, land use plans,
                                                            and operations and maintenance plans. The land use goals of this
                                                            General Plan support both mitigation and response by approp-
                                                            riately siting land uses and infrastructure in less vulnerable areas,
                                                            managing water and energy demand, and providing mitigation
                                                            strategies such as green stormwater infrastructure.
                                                            WATER SUPPLY
                                                            The City of Morgan Hill provides potable water service to
                                                            approximately 12,300 residential and non-residential customers
                                                            inside and outside the City limits. The City’s water system (Figure
                                                            SSI-8) includes a series of groundwater wells that extract water
                                                            from underground aquifers in the Llagas Subbasin and Coyote
                                                            Valley Subarea of the Santa Clara Valley Subbasin. To deliver this
                                                            water, the City maintains over 180 miles of water mains ranging
                                                            in size between 2 and 16 inches, booster stations that elevate water
                                                            to higher pressure zones, and storage reservoirs.
                                                            On September 16, 2014, a three-bill legislative package was signed
                                                            into law, composed of Assembly Bill (AB) 1739, Senate Bill (SB)
                                                            1168, and SB 1319, collectively known as the Sustainable Ground-
                                                            water Management Act. The Governor’s signing message states “a
                                                            central feature of these bills is the recognition that groundwater
                                                            management in California is best accomplished locally.” The
                                                            Sustainable Groundwater Management Act requires the formation
                                                            of local groundwater sustainability agencies (GSAs) who must
                                                            assess conditions in their local groundwater basins and then
                                                            prepare locally based management plans but the act gives the
                                                            GSAs 20 years to implement the plans.
SSI-16

                                                   M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                         S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-8 Water Infrastructure System
                                                                                                    SSI-17
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            WASTEWATER
                                                            The City of Morgan Hill provides sewer collection system service
                                                            to approximately 11,500 residential and non-residential
                                                            customers. This sewer collection system (Figure SSI-9) includes
                                                            approximately 140 miles of pipelines ranging in size from 6 to 30
                                                            inches in diameter, 14 sewage lift stations, and associated force
                                                            mains. The trunk sewers are dendritic pipelines (i.e., similar to a
                                                            tree, with branches and sub branches), generally 12 inches in
                                                            diameter and larger, and convey the collected wastewater flows
                                                            via the Joint Morgan Hill-Gilroy Trunk southward to the Gilroy
                                                            Wastewater Treatment Plant, which serves both cities.
                                                            STORMWATER
                                                            The City of Morgan Hill provides storm drainage service
                                                            throughout the City. The existing storm drainage system consists
                                                            of curb and gutter facilities, curb inlets, underground pipelines,
                                                            and bubblers draining to the nearest creek or manmade natural
                                                            retention areas. The City is divided into several hydrologically
                                                            distinct drainage areas. Each of these areas consists of conveyance
                                                            facilities, pumps, and detention basins to collect and dispose of
                                                            the runoff. The runoff from these areas is discharged into creeks
                                                            that flow through the City and that are tributaries to either
                                                            Monterey Bay or San Francisco Bay. The main drainage areas
                                                            include Coyote Creek, Fisher Creek, Tennant Creek, Madrone
                                                            Channel, Butterfield Channel, West Little Llagas Creek, and
                                                            Llagas Creek (Figure SSI-10). Figure SSI-10 also shows the major
                                                            stormwater management facilities in Morgan Hill.
                                                            SOLID WASTE
                                                            State law requires the City of Morgan Hill to divert 50 percent of
                                                            its waste away from landfills. An outside vendor provides
                                                            garbage service, including recycling, composting, and garbage
                                                            collection, to the City of Morgan Hill. The City of Morgan Hill
                                                            uses single-stream recycling, meaning that all types of recyclable
                                                            SSI-18
                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-9 Wastewater Infrastructure System
                                                                                                         SSI-19
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Figure SSI-10            Stormwater Management Facilities
SSI-20
                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
materials are mixed together upon collection and sorted later at a
materials recovery facility.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Telecommunications in Morgan Hill is offered by multiple service
providers and is distributed through a variety of different types of
infrastructure systems. Wireline telephone, cable television, and
satellite television services are generally available throughout
Morgan Hill. Mobile telephone service is available from various
networks, and companies that re-sell services on those networks.
Long haul fiber optic cables run through Morgan Hill along the
Union Pacific Coast Line railroad right-of-way. These lines
connect major Internet hubs, for example Silicon Valley and Los
Angeles, and are the core, backbone infrastructure that makes
worldwide connectivity possible.
The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC), a Governor-
appointed Commission that regulates some telecommunications
services and other privately owned utilities and common carriers,
establishes minimum acceptable benchmarks for Internet service.
Any geographic area which does not have at least one Internet
service provider (wireline, fixed wireless, or mobile) offering this
level of service is eligible for broadband infrastructure
construction grants from the California Advanced Services Fund,
a funding source established by legislation and administered by
the CPUC to improve broadband service in underserved areas. In
general, as of 2015, residential and commercial broadband service
levels in Morgan Hill are below statewide and San Francisco Bay
Area averages. To address this important issue, the City has
prepared a Telecommunication Infrastructure Master Plan that
lays out policies and actions to extend and improve connectivity
in Morgan Hill.
Wireless Internet service is offered by the mobile telephone
carriers in Morgan Hill. Several companies offer satellite Internet
service, and at least one fixed wireless Internet service provider
covers a portion of Morgan Hill.
                                                                                                                         SSI-21
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
                                                            E NVIRONMENTAL H AZARDS
                                                            GOAL SSI-1     Development that avoids or minimizes risks
                                                                           from environmental hazards.
                                                            Action SSI-1.A New Development and Hazards. New develop-
                                                                           ment should avoid hazardous and sensitive areas,
                                                                           and should occur only where it can be built
                                                                           without risking health and safety. New habitable
                                                                           structures should not be allowed in areas of
                                                                           highest hazard, such as floodways, active
                                                                           landslides, active fault traces, and airport safety
                                                                           zones. In areas of less risk, development should
                                                                           be limited and designed to reduce risks to an
                                                                           acceptable level. (South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                           15.00)
                                                            Policy SSI-1.2 Hazard Reporting. Known or potential geologic,
                                                                           fire, and flood hazards shall be disclosed as part
                                                                           of every real estate transaction and recorded on
                                                                           documents to be reported for building permits,
                                                                           subdivisions, and land development reports.
                                                                           Mitigation of hazards shall be noted in the same
                                                                           manner.
                                                            Policy SSI-1.3 Safety Public Education Programs. Continue and
                                                                           improve public education programs that: a)
                                                                           increase awareness of the safety hazards present
                                                                           in South County, b) provide information on
                                                                           mitigation techniques, and c) strengthen public
                                                                           support for adopted policies which might restrict
                                                                           development in hazardous areas. (South County
                                                                           Joint Area Plan 15.15)
SSI-22
                                                                       M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                             S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-1.4 Development       Regulations      and    Hazards.
               Regulate development in hazardous areas in such
               a way that it minimizes disruption of the
               environment and does not trigger or accelerate
               the hazardous processes which exist in South
               County. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.02b.)
Policy SSI-1.5 Cluster Development. Cluster development in
               hazardous areas with dwellings grouped on the
               least hazardous portion of the property. (South
               County Joint Area Plan 15.02e)
Action SSI-1.A Management of Hazardous Areas. Continue
               existing development regulations and policies
               regarding management of hazardous areas, with
               monitoring to determine their effectiveness. Make
               policy changes only after review by all three
               South County jurisdictions. (South County Joint
               Area Plan 15.10 & 15.11)
Action SSI-1.B Current Information. Coordinate with local,
               regional, State, and federal sources to ensure the
               City maintains complete and current GIS
               information on fire, flood, and geotechnical
               hazards.
G EOLOGIC AND S EISMIC H AZARDS
GOAL SSI-2     Reduction of potential harm to persons or
               property from geologic/seismic hazards.
Policy SSI-2.1 Land Use and Geologic Hazards. Limit uses on
               lands with geologic hazards, but allow uses on
               previously urbanized lands with proper
               mitigation. Keep development in hazardous areas
               to a minimum by encouraging low-density, low-
               intensity uses and the types of uses least
               disruptive to the soil and vegetative cover. (South
               County Joint Area Plan 15.02a)
                                                                                                                        SSI-23
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-2.2 Site Preparation for Geologic Stability. On lands
                                                                           with geologic hazards that have already been
                                                                           developed, require mitigation procedures,
                                                                           including geotechnical investigations appropriate
                                                                           for the known or suspected geologic problems.
                                                            Policy SSI-2.3 Site Preparation in Hazardous Areas. Require
                                                                           site preparation in hazardous areas to be
                                                                           designed to achieve long-term geologic stability.
                                                            Policy SSI-2.4 Code Requirements for Critical Structures.
                                                                           Design and construct critical structures above and
                                                                           beyond the applicable engineering and building
                                                                           standards, where such measures are deemed
                                                                           necessary     from       available geologic    and
                                                                           engineering data. Critical structures are those
                                                                           structures:
                                                                           a) needed after a disaster (e.g., emergency
                                                                           communications, fire stations, hospitals, bridges
                                                                           and overpasses);
                                                                           b) whose continued functioning is critical (e.g.,
                                                                           major power lines and stations, water lines, and
                                                                           other public utilities); or
                                                                           c) whose failure might be catastrophic (e.g., large
                                                                           dams).
                                                            Policy SSI-2.5 Design of Critical Structures. Design and
                                                                           construct critical structures to resist minor
                                                                           earthquakes without damage, resist moderate
                                                                           earthquakes without structural damage, and
                                                                           resist major earthquakes of the intensity or
                                                                           severity of the strongest experienced in California
                                                                           without collapse.
SSI-24
                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-2.6  Hillside Development. Protect hillsides and
                carefully control development on steep slopes.
                When hillside land is developed, it should be
                done with minimum disruption of topography
                and vegetative cover. (South County Joint Area
                Plan 15.00)
Policy SSI-2.7  Landslides. Prohibit development on known
                active landslides and limit development in areas
                where such development might initiate sliding or
                be affected by sliding on adjacent parcels. (South
                County Joint Area Plan 15.02c)
Policy SSI-2.8  Runoff      and    Slope     Stability.    Prohibit
                development in areas where increased runoff
                from the addition of impervious surfaces and
                drainage would increase the probability of
                downslope landsliding, or where additional
                projects would add to the cumulative effect of
                increased runoff, unless a downslope drainage
                improvement plan has been approved. (South
                County Joint Area Plan 15.02d)
Policy SSI-2.9  Geologic Studies. Continue to require geologic
                and geotechnical studies for development in
                potentially hazardous areas, such as hillside areas
                and geotechnical studies for critical facilities in
                areas with liquefiable soils. The costs for
                consulting geologists shall be covered by a fee to
                the developer.
Policy SSI-2.10 Slope Stability. Enforce and maintain strict
                grading and building regulations to minimize
                instability of slopes sloping areas and reduce
                public costs associated with maintaining roads
                and utilities on unstable slopes. (South County
                Joint Area Plan 15.12b)
                                                                                                                         SSI-25
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-2.11 Geotechnical         Investigations.       Require
                                                                            geotechnical investigations on all projects in
                                                                            unstable areas, including areas of expansive soils,
                                                                            prior to construction to insure that the potential
                                                                            hazards are identified and can be properly
                                                                            mitigated. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.13)
                                                            Action SSI-2.A  Interjurisdictional      Information      Sharing.
                                                                            Cooperate with the South County jurisdictions to
                                                                            develop a process for sharing information relating
                                                                            to development activity in areas of geological
                                                                            concern. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.01)
                                                            Action SSI-2.B  Hillside Development. Enforce and maintain
                                                                            current zoning and land development ordinances
                                                                            and policies restricting development on hillsides
                                                                            to low-density, low-intensity uses. (South County
                                                                            Joint Area Plan 15.12a)
                                                            F IRE H AZARDS
                                                            GOAL SSI-3      Minimal threat to persons, property, and the
                                                                            environment from fire hazards.
                                                            Policy SSI-3.1  Development in Fire Hazard Areas. Minimize
                                                                            development in fire hazard areas and plan and
                                                                            construct permitted development so as to reduce
                                                                            exposure to fire hazards and to facilitate fire
                                                                            suppression efforts in the event of a wildfire.
                                                                            (South County Joint Area Plan 15.04)
                                                            Policy SSI-3.2  Wildfire Risks. Avoid actions which increase fire
                                                                            risk, such as increasing public access roads in fire
                                                                            hazard areas, because of the great environmental
                                                                            damage and economic loss associated with a large
                                                                            wildfire. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.04)
SSI-26
                                                                         M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                               S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-3.3 Public Facilities Location. Locate, when feasible,
               new essential public facilities outside of high fire
               risk areas, including, but not limited to, hospitals
               and health care facilities, emergency shelters,
               emergency command centers, and emergency
               communications facilities, or identify construction
               methods or other methods to minimize damage if
               these facilities are located in a state responsibility
               area or very high fire hazard severity zone.
Policy SSI-3.4 Adequate Infrastructure. Design adequate
               infrastructure if a new development is located in a
               state responsibility area (SRA) or in a very high
               fire hazard severity zone (VHFHSZ) or high fire
               hazard severity zone (HFHSZ) as indicated on the
               City of Morgan Hill Wildland Urban Interface
               map (adopted March 18, 2009), including safe
               access for emergency response vehicles, visible
               street signs, and water supplies for structural fire
               suppression.
Policy SSI-3.5 Fire Risks. Work cooperatively with CAL FIRE
               and other public agencies with responsibility for
               fire protection to reduce fire risks in Morgan Hill.
Policy SSI-3.6 Fire Hazard Severity Zones. Continue to support
               special High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
               requirements.
Policy SSI-3.7 Inspection Program. Maintain a long range
               inspection program for fire prevention with
               highest priority established by the level of
               occupancy (high density uses – hotels apartments,
               offices, theaters and churches) and the nature of
               occupancy (schools, hospitals, jails and nursing
               homes). Update all information regarding
               hazardous areas to reflect current knowledge.
               (South County Joint Area Plan 15.11)
                                                                                                                          SSI-27

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            H AZARDOUS M ATERIALS
                                                            GOAL SSI-4     Avoidance of exposure to hazardous substances.
                                                            Policy SSI-4.1 Hazardous Materials Manufacture. Support
                                                                           programs and incentives to reduce the
                                                                           manufacture and use of materials that are
                                                                           hazardous to people and the environment.
                                                            Policy SSI-4.2 On-Site Pretreatment. In order to minimize
                                                                           potential hazards, and decrease the volume of
                                                                           waste that must be disposed of require generators
                                                                           of hazardous waste to use on-site pretreatment
                                                                           prior to discharging treated waste effluent into
                                                                           the sewer system, using such methods as
                                                                           neutralization, precipitation, and oxidation.
                                                                           (South County Joint Area Plan 9.05 & 9.15)
                                                            Policy SSI-4.3 Use and Handling Requirements. Continue a
                                                                           program of regular inspections and monitoring to
                                                                           ensure compliance with local, State, and federal
                                                                           regulations, in order to reduce the risks associated
                                                                           with the use and handling of hazardous materials
                                                                           and wastes. (South County Joint Area Plan 9.00)
                                                            Policy SSI-4.4 Industrial     and    Commercial       Users    and
                                                                           Generators. Continue to implement the Joint
                                                                           Powers Pretreatment Program for industrial and
                                                                           commercial hazardous material users and/or
                                                                           hazardous waste generators, and coordinate as
                                                                           appropriate with Memoranda of Understanding
                                                                           (MOU) inspections, Hazardous Materials Storage
                                                                           Ordinance (HMSO) regulations, and implemen-
                                                                           tation of applicable State laws. (South County
                                                                           Joint Area Plan 9.01)
SSI-28
                                                                         M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                               S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-4.5  Storage and Usage. Regularly inspect activities
                that store and/or use hazardous materials,
                including above-ground and underground
                storage tanks and related equipment, to ensure
                compliance with the City's Hazardous Materials
                Storage Ordinance (HMSO). (South County Joint
                Area Plan 9.02)
Policy SSI-4.6  Short-Term Storage. Regularly inspect those
                facilities which store hazardous waste on site for
                less than 90 days (a time period for which a
                hazardous materials storage permit is not
                required). (South County Joint Area Plan 9.03)
Policy SSI-4.7  Handling. Require submittal of a hazardous
                materials handling plan as a prerequisite for
                developments requiring zone changes and use
                permits. (South County Joint Area Plan 9.04)
Policy SSI-4.8  County and Water District Programs. Support
                County and Santa Clara Valley Water District
                programs to encourage source reduction and
                waste minimization by smaller firms which
                generate hazardous wastes. (South County Joint
                Area Plan 9.06)
Policy SSI-4.9  Leaking Equipment. Require Vehicles and other
                equipment that may threaten the quality of water
                from leaking fuel tanks or oil spills to be removed
                from the site and/or repaired. (South County Joint
                Area Plan 9.07)
Policy SSI-4.10 Public Education Programs. Work with Gilroy,
                Santa Clara County, the Santa Clara Valley Water
                District, the Regional Water Quality Control
                Board, and local community groups to coordinate
                and implement public education programs
                regarding hazardous materials and waste
                management. (South County Joint Area Plan 9.08)
                                                                                                                          SSI-29
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-4.11 Transportation      Monitoring.     Monitor      the
                                                                            transportation of hazardous materials and wastes
                                                                            to reduce risks and ensure notification of South
                                                                            County jurisdictions in the event of a leak or spill.
                                                                            (South County Joint Area Plan 9.10)
                                                            Policy SSI-4.12 Annual Records. Support the County's continued
                                                                            role as the agent that requires hazardous material
                                                                            users and waste generators to provide annual
                                                                            records and monitors haulers of hazardous
                                                                            materials and waste. (South County Joint Area
                                                                            Plan 9.14)
                                                            Policy SSI-4.13 Household Waste. Offer regular household
                                                                            hazardous waste collection programs and other
                                                                            related activities in order to limit the types and
                                                                            amounts of hazardous waste entering the
                                                                            ordinary waste stream. (South County Joint Area
                                                                            Plan 8.09)
                                                            Policy SSI-4.14 Santa     Clara    County     Hazardous      Waste
                                                                            Management Plan. The Santa Clara County
                                                                            Hazardous Waste Management Plan is herewith
                                                                            incorporated in this General Plan by reference. It
                                                                            is a City policy to restrict off-site hazardous
                                                                            materials operations (Hazardous Materials
                                                                            Reprocessing uses as defined by the Zoning
                                                                            Ordinance) to industrially zoned sites which have
                                                                            received Conditional Use Permits and which
                                                                            comply with the Santa Clara County Hazardous
                                                                            Waste management Plan or a City-designated
                                                                            equivalent.
                                                            Policy SSI-4.15 Small Quantity Generators. Continue to allow
                                                                            Small Quantity Generators such as dry cleaners to
                                                                            locate in appropriate commercial and industrial
                                                                            zones without requiring additional hazardous
                                                                            materials permits, providing that such uses
                                                                            comply with other federal, State, and local
SSI-30
                                                                      M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                            S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                hazardous materials laws and regulations and
                providing that the site does not accept hazardous
                waste from off site for reprocessing.
Policy SSI-4.16 Contaminated Site Mitigation. Require new or
                expanding development projects in areas con-
                taminated from previous discharges to mitigate
                their environmental effects.
Policy SSI-4.17 Legislative Updates. During the implementation
                of "2185" (Calif. Health and Safety Code Chap.
                6.95 Division 20 Section 25500 et seq.) and
                successor legislation, make major efforts to
                achieve maximum integration between newly
                mandated actions and ongoing hazardous
                materials programs, particularly as they apply to:
                a) coordinated permit and fee structure, b)
                coordinated inspections, c) emergency response
                ("business") plans, d) training programs, e)
                evacuation requirements, and f) information
                requirements. (South County Joint Area Plan 9.09)
Policy SSI-4.18 High-Pressure Gas Lines. Ensure that approp-
                riate precautions are taken during development to
                minimize the risk of fire and/or explosion
                associated with high-pressure gas lines.
Action SSI-4.A  Highway Spills. Request that Caltrans and the
                California Highway Patrol report any spills or
                leaks on the highway to the City. (South County
                Joint Area Plan 9.11)
Action SSI-4.B  Transportation Routes. Designate specific
                transportation routes for the conveyance of
                hazardous materials and waste, if the City desires
                hazardous materials and waste to be transported
                on routes other than designated truck routes.
                (South County Joint Area Plan 9.13)
                                                                                                                       SSI-31
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Action SSI-4.C Multijurisdictional Notification. If a spill occurs
                                                                           while transporting hazardous materials or waste
                                                                           in one of the South County cities or the county,
                                                                           immediately notify the other jurisdictions. (South
                                                                           County Joint Area Plan 9.12)
                                                            F LOOD H AZARDS
                                                            GOAL SSI-5     The least possible damage to persons and
                                                                           property from flooding.
                                                            Policy SSI-5.1 Development in Floodways and Floodplains.
                                                                           Prohibit development in floodways and regulate
                                                                           development in floodplains to minimize flood
                                                                           damage and be consistent with the federal flood
                                                                           insurance program. (South County Joint Area
                                                                           Plan 15.05)
                                                            Policy SSI-5.2 Private Development in Flood-Prone Areas. If
                                                                           development is allowed in flood-prone areas,
                                                                           provide flood control facilities or appropriate
                                                                           flood-proofing prior to or in conjunction with
                                                                           development at developers' expense. (South
                                                                           County Joint Area Plan 12.05)
                                                            Policy SSI-5.3 Flood Clearance. Prior to the start of construction,
                                                                           a Flood Clearance shall be obtained from the
                                                                           Floodplain Administrator for the City of Morgan
                                                                           Hill that provides plans drawn to scale showing
                                                                           the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of
                                                                           the area; existing or proposed structures, fill,
                                                                           storage of material, and drainage facilities, and
                                                                           floodproofing provisions. Specifically, the
                                                                           following information shall be required:
                                                                              Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea
                                                                               level of the lowest floor (including basement)
                                                                               of all structures.
SSI-32

                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                 Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea
                  level to which any structure will be
                  floodproofed.
                 Appropriate elevation       and   floodproofing
                  certifications.
                 Description of the extent to which any water
                  course will be altered or relocated as a result of
                  the proposed development.
               New residential buildings in the 100-year
               floodplain shall have their lowest floor elevation
               (excluding garage) floodproofed or raised a
               minimum of 1 foot above the base flood elevation
               (BFE). Substantially improved structures within
               the 100-year floodplain shall meet the same
               floodplain construction requirements as new
               buildings.*
Policy SSI-5.4 Floodwater Diversion. Require that new
               developments within flood hazard areas are done
               in a manner that will not cause floodwaters to be
               diverted onto adjacent property or increase flood
               hazards to properties located elsewhere unless
               secured through a flood easement or fee title
               buyout.
Policy SSI-5.5 Off-Site Impacts. Require all local development
               to provide appropriate mitigation of off-site
               flooding impacts, including limiting runoff to pre-
               development levels and/or complete solutions to
               flooding and local drainage problems in the
               vicinity of the development, using such methods
               as detention or retention. (South County Joint
               Area Plan 12.08)
                                                                                                                         SSI-33

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-5.6  New Development in Hazard Areas. Consider
                                                                            risk of flood hazards and damage in new
                                                                            development proposals within flood hazard
                                                                            areas. Ensure that new construction is consistent
                                                                            with federal flood protection regulations.
                                                            Policy SSI-5.7  Raised Structures. Where other mitigation
                                                                            measures do not solve the flooding problem,
                                                                            permit raising individual foundations (padding
                                                                            up structures) in appropriate situations; however,
                                                                            its use must be restricted in order to minimize the
                                                                            cumulative effects on adjacent areas. (South
                                                                            County Joint Area Plan 12.06)
                                                            Policy SSI-5.8  Water District Project Review. Send all
                                                                            subdivisions and private and public project
                                                                            referrals where activity is located near to
                                                                            floodplain areas to Santa Clara Valley Water
                                                                            District for review prior to City approval.
                                                            Policy SSI-5.9  Riparian Natural Functions. Restore and
                                                                            maintain the natural functions of riparian
                                                                            corridors, creeks, and channels to reduce
                                                                            flooding, convey stormwater flows, and improve
                                                                            water quality.
                                                            Policy SSI-5.10 Development along Reservoirs. Limit develop-
                                                                            ment along the shores of reservoirs which can be
                                                                            expected to sustain damage from seismically-
                                                                            induced seiche waves. (South County Joint Area
                                                                            Plan 15.6)
                                                            Policy SSI-5.11 New Development in Dam Inundation Areas.
                                                                            Consider risk of dam inundation in new
                                                                            development proposals within the Anderson,
                                                                            Chesbro, and Coyote dam inundation areas.
SSI-34
                                                                         M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                               S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-5.12 Public Facilities Maintenance. Design and locate
                essential public facilities so that their structural
                and operational integrity can be maintained
                during flooding.
Policy SSI-5.13 Public Facilities Location. Locate, when feasible,
                new public facilities outside of flood hazard
                zones, including hospitals and health care
                facilities, emergency shelters, fire stations,
                emergency command centers, and emergency
                communication facilities or identify construction
                methods or other methods to minimize damage if
                these facilities are located in flood hazard zones.
Policy SSI-5.14 Evacuation and Rescue Maps. Maintain, update,
                and make available to the public, as appropriate,
                community flood evacuation and rescue maps.
Policy SSI-5.15 Waterway Access Dedication. Require that
                projects      dedicate access to and along all
                waterways pursuant to the State Map Act
                Sections 66475 and 66478.5 for.
Action SSI-5.A  Floodway and Floodplain Dedication. Continue
                to require dedication of floodway and floodplain
                areas pursuant to the PL566 Drainage Program.
Action SSI-5.B  Floodplain Regulations. Develop, enact, and
                enforce regulations for all floodplains, with
                specific standards to minimize flooding of
                existing structures and surrounding properties.
Action SSI-5.C  Critical Facilities. Conduct a study to identify
                critical facilities, such as levees, in flood hazard
                areas and within the dam inundation area, and
                seek ways to improve their level of protection, if
                possible.
                                                                                                                          SSI-35
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            GOAL SSI-6     Adequate, safe, and environmentally
                                                                           responsible drainage and flood control.
                                                            Policy SSI-6.1 Flood Control Projects. Minimize disruption of
                                                                           natural riparian areas by flood control projects
                                                                           needed to protect presently existing development
                                                                           by maintaining slow flow and stable banks
                                                                           through design and other appropriate mitigation
                                                                           measures. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.08)
                                                            Policy SSI-6.2 Minimize Future Flood Control Costs. As
                                                                           flooding affects substantial areas of South County
                                                                           and the flood control projects now being
                                                                           constructed are designed to protect only existing
                                                                           developed and currently planned urban areas,
                                                                           manage land development to mitigate flooding
                                                                           problems and minimize the need for local public
                                                                           funding for additional flood control and local
                                                                           drainage facilities. (South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                           12.00)
                                                            Policy SSI-6.3 Existing and Planned Development. Areas which
                                                                           are developed or planned for development
                                                                           should be protected by the construction of flood
                                                                           control facilities. ( South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                           12.00)
                                                            Policy SSI-6.4 Flood Protection Priority. Give highest priority
                                                                           for construction of flood protection facilities as
                                                                           follows: 1) to areas of existing development
                                                                           subject to the highest potential flood damage; 2)
                                                                           to undeveloped areas planned for urban
                                                                           development which would be subject to the
                                                                           highest potential of flood damage; 3) to
                                                                           agricultural lands; and 4) to other undeveloped
                                                                           areas. (South County Joint Area Plan 12.01)
SSI-36
                                                                      M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                            S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-6.5 Flood Risks. Work with the Santa Clara Valley
               Water District and other agencies with the
               responsibility for flood protection to reduce
               flooding risks in Morgan Hill.
Policy SSI-6.6 Flood Management Design. Encourage flood
               management designs that respect the natural
               topography and vegetation of waterways while
               retaining dynamic flow and functional integrity.
Policy SSI-6.7 Urban Creeks and Channels. Preserve the
               existing floodplain capacity of urban creeks and
               channels.
Policy SSI-6.8 Increased     Capacity.      Encourage  increased
               stormwater and flood management infrastructure
               capacity in order to accommodate changes in
               climate, precipitation, and extreme weather
               events.
A IRPORT H AZARDS
GOAL SSI-7     To protect the public’s health and safety, ensure
               compatible land uses with South County
               Airport operations.
Policy SSI-7.1 Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan. Work
               closely with appropriate agencies, including the
               Santa Clara County Airport Land Use
               Commission, to ensure compatibility of land uses
               with airport facilities and operations.
Policy SSI-7.2 Airspace Protection. Limit building heights for
               airspace protection in accordance with Federal
               Aviation Regulations Part 77.
                                                                                                                       SSI-37

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            N OISE
                                                            GOAL SSI-8     Prevention of noise from interfering with
                                                                           human activities or causing health problems.
                                                            Policy SSI-8.1 Exterior Noise Level Standards. Require new
                                                                           development projects         to be designed and
                                                                           constructed to meet acceptable exterior noise level
                                                                           standards (see Table SSI-1), as follows:
                                                                              Apply a maximum exterior noise level of 60
                                                                               dBA Ldn in residential areas where outdoor
                                                                               use is a major consideration (e.g., backyards in
                                                                               single-family housing developments and
                                                                               recreation areas in multi-family housing
                                                                               projects). Where the City determines that
                                                                               providing an Ldn of 60 dBA or lower cannot be
                                                                               achieved after the application of reasonable
                                                                               and feasible mitigation, an Ldn of 65 dBA may
                                                                               be permitted.
                                                                              Indoor noise levels should not exceed an Ldn of
                                                                               45 dBA in new residential housing units.
                                                                              Noise levels in new residential development
                                                                               exposed to an exterior Ldn 60 dBA or greater
                                                                               should be limited to a maximum instantaneous
                                                                               noise level (e.g., trucks on busy streets, train
                                                                               warning whistles) in bedrooms of 50 dBA.
                                                                               Maximum instantaneous noise levels in all
                                                                               other habitable rooms should not exceed 55
                                                                               dBA. The maximum outdoor noise level for
                                                                               new residences near the railroad shall be
                                                                               70 dBA Ldn, recognizing that train noise is
                                                                               characterized by relatively few loud events.
                                                            Policy SSI-8.2 Impact Evaluation. The impact of a proposed
                                                                           development project on existing land uses should
                                                                           be evaluated in terms of the potential for adverse
                                                                           community response based on significant increase
                                                                           in existing noise levels, regardless of compat-
                                                                           ibility guidelines.
SSI-38

                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-8.3 Commercial and Industrial Noise Level
               Standards. Evaluate interior noise levels in
               commercial and industrial structures on a case-
               by-case basis based on the use of the space .
Policy SSI-8.4 Office Noise Level Standards. Interior noise
               levels in office buildings should be maintained at
               45 dBA Leq (hourly average) or less, rather than 45
               dBA Ldn (daily average).
Policy SSI-8.5 Traffic Noise Level Standards. Consider noise
               level increases resulting from traffic associated
               with new projects significant if: a) the noise level
               increase is 5 dBA Ldn or greater, with a future
               noise level of less than 60 dBA Ldn, or b) the noise
               level increase is 3 dBA Ldn or greater, with a
               future noise level of 60 dBA Ldn or greater.
Policy SSI-8.6 Stationary Noise Level Standards. Consider
               noise levels produced by stationary noise sources
               associated with new projects significant if they
               substantially exceed existing ambient noise levels.
Policy SSI-8.7 Other Noise Sources. Consider noise levels
               produced by other noise sources (such as
               ballfields) significant if an acoustical study
               demonstrates they would substantially exceed
               ambient noise levels.
Policy SSI-8.8 Screening. Use the Noise Contour map to screen
               projects to determine if acoustical studies shall be
               required.
                                                                                                                         SSI-39
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-8.9 Site Planning and Design. Require attention to
                                                                           site planning and design techniques other than
                                                                           sound walls to reduce noise impacts, including: a)
                                                                           installing earth berms, b) increasing the distance
                                                                           between the noise source and the receiver; c)
                                                                           using non-sensitive structures such as parking
                                                                           lots, utility areas, and garages to shield noise-
                                                                           sensitive areas; d) orienting buildings to shield
                                                                           outdoor spaces from the noise source; and e)
                                                                           minimizing the noise at its source.
                                                            Action SSI-8.A Noise Contour Map Updates. Assess and track
                                                                           noise levels when specific projects are proposed
                                                                           to determine the continued accuracy of the Noise
                                                                           Contour map. If necessary, based on these
                                                                           assessments, update the future Noise Contour
                                                                           map to reflect changed conditions.
                                                            Action SSI-8.B Zoning Ordinance. Amend the Zoning
                                                                           Ordinance to reflect noise limits intended to
                                                                           protect noise sensitive land uses from intrusion
                                                                           by stationary noise sources.
                                                            GOAL SSI-9     Protection from noise associated with motor
                                                                           vehicles and railroad activity.
                                                            Policy SSI-9.1 Techniques to Reduce Traffic Noise. Use
                                                                           roadway design, traffic signalization, and other
                                                                           traffic planning techniques (such as limiting truck
                                                                           traffic in residential areas) to reduce noise caused
                                                                           by speed or acceleration of vehicles.
                                                            Policy SSI-9.2 Noise Barrier Dimensions. If noise barriers are
                                                                           deemed the only effective mitigation for
                                                                           development        along     major    transportation
                                                                           corridors, require an acoustical analysis to
                                                                           determine necessary dimensions.
SSI-40
                                                                       M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                             S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-9.3 Sound Wall Design. The maximum height of
               sound walls shall be eight feet. Residential
               projects adjacent to the freeway shall be designed
               to minimize sound wall height through location
               of a frontage road, use of two sound walls or
               other applicable measures. Sound wall design and
               location shall be coordinated for an entire project
               area and shall meet Caltrans noise attenuation
               criteria for a projected eight-lane freeway
               condition. If two sound walls are used, the first
               shall be located immediately adjacent to the
               freeway right-of-way and the second shall be
               located as necessary to meet Caltrans noise
               requirements for primary outdoor areas. The
               minimum rear yard setback to the second wall
               shall be 20 feet.
Policy SSI-9.4 Sound Barrier Vandalism. Ensure that sound
               barriers do not become targets for vandalism and
               prioritize clean-up if sound walls are vandalized.
Policy SSI-9.5 Noise Studies for Private Development. In order
               to prevent significant noise impacts on
               neighborhood residents which are related to
               roadway extensions or construction of new
               roadways, require completion of a detailed noise
               study during project-level design to quantify
               noise levels generated by projects such as the
               Murphy Avenue extension to Mission View Drive
               and the Walnut Grove Extension to Diana
               Avenue. The study limits should include noise
               sensitive land uses adjacent to the project
               alignment as well as those along existing
               segments that would be connected to new
               segments. A significant impact would be
               identified where traffic noise levels would exceed
               the “normally acceptable” noise level standard for
               residential land uses and/or where ambient noise
               levels would be substantially increased with the
                                                                                                                        SSI-41

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                                           project. Project specific mitigation measures could
                                                                           include, but not be limited to, considering the
                                                                           location of the planned roadway alignment
                                                                           relative to existing receivers in the vicinity,
                                                                           evaluating the use of noise barriers to attenuate
                                                                           project-generated traffic noise, and/or evaluating
                                                                           the use of “quiet pavement” to minimize traffic
                                                                           noise levels at the source. Mitigation should be
                                                                           designed to reduce noise levels into compliance
                                                                           with “normally acceptable” levels for residential
                                                                           noise and land use compatibility.
                                                            Policy SSI-9.6 Earth Berms. Allow and encourage earth berms in
                                                                           new development projects as an alternative to
                                                                           sound walls if adequate space is available.
                                                            Policy SSI-9.7 Sound Barrier Design. Require non-earthen
                                                                           sound barriers to be landscaped, vegetated, or
                                                                           otherwise designed and/or obscured to improve
                                                                           aesthetics and discourage graffiti and other
                                                                           vandalism.
                                                            Action SSI-9.A UPRR Madrone Parkway Crossing Noise
                                                                           Study. In order to prevent significant noise
                                                                           impacts on sensitive receptors and neighborhood
                                                                           residents which are related to an at-grade
                                                                           Madrone Parkway Crossing of the UPRR tracks,
                                                                           during project-level design, conduct a detailed
                                                                           noise study to calculate noise levels expected as a
                                                                           result of train warning whistles and warning bells
                                                                           that would be sounded, and to calculate the
                                                                           increase in ambient noise levels resulting from the
                                                                           project. The study limits should include noise
                                                                           sensitive land uses north and south of the at-
                                                                           grade crossing as warning whistles would be
                                                                           expected up to one-quarter mile in each direction.
                                                                           A significant impact would be identified where (it
                                                                           is likely that these receivers are already exposed
                                                                           to noise levels above 60 dBA Ldn) where ambient
SSI-42

                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                noise levels would be substantially increased with
                the project. Project specific mitigation measures
                should include, but not be limited to, evaluating
                the use of noise barriers to attenuate the warning
                whistle/bell noise, residential sound insulation,
                utilizing wayside horns, and/or establishing a
                train whistle quiet zone per the Federal Railroad
                Administration’s Final Rule on the Use of
                Locomotive Horns at Highway-Rail Grade
                Crossings. Mitigation should be designed to
                avoid a substantial permanent increase in noise.
I MPACTS FROM C LIMATE C HANGE
GOAL SSI-10 Built environment and emergency response that
                protects residents from the health and safety
                impacts of climate change.
Policy SSI-10.1 Public Information. Educate the public about the
                risks and symptoms of extreme heat exposure,
                flooding, and exposure to fire, particularly for the
                most vulnerable populations such as those in
                poverty, seniors, pregnant women, young
                children, people with chronic conditions, the
                socially isolated, the disabled, and workers in
                outdoor jobs.
Policy SSI-10.2 Emergency Response Planning. Incorporate
                potential impacts of climate change into
                emergency and disaster planning, including
                providing for emergency cooling, safe drinking
                water, and emergency housing.
Policy SSI-10.3 Building Design. Encourage energy retrofits and
                new construction design that increases resiliency
                to flooding and extreme heat, including raised
                ground floors in flood-prone areas, passive
                cooling, and backup power supply.
                                                                                                                         SSI-43

M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-10.4 Heat Island Mitigation. Encourage design and
                                                                            landscaping       features    that    reduce      the
                                                                            intensification of heat due to the urban heat island
                                                                            effect, including tree canopy, cool pavement, and
                                                                            living roofs.
                                                            Policy SSI-10.5 Community Capacity. Build capacity among
                                                                            nonprofit partners, agencies, and neighborhoods
                                                                            for emergency response to climate-related
                                                                            extreme weather events.
                                                            Action SSI-10.A Design Guidelines. Develop and publicize
                                                                            design guidelines to encourage construction that
                                                                            incorporates passive cooling, reduces emissions,
                                                                            and otherwise mitigates the impacts of and
                                                                            greater contribution to climate change.
                                                            P OLICE AND F IRE
                                                            GOAL SSI-11 Efficient police, fire, and emergency medical
                                                                            response and services, and access to local
                                                                            medical facilities.
                                                            Policy SSI-11.1 Staffing. Provide police and fire staffing and
                                                                            facilities as necessary to provide adequate public
                                                                            safety protection.
                                                            Policy SSI-11.2 Prevention through Design. Promote police and
                                                                            fire security considerations in all structures by
                                                                            ensuring that crime and fire prevention concepts
                                                                            are considered in development and design.
                                                            Policy SSI-11.3 Medical Services. Encourage provision of a full
                                                                            range of medical services in the city, including an
                                                                            acute care hospital. .
SSI-44
                                                                       M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                             S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
E MERGENCY R ESPONSE
GOAL SSI-12 Reduce risk to life and property associated with
                emergencies and natural and manmade
                disasters.
Policy SSI-12.1 Emergency        Response     Public    Awareness.
                Promote public awareness of potential disaster
                scenarios for Morgan Hill and encourage
                individual preparedness.
Policy SSI-12.2 Emergency Response Education. Provide
                education and support to neighborhood- or block-
                level efforts to prepare for disasters.
Policy SSI-12.3 Disaster Preparedness. Maintain an adequate
                level of disaster response preparedness through
                careful review of proposed developments and
                through staff training in and exercise of the local
                hazard mitigation plan.
Policy SSI-12.4 Maintenance of Emergency Access Routes.
                Require that emergency access routes be kept free
                of traffic impediments.
Policy SSI-12.5 Emergency Response Plan. Maintain compre-
                hensive Emergency Response Plans.
Policy SSI-12.6 Accessibility. Continue restricting development
                in areas of poor accessibility. Discourage
                development in areas where access is provided
                by a single road that could be damaged by
                faulting or landslides, or where access could be
                cut off by wildfires, trapping residents or
                workers. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.07)
                                                                                                                        SSI-45
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Action SSI-12.A Emergency Access. Where appropriate, allow
                                                                            development in areas where a second improved
                                                                            access road has been provided for emergency
                                                                            escape. (South County Joint Area Plan 15.07)
                                                            Action SSI-12.B Safety Drills. Conduct periodic drills using
                                                                            emergency response systems to test the effective-
                                                                            ness of City procedures.
                                                            A DAPTIVE I NFRASTRUCTURE
                                                            GOAL SSI-13 Infrastructure and urban development that
                                                                            adapts and evolves to respond to a changing
                                                                            climate.
                                                            Policy SSI-13.1 Underground Utilities. Continue to require
                                                                            utilities in subdivisions to be underground, and
                                                                            convert overhead utilities throughout the city to
                                                                            underground facilities.
                                                            Policy SSI-13.2 System Assessment. Evaluate the capacity and
                                                                            condition of water, wastewaster, and stormwater
                                                                            facilities on a regular basis to assess each system’s
                                                                            ability to withstand increased wet and dry
                                                                            weather events, meet changes in demand, and
                                                                            determine system deficiencies.
                                                            Action SSI-13.A Utility Improvements. Create a plan and
                                                                            schedule for converting overhead utilities to
                                                                            underground facilities.
                                                            Action SSI-13.B Conservation Incentives. Create new incentive
                                                                            programs to encourage resource conservation,
                                                                            such as reduced permit fees for development that
                                                                            demonstrates conservation and climate change
                                                                            resiliency.
SSI-46

                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Action SSI-13.C Plan Updates. Monitor the effects of climate
                change in Morgan Hill and update planning
                documents as needed to respond to changing
                community needs and system demands.
Action SSI-13.D Inspections. Regularly inspect infrastructure
                more vulnerable to storms (e.g., wooden utilities
                poles) to ensure reliability during storm events.
W ATER S UPPLY
GOAL SSI-14 High quality water resources, managed
                effectively.
Policy SSI-14.1 Efficient Water Management. Manage the supply
                and use of water more efficiently through
                appropriate means, such as watershed protection,
                percolation, conservation, and reclamation.
                (South County Joint Area Plan 7.00)
Policy SSI-14.2 Water Conservation. Support water conservation
                measures that comply with State and federal
                legislation and that are consistent with measures
                adopted in the Urban Water Management Plan.
Policy SSI-14.3 SB-X7-7. Implement water conservation policies
                contained within Morgan Hill's Urban Water
                Management Plan to achieve 20 percent per capita
                water reductions by 2020.
Policy SSI-14.4 Drought Planning. Encourage water agencies to
                develop and maintain drought contingency plans,
                including emergency water connections and
                related measures to ensure adequate water during
                drought.
                                                                                                                         SSI-47
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-14.5  Water Supply. Routinely evaluate the impact of
                                                                             new development proposals in Morgan Hill and
                                                                             require appropriate measures (fees, water supply
                                                                             assessments, etc.) to ensure long-term water
                                                                             supplies are available.
                                                            Policy SSI-14.6  Well Pumping. Support cooperation among all
                                                                             jurisdictions and agencies pumping water from
                                                                             wells in order to manage the aquifer to preserve
                                                                             the natural ecology of the region, secure the
                                                                             aquifer's utility as a water resource, and ensure
                                                                             the water’s quality. (South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                             7.04)
                                                            Policy SSI-14.7  Water District Programs. Encourage the Santa
                                                                             Clara Valley Water District to continue
                                                                             developing programs to assure effective
                                                                             management of water resources, such as well
                                                                             monitoring, percolation of imported water,
                                                                             reclamation, and conservation. (South County
                                                                             Joint Area Plan 7.07)
                                                            Policy SSI-14.8  Sufficient Supply. Ensure that new development
                                                                             does not exceed the water supply. (South County
                                                                             Joint Area Plan 7.08)
                                                            Policy SSI-14.9  Well Monitoring. Continue to monitor wells and
                                                                             provide the results to the Santa Clara Valley
                                                                             Water District which would coordinate the data
                                                                             and make it available to all jurisdictions and
                                                                             agencies. (South County Joint Area Plan 8.14)
                                                            Policy SSI-14.10 Private Well Monitoring Programs. Expand
                                                                             programs for monitoring private wells by
                                                                             including tests of more wells, tests on constituents
                                                                             not yet tested in private wells (i.e., volatile
                                                                             organics, bacteriological, radiological, etc.), and
                                                                             periodic retesting of selected private wells. (South
                                                                             County Joint Area Plan 8.15)
SSI-48

                                                                       M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                             S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-14.11 Urban Encroachment. Protect streambeds and
                 other appropriate percolation areas from
                 encroachment by urban development. (South
                 County Joint Area Plan 7.05)
Policy SSI-14.12 Water Reclamation Facilities. Encourage the
                 development of water reclamation facilities where
                 feasible, in order to make reclaimed water
                 available to help meet the growing water needs of
                 the South County region. (South County Joint
                 Area Plan 7.09)
Policy SSI-14.13 Use of Recycled Water. Increase use of recycled
                 water in development projects and landscaping;
                 implement best practices (e.g., dual plumbing) to
                 expand recycled water use when safe, practical,
                 and available.
Action SSI-14.A  Tiered Water Rates. Review the tiered system for
                 water rates to ensure that it encourages
                 conservation without unduly burdening local
                 residents.
Action SSI-14.B  Gray Water. Explore use of gray water to help
                 mitigate long-term water shortages.
Action SSI-14.C  Reclaimed       Water     Importation.    Explore
                 opportunities to import reclaimed water from the
                 wastewater      treatment    plant   and     other
                 geographically feasible sources.
Action SSI-14.D  Untreated Water Usage. Encourage the Santa
                 Clara Valley Water District to continue to allow
                 use of untreated water for irrigating large
                 landscaped areas.
                                                                                                                        SSI-49
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Action SSI-14.E Well Pumping Impacts. Partner with other South
                                                                            County jurisdictions to assess the demand that
                                                                            the City’s well pumping imposes on the direction
                                                                            of flow of water and how it affects others that are
                                                                            pumping from the same aquifer, in order to
                                                                            prevent adverse impacts on existing groundwater
                                                                            contamination problems. (South County Joint
                                                                            Area Plan 7.03)
                                                            Action SSI-14.F San Felipe Water. Continue coordination among
                                                                            the South County jurisdictions and the Santa
                                                                            Clara Valley Water District to ensure that the
                                                                            South County will get sufficient deliveries of San
                                                                            Felipe water as needs require. (South County Joint
                                                                            Area Plan 7.06)
                                                            Action SSI-14.G Abandoned and Unused Wells. Continue
                                                                            programs to identify and seal abandoned and
                                                                            unused wells, as such wells may be prime sources
                                                                            for transferring contaminants from the upper to
                                                                            lower aquifer. (South County Joint Area Plan 7.01)
                                                            Action SSI-14.H Monitoring Programs. Work with other South
                                                                            County jurisdictions to track existing water
                                                                            quality, water supply, and water flow monitoring
                                                                            programs. This information should be used to
                                                                            evaluate current regulations and procedures, and
                                                                            to assess the need for new monitoring programs
                                                                            or for revisions or consolidation of existing
                                                                            programs. (South County Joint Area Plan 7.02)
                                                            Action SSI-14.I Water District Programs. Work with the Santa
                                                                            Clara Valley Water District to encourage water
                                                                            use efficiency and conservation programs for
                                                                            residences, businesses, and agriculture and to
                                                                            increase public awareness of the need for efficient
                                                                            management of water resources, including but
                                                                            not limited to, conservation and reuse practices.
SSI-50

                                                                       M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                             S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
W ASTEWATER
GOAL SSI-15 Efficient, effective, and sustainable wastewater
                treatment.
Policy SSI-15.1 Septic Systems. Allow septic systems for low-
                intensity uses where they will not have a negative
                impact on the environment. (South County Joint
                Area Plan 6.00)
Policy SSI-15.2 Wastewater Treatment Facility and Growth.
                Ensure that the total capacity for the
                Gilroy/Morgan Hill Wastewater Treatment
                Facility, its timing for expansion , and
                configuration are consistent with         adopted
                policies for the overall growth of Morgan Hill and
                Gilroy. Plans for the expansion of the Wastewater
                Treatment Facility should be based on the flow
                projections found in the Gilroy and Morgan Hill
                Sewer Master Plans. (South County Joint Area
                Plan 6.00)
Policy SSI-15.3 Wastewater Treatment Facility Funding. Fund
                the Wastewater Treatment Facility expansion in a
                manner which considers the financing needs of
                other infrastructure in the South County. (South
                County Joint Area Plan 6.01)
Policy SSI-15.4 Alternative Sewer Systems. Prohibit the use of
                alternative sewage treatment and disposal
                systems until a reliable track record for the type
                of system has been documented and conditions
                for ongoing safe and effective operation have
                been established. (South County Joint Area Plan
                6.04)
                                                                                                                        SSI-51
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-15.5 County and Water District Assistance.
                                                                            Encourage Santa Clara County and the Santa
                                                                            Clara Valley Water District to assist in the Cities'
                                                                            wastewater treatment program, if feasible and
                                                                            agreed to by the participants. (South County Joint
                                                                            Area Plan 6.02)
                                                            Policy SSI-15.6 Regional Infrastructure Planning. Coordinate
                                                                            with Gilroy and Santa Clara County on the
                                                                            infrastructure and public services needed for
                                                                            future urban development, including their
                                                                            location and timing. (South County Joint Area
                                                                            Plan 17.08)
                                                            Action SSI-15.A Wastewater Treatment Facility Capacity. Work
                                                                            with the City of Gilroy to determine the best
                                                                            method to increase and fund sewer treatment
                                                                            capacity in order to facilitate development that is
                                                                            consistent with both cities’ general plans. (South
                                                                            County Joint Area Plan 6.01)
                                                            Action SSI-15.B Alternative Methods for Wastewater Treatment.
                                                                            Investigate alternative methods for wastewater
                                                                            treatment.
                                                            S TORMWATER
                                                            GOAL SSI-16 Minimized adverse effects on property, natural
                                                                            resources, and ground and surface water quality
                                                                            from stormwater runoff.
                                                            Policy SSI-16.1 Drainage Facilities Payment. Ensure that those
                                                                            residents who benefit from, as well as those who
                                                                            contribute to the need for, local drainage facilities
                                                                            pay for them. (South County Joint Area Plan
                                                                            13.02)
SSI-52

                                                                       M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                             S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-16.2 Drainage System Capacity. Ensure that the level
                of detention or retention provided on the site of
                any new development is compatible with the
                capacity of the regional storm drainage system.
Policy SSI-16.3 Stormwater Management Plans. Require a storm
                water management plan for each proposed
                development, to be presented early in the
                development process and describe the design,
                implementation, and maintenance of the local
                drainage facilities. (South County Joint Area Plan
                13.03)
Policy SSI-16.4 Regional System Compatibility. Coordinate with
                the Santa Clara Valley Water District to ensure
                compatibility of the local and regional storm
                drainage systems.
Action SSI-16.A Drainage Impacts. Require developers of
                individual projects to mitigate on- and off-site
                drainage impacts and, where appropriate, install
                local drainage facilities which would contribute to
                an eventual area-wide solution to local drainage
                problems. (South County Joint Area Plan 13.00)
Action SSI-16.B South County Drainage. Work with the City of
                Gilroy and Santa Clara County to develop a
                coordinated, interjurisdictional master plan for
                local drainage in the South County, which
                includes consideration of the interface between
                unincorporated areas and City drainage systems.
                (South County Joint Area Plan 13.04)
                                                                                                                        SSI-53
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Action SSI-16.C Drainage Impact Mitigation. Require developers
                                                                            of individual projects to       mitigate drainage
                                                                            impacts and protect ground-water quality. Such
                                                                            mitigation may include limiting runoff to pre-
                                                                            development levels and/or complete solutions to
                                                                            local drainage problems in the vicinity of the
                                                                            development or downstream, possibly using
                                                                            detention or retention methods. (South County
                                                                            Joint Area Plan 13.05)
                                                            Action SSI-16.D Drainage Maintenance Funding. Since County
                                                                            maintenance is limited to maintaining local storm
                                                                            drainage facilities which may affect County roads,
                                                                            study the available mechanisms for acquiring
                                                                            additional funding from residents and/or
                                                                            developers for any additional storm drain-related
                                                                            maintenance beyond that which is currently
                                                                            provided. (South County Joint Area Plan 13.01)
                                                            S OLID W ASTE
                                                            GOAL SSI-17 Reduced generation of solid waste and
                                                                            increased diversion of waste from landfills.
                                                            Policy SSI-17.1 Waste Diversion. Maximize reuse, recycling, and
                                                                            composting citywide to reduce the amount of
                                                                            waste disposed of in landfills.
                                                            Policy SSI-17.2 Waste Management Technologies. Support
                                                                            adoption of new technologies for waste
                                                                            management activities, including collection,
                                                                            sorting, and processing, that can maximize waste
                                                                            stream materials recovery.
                                                            Policy SSI-17.3 Public Waste Reduction. Reduce the amount of
                                                                            waste disposed of in landfills through waste
                                                                            prevention, reuse, and recycling at venues, public
                                                                            facilities, and special events.
SSI-54
                                                                         M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                               S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-17.4  Food Scrap and Yard Waste Diversion. Promote
                 the collection of food scraps and compostable
                 paper in yard waste bins through public outreach
                 campaigns.
Policy SSI-17.5  Single-Use Materials. Support programs and
                 incentives to reduce the manufacture and use of
                 materials that are difficult to recycle or are non-
                 compostable      substitutes    for    compostable
                 materials.
Policy SSI-17.6  Local Materials. Encourage the use of locally
                 extracted, manufactured, recycled, and reused
                 materials, including construction materials and
                 compost.
Policy SSI-17.7  Citywide Recycling Program. Maintain the city-
                 wide recycling program, including commercial
                 and industrial efforts, as well as downtown
                 recycling bins.
Policy SSI-17.8  Public Participation. Increase program partici-
                 pation and reduce disposal of recyclable or
                 compostable materials through a combination of
                 intensive outreach, incentives, enforcements, and
                 mandates.
Policy SSI-17.9  Litter Control. Promote aggressive litter control.
Action SSI-17.A  Litter Control in Commercial Development.
                 Require litter control considerations in all
                 commercial development.
Policy SSI-17.10 Energy Generation. Encourage the development
                 of energy generation and conservation technolo-
                 gies for converting residual solid waste into
                 energy.
                                                                                                                          SSI-55
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
                                                            Policy SSI-17.11 Hard-to-Recycle Materials. Expand programs
                                                                             and facilities that accept hazardous and hard-to-
                                                                             recycle materials.
                                                            Policy SSI-17.12 Building Reuse. Promote the use of recycled
                                                                             materials, including reuse of existing building
                                                                             shells and elements, as part of new construction
                                                                             or renovations.
                                                            Policy SSI-17.13 Public     Venues      and   Events.    Encourage
                                                                             commercial businesses, public facilities, and
                                                                             permitted events to provide composting and
                                                                             recycling bins with signage and labels to educate
                                                                             members of the public about proper use.
                                                            Action SSI-17.A  Zero Waste Goal. Prepare a zero-waste strategic
                                                                             plan to maximize solid waste diversion
                                                                             community-wide.
                                                            Action SSI-17.B  Public Participation. Investigate ways to increase
                                                                             public awareness and participation in recycling
                                                                             programs.
                                                            T ELECOMMUNICATIONS
                                                            GOAL SSI-18 State-of-the-art telecommunication services for
                                                                             all segments of the community to foster fiscal
                                                                             and environmental sustainability, support an
                                                                             innovative economy, and meet the needs of the
                                                                             community.
                                                            Policy SSI-18.1  Access and Availability. Work with service
                                                                             providers to ensure access to and availability of a
                                                                             wide range of state-of-the-art telecommunication
                                                                             systems and services for households, businesses,
                                                                             institutions, and public agencies in Morgan Hill.
SSI-56
                                                                        M O R G A N    H I L L  2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                              S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
Policy SSI-18.2 Telecommunications Marketplace Competition.
                Encourage       marketplace    competition     from
                multiple telecommunications service providers to
                maximize access to inexpensive service.
Policy SSI-18.3 Retrofitting. Work with utility companies to
                retrofit areas not served by current telecom-
                munication technologies, as feasible.
Policy SSI-18.4 Telecommunication Planning. Work with utility
                companies to strategically plan telecommun-
                ication for newly developing areas.
Policy SSI-18.5 Collocation of Telecommunication Facilities.
                Encourage compatible collocation of telecom-
                munication facilities and work with utility
                companies to provide opportunities for siting
                facilities on City-owned property and public
                rights-of-ways.
Policy SSI-18.6 Telecommunications Master Plan. Support the
                implementation of the Telecommunications
                Master Plan.
Action SSI-18.A Telecommunications Requirements for New
                Development. Establish requirements for the
                installation of state-of-the-art internal telecom-
                munication technologies in new large-scaled
                residential, office, and commercial developments.
Action SSI-18.B Standardized Telecommunications Develop-
                ment. Establish standard procedures for permitt-
                ing and installation of telecommunication facili-
                ties, including but not limited to the public right-
                of-way, as allowed by federal and State law.
                                                                                                                         SSI-57
M O R G A N    H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L   P L A N
S A F E T Y , S E R V I C E S ,  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
SSI-58
                                                                     10
REGIONAL
COORDINATION
CHAPTER PURPOSE
Coordination with other agencies and jurisdictions in the region
will be crucial for the successful implementation of the vision and
goals throughout General Plan 2035. Many key aspects of daily
life in Morgan Hill are affected by the decisions and actions of
neighboring or regional agencies such as the Valley
Transportation Authority (VTA), the Santa Clara Valley Water
District (SCVWD), Santa Clara County, and the City of Gilroy. The
City of Morgan Hill will continue to participate in planning for
growth, conservation, and change in the surrounding area to
ensure that Morgan Hill will retain its distinctive character and
quality of life.
Policies and actions that support ongoing coordination with these
agencies are spread throughout the General Plan and are
integrated with other policies and actions affecting the same topic.
An important source of these policies is the South County Joint
Area Plan, which was jointly adopted by the County, Gilroy, and
Morgan Hill in 1989 and amended in the early 1990s with a
planning horizon of 2005. The South County Joint Area Plan
continues to serve as a reference of recommended policies and
approaches to ensure a regional approach to growth management
in the South County. Many of the policies remain relevant today
and are incorporated throughout the General Plan, with the South
County Joint Area Plan noted as the source in parentheses.
This Element contains a guide to all the policies and actions
throughout the General Plan that guide regional coordination and
collaboration. In addition, each policy or action is denoted by the
circular RC symbol in the margin.
                                                                        RC-1
M O R G A N     H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
R E G I O N A L   C O O R D I N A T I O N
                                                        POLICIES AND ACTIONS
                                                        The following     policies   and    actions will   guide   regional
                                                        coordination:
                                                        City and Neighborhood Form
                                                        CNF-1.3 Regional Coordination
                                                        CNF-5.1 Land Use Conflicts
                                                        CNF-5.2 Road and Infrastructure Extensions
                                                        [All of Goal CNF-21 regarding Effective, stable growth in South
                                                        County]
                                                        Economic Development
                                                        ED-1.3     Regional Housing Needs Allocation
                                                        ED-1.4     Local Higher Education Resources
                                                        ED-4.B     Tourism Promotion
                                                        ED-9.3     Robust Transportation Options
                                                        Healthy Community
                                                        HC-2.2     Coordinated Senior Services
                                                        HC-3.14 Streamside Trails
                                                        HC-3.17 Regional Needs
                                                        HC-3.25 Partnerships
                                                        HC-3.F     Pursue Funding
                                                        Transportation
                                                        TR-1.1     System Efficiency
                                                        TR-1.2     Highway 101 Widening
                                                        TR-6.8     Transit for Changing Needs
                                                        TR-6.9     Funding Partnerships
                                                        TR-6.10    Transit for Senior Citizens
                                                        TR-6.11    Transit for a Healthy and Active Community
                                                        TR-6.A     Caltrain
                                                        TR-9.D     Partnerships for Pedestrian Safety.
                                                        TR-10.D Ride Sharing for Large Employers
                                                        [All of Goal TR-11 regarding coordinated transportation planning]
                                                        Natural Resources and Environment
                                                        NRE-1.1 Natural Features
                                                        NRE-1.2 Large Open Space Areas.
                                                        NRE-1.4 South County Open Space
RC-2
                                                      M O R G A N H I L L  2 0 3 5 G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                   R E G I O N A L C O O R D I N A T I O N
NRE-1.5 Coordinated Action
NRE-1.6 Open Space Preservation Tools
NRE-1.7 Priority Areas for Preservation
NRE-1.8 County Parks and Open Space Programs
NRE-1.B Open Space Acquisition and Maintenance
NRE-2.D El Toro Mountain and Santa Clara County Parks
[All of Goal NRE-3 regarding Greenbelt]
NRE-4.7 Long-Term Maintenance of Agriculture
NRE-4.14 LAFCO Policies
NRE-4.19 Agricultural Lands Preservation Program
NRE-4.D South County Agricultural Areas
NRE-5.2 Other Agencies and Environmental Review
NRE-5.A West Little Llagas Creek
NRE-6.2 Habitat Conservation Plan
NRE-6.7 Habitat Protection and Enhancement
NRE-8.7 Aquifer Protection
NRE-8.8 Water Quality Compliance
NRE-9.1 Interjurisdictional Coordination
NRE-9.2 Water Board Standards
NRE-9.3 Solid Waste Facility Impacts and Benefits
NRE-9.4 Compatibility of Regulations
NRE-9.A Intergovernmental Coordination
NRE-10.1 Regional and Subregional Cooperation
NRE-15.10 VMT Reduction
NRE-16.A Community Choice Aggregation
Safety, Services, and Infrastructure
SSI-1.B    Current Information
SSI-3.5    Fire Risks
SSI-4.10 Public Education Programs
SSI-6.5    Flood Risks
SSI-7.1    Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
SSI-10.5 Community Capacity
SSI-14.1 Efficient Water Management
SSI-14.4 Drought Planning
SSI-14.6 Well Pumping
SSI-14.9 Well Monitoring
SSI-14.12 Water Reclamation Facilities
SSI-14.D Untreated Water Usage
SSI-14.E Well Pumping Impacts
                                                                                                    RC-3
M O R G A N     H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
R E G I O N A L   C O O R D I N A T I O N
                                                        SSI-14.F San Felipe Water
                                                        SSI-15.5 County and Water District Assistance
                                                        SSI-15.6 Regional Infrastructure Planning
                                                        SSI-16.2 Drainage System Capacity
                                                        SSI-16.4 Regional System Compatibility
RC-4
                                                                   11
This glossary explains the technical terms used in the Morgan Hill
General Plan and common in the field of planning. Definitions
come from several sources, including the California Office of
Planning and Research and the American Planning Association
Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms.
AB:            Assembly Bill
ABAG:          Association of Bay Area Governments
ADT:           Average daily trips
AIA:           Airport Influence Area
ALUC:          Airport Land Use Commission
ALUCP:         Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
AQMD:          Air Quality Management District
BAAQMD:        Bay Area Air Quality Management District
BMR:           Below Market Rate
CAL FIRE:      California Department of Forestry and Fire
               Protection
CARB:          California Air Resource Board
CEQA:          California Environmental Quality Act
CDFW:          California Department of Fish and Wildlife
CIP:   Capital Improvement Program
CNEL:  Community Noise Equivalent Level
CPUC:  California Public Utilities Commission
dB:    Decibel
dBA:   Decibel “A-Weighted”
DOC:   State of California, Department of Conservation
du:    Dwelling Unit
EIR:   Environmental Impact Report
FAR:   Floor Area Ratio
FEMA:  Federal Emergency Management Agency
FHSZ:  Fire Hazard Severity Zone
GPA:   General Plan Amendment
GPAC:  General Plan Advisory Committee
GIS:   Geographic Information Systems
GHG:   Greenhouse Gas
HCP:   Habitat Conservation Plan
HMSO:  Hazardous Material Storage Ordinance
HOV:   High Occupancy Vehicle Lanes
LAFCO: Local Agency Formation Commission
LEED:  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LOS:   Level of Service
LRA:   Local Responsibility Area

PG&E:   Pacific Gas and Electric Company
PD:     Planned Development
RDCS:   Residential Development Control System
SB:     Senate Bill
SCVWD:  Santa Clara Valley Water District
SEQ:    Southeast Quadrant
SOI:    Sphere of Influence
SRA:    State Responsibility Area
TDR:    Transfer of Development Rights
TOD:    Transit Oriented Development
UGB:    Urban Growth Boundary
USA:    Urban Service Area
USFWS:  United States Fish and Wildlife Service
USGS:   United States Geological Survey
UWMP:   Urban Water Management Plan
VTA:    Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority
VHFHSV: Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
WWTP:   Waste Water Treatment Plant
Acreage, Gross. The land area that exists prior to any dedications
for public use, health, and/or safety purposes.
Acreage, Net. The portion of a site that can actually be built upon,
which is the land area remaining after dedication of ultimate
rights-of-way for:
     Exterior boundary streets
     Flood ways
     Public parks
     Utility corridors
Acre-Foot. The volume of water that would cover 1 acre to a
depth of 1 foot. An acre-foot is about the amount of water used
each year in and around the home by two average California
families.
Action. An action is a program, implementation measure,
procedure, or technique intended to help achieve a specified goal.
(See “Goal”)
Adverse Impact. A negative consequence for the physical, social,
or economic environment resulting from an action or project.
Affordability, Housing. The relation of housing costs to
household income.
Affordable Housing. Dwelling units for which the housing
payment is not more than 30 percent of household gross income
for a specified income group.
Apartment-Type          Units.   Garden-type      apartments      or
condominiums, generally at densities of 14 units per acre or more,
designed as stacked units without garages.
Archaeological Resource. Material evidence of past human
activity found below the surface of ground or water, portions of
which may be visible above the surface.

Arterials. Major thoroughfares that carry large volumes of traffic
at relatively high speeds. Arterials are designed to facilitate two or
more lanes of moving vehicles in each direction and rarely contain
on-street parking.
Assembly Bill (AB). Precedes digits indicating specific bill
number (e.g., AB 32). An Assembly Bill is an idea or concept
designed by a member of the California Assembly. Once an
Assembly Bill is passed in both the State Assembly and Senate it
goes to the Governor for signature, veto, or approval without
signature.
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). The regional
planning agency for the nine Bay Area counties, including Santa
Clara County, and the 101 cities and towns within these counties.
Below Market Rate (BMR). BMR housing is subsidized to make it
available to households that cannot afford current market price.
Bicycle Lane (Class II facility). A corridor expressly reserved for
bicycles on a street or roadway in addition to lanes for use by
motorized vehicles.
Bicycle Path (Class I facility). A paved route, not on a street or
roadway, expressly reserved for bicycles traversing an otherwise
unpaved area. Bicycle paths may parallel roads but are typically
separated from them by landscaping.
Bicycle Route (Class III facility). A roadway shared with
motorists and identified only by signs, a bicycle route has no
pavement markings or lane stripes.
Bikeways. A term that encompasses “bicycle lanes,” “bicycle
paths,” and “bicycle routes.”
Buffer. An area established between potentially conflicting land
uses, such as agricultural and residential uses, which, depending
on the potential impact, may utilize landscaping or structural
barriers such as setbacks or roads.

Buildout. Development of land to its full potential, or theoretical
capacity, as permitted under current or proposed planning or
zoning designations.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Legislation and
corresponding procedural components established in 1970 by the
State of California to require environmental review for projects
anticipated to result in adverse impacts to the environment.
Caltrans. California Department of Transportation.
Capital Improvement Program (CIP). A program that schedules
permanent improvements, usually for a minimum of five years in
the future, that fits the projected fiscal capability of the local
jurisdiction. The program generally is reviewed on an annual basis
for conformance to and consistency with the General Plan.
City. City with a capital “C” generally refers to the City
government or administration. City with a lower case “c” may
mean any city or may refer to the geographical area.
City Limits. The legal boundaries of the geographical area subject
to the jurisdiction of the City of Morgan Hill’s government. For
example, development applications for properties located within
the city limits must be reviewed by the City.
Collectors. Roadways that connect local streets to “arterials”;
collectors usually provide two travel lanes for automobiles, and
may also have bicycle lanes.
Compatible. Capable of existing together without conflict or ill
effects.
Complete Streets Act. A law that requires all road construction
and improvement projects to evaluate how the right-of-way
serves all who use it, including pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit
users.
Conditional Use Permit. The discretionary and conditional
review of an activity or function or operation on a site or in a
building or facility.

Conservation. The management of natural resources to prevent
waste, destruction, or neglect.
Courtyard Homes. A grouping of detached single-family homes
arranged around a courtyard that is typically perpendicular to the
street.
Cultural Resources. Includes historic, archaeological,           and
paleontological resources, as well as human remains.
Cumulative Impact. As used in CEQA, the total environmental
impact resulting from the accumulated impacts of individual
projects or programs over time.
Decibel (dB). A unit used to express the relative intensity of a
sound as it is heard by the human ear. The lowest volume a
normal ear can detect under laboratory conditions is 0 dB, the
threshold of human hearing. Since the decibel scale is logarithmic,
10 dB are ten times more intense and 20 dB are 100 times more
intense than 1 dB.
Decibel “A-Weighted” (dBA). The “A-weighted” scale for
measuring sound in decibels, which weighs or reduces the effects
of low and high frequencies in order to simulate human hearing.
Every increase of 10 dBA doubles the perceived loudness even
though the noise is actually ten times more intense.
Dedication. The turning over by an owner or developer of private
land for public use, and the acceptance of land for such use by the
governmental agency having jurisdiction over the public function
for which it will be used. Dedications for roads, parks, school
sites, or other public uses are often required by a city or county as
conditions for approval of a development. (See “In-Lieu Fee”)
Density. The amount of development or people per unit of area or
property. (See also “Density, Residential” and “Floor Area Ratio”)
Density, Residential (du/acre). The number of permanent
residential dwelling units (du) per acre of land. Densities specified
in the General Plan are expressed in dwelling units per net
acreage (du/acre). (See “Acres, Gross” and “Acres, Net”)

Development. The physical extension and/or construction of non-
farm land uses. Development activities include: subdivision of
land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, utilities and
other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of
refuse, debris or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetative
cover (with the exception of agricultural activities). The
construction of a single-family home on an existing lot, and
routine repair and maintenance activities, are exempted.
Development Fees. Direct charges or dedications collected on a
one-time basis for a service provided or as a condition of approval
being granted by the local government. The purpose of the fee or
exaction must directly relate to the need created by the
development. In addition, its amount must be proportional to the
cost of the service or improvement. Fees can be broken down into
two major classes: 1) service charges such as permit fees covering
the cost of processing development plans, connection or standby
fees for installing utilities, or application fees for reviewing and
considering development proposals; and 2) “impact” fees levied
on new development to cover the cost of infrastructure or facilities
necessitated by development.
Disabled. Persons determined to have a physical impairment or
mental disorder, which is expected to be of long, continued, or
indefinite duration and is of such a nature that the person’s ability
to live independently could be improved by more suitable
housing conditions.
Duet. Two single-family homes attached to each other by at least
one common wall extending from the foundation to the roof,
which forms the property line. Each dwelling unit has individual
heating and plumbing systems and may be owned separately.
Duplex. A free-standing house divided into two separate
dwelling units or residences, usually having separate entrances.
The duplex is owned as a single property; the two units typically
cannot be owned separately.
Dwelling Unit (du). A building or portion of a building
containing one or more rooms, designed for or used by one family

for living or sleeping purposes, and having a separate bathroom
and only one kitchen or kitchenette.
Ecosystem. An interacting system formed by a biotic community
and its physical environment.
Erosion. The process by which soil and rock are detached and
moved by running water, wind, ice, and gravity.
Farmland, Prime. Land that has the best combination of physical
and chemical characteristics for the production of crops. It has the
soil quality, growing season, and moisture supply needed to
produce sustained high yields of crops when treated and
managed, including water management, according to current
farming methods. Prime Farmland must have been used for the
production of irrigated crops within the last 3 years.
Farmland of Local Importance. Land other than Prime Farmland,
Farmland of Statewide Importance, or Unique Farmland that is
either currently producing crops or that has the capability of
production. This land may be important to the local economy due
to its productivity.
Farmland of Statewide Importance. Land other than Prime
Farmland which has a good combination of physical and chemical
characteristics for the production of crops. It must have been used
for the production of irrigated crops within the last 3 years.
Farmland, Unique. Land which does not meet the criteria for
Prime Farmland or Farmland of Statewide Importance that is
currently used for the production of specific high economic value
crops. It has the special combination of soil quality, location,
growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce
sustained high quality or high yields of a specific crop when
treated and managed according to current farming methods.
Examples of such crops may include oranges, olives, avocados,
rice, grapes, and cut flowers.
Fault. A fracture in the earth’s crust that forms a boundary
between rock masses that have shifted.

Flood, 100-year. In any given year, a flood that has a 1 percent
likelihood of occurring, and is recognized as a standard for
acceptable risk.
Flood, 500-year. In any given year, a flood that has a 0.2 percent
likelihood of occurring.
Floodplain. The relatively level land area on either side of the
banks of a stream regularly subject to flooding.
Floodway. The part of the floodplain capable of conveying the
100-year flood with no more than a 1-foot rise in water. The
floodway includes the river channel itself and adjacent land areas.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The size of a building in square feet
divided by land area, expressed as a decimal number. For
example, a 60,000-square-foot building on a 120,000 square-foot
parcel would have an FAR of 0.50. The FAR is used in calculating
the building intensity of non-residential development.
Garden Apartments. A grouping of attached homes arranged to
share one or more central courtyards.
General Plan. A compendium of City policies regarding its long-
term development, in the form of maps and accompanying text.
The General Plan is a legal document required of each local
agency by the State of California Government Code Section 65301
and adopted by the City Council. In California, the General Plan
has seven mandatory elements (Circulation, Conservation,
Housing, Land Use, Noise, Open Space, and Public Safety) and
may include any number of optional elements the City deems
important.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS). A combination of
approaches, programs, methodologies, and technologies to gather,
store, manipulate, analyze, present, and interpret spatial
information and data.
Goal. A description of the general desired results that Morgan
Hill seeks to create through the implementation of the General
Plan. Goals are included in each element of the Plan and may
include the key physical or community characteristics that the
City and its residents wish to maintain or develop.
Gray Water.         The less contaminated portion of domestic
wastewater, including wash water from clothes washers and
laundry tubs.
Greenhouse Effect. A term used to describe the warming of the
earth’s atmosphere due to accumulated carbon dioxide and other
gases in the upper atmosphere. These gases absorb energy
radiated from the earth’s surface, “trapping” it in the same
manner as glass in a greenhouse traps heat.
Greenhouse Gas (GHG). A gaseous compound that contributes to
the greenhouse effect.
Groundwater. Water that exists beneath the earth’s surface,
typically found between saturated soils and rock, and is used to
supply wells and springs.
Growth Management. The use by a community of a wide range of
techniques in combination to determine the amount, type, and
rate of development desired by the community and to channel
that growth into designated areas. Growth management policies
can be implemented through building permit caps, public
facilities/infrastructure ordinances, urban limit lines, standards for
levels of service, phasing, and other programs.
Habitat. The physical location or type of environment in which an
organism or biological population lives or occurs.
Hazardous Waste. Waste that requires special handling to avoid
illness or injury to persons or damage to property.
High Occupancy Vehicle Lanes (HOV). Traffic lanes that are
designated and reserved for vehicles with a minimum number of
passengers during high-volume commute hours in order to
encourage carpooling through faster travel. They are enforced
with fines and traffic tickets.

Horizon Year. The year through which the General Plan is
intended to be effective, or 2035.
Horizontal Mixed Use. A type of mixed-use development where
residential uses are located behind or next to non-residential uses
on the same development site.
Household. Person or persons living in one dwelling unit.
Implementation. Actions, procedures, programs, or techniques
that carry out policies.
Income, Above-Moderate. A household whose income exceeds
120 percent of the county median.
Income, Extremely-Low. A household whose income is less than
30 percent of the county median.
Income, Low. A household whose income is between 50 and 80
percent of the county median.
Income, Median. The countywide median income for a four-
person household, as defined by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).
Income, Moderate. A household whose income is between 81 and
120 percent of the median family income for the county.
Income, Very-Low. A household whose income does not exceed
50 percent of the median family income for the county.
Infill Development. Development that occurs on vacant or
underutilized land within areas that are already largely
developed.
In-lieu Fee. Cash payments that may be required of an owner or
developer as a substitute for a dedication of land for public use,
usually calculated in dollars per lot, and referred to as in-lieu fees
or in-lieu contributions. (See “Dedication”)

Jobs/Housing Balance. A ratio used to describe the adequacy of
the housing supply within a defined area to meet the needs of
persons working within the same area. Jobs/housing balance as
used in the General Plan is the ratio of jobs to employed residents.
Landslide. The downslope movement of soil and rock.
Land Use. The occupation or utilization of an area of land for any
human activity or any purpose.
Land Use Designation. One particular category in a classification
series of appropriate use of properties established by the General
Plan City and Neighborhood Form Element.
Level of Service (LOS) Standard. A standard used by
government agencies to measure the quality or effectiveness of a
municipal service, such as police, fire, or library, or the
performance of a facility, such as a street or highway.
Level of Service (Traffic). A scale that measures the amount of
traffic that a roadway or intersection can accommodate, based on
such factors as maneuverability, driver dissatisfaction, and delay.
Level of Service A. A relatively free flow of traffic, with little or
no limitation on vehicle movement or speed. Average delays at
signalized intersections are less than 35 seconds, and all queues
clear in a single signal cycle.
Level of Service B. A steady flow of traffic, with only slight delays
in vehicle movement and speed. Average delays at signalized
intersections are less than 35 seconds, and all queues clear in a
single signal cycle.
Level of Service C. A reasonably steady, high-volume flow of
traffic, with some limitations on movement and speed, and
occasional backups on critical approaches. Average delays at
signalized intersections are less than 35 seconds, and all queues
clear in a single signal cycle.
Level of Service D. Designates the level where traffic nears an
unstable flow. Intersections still function, but short queues
develop and cars may have to wait through one signal cycle
during short peaks. Average delays at signalized intersections are
35 seconds.
Level of Service E. Represents traffic characterized by slow
movement and frequent (although momentary) stoppages. This
type of congestion is considered severe, but is not uncommon at
peak traffic hours, with frequent stopping, long-standing queues,
and blocked intersections. Average delays at signalized
intersections are 80 seconds.
Level of Service F. Describes unsatisfactory stop-and-go traffic
characterized by “traffic jams” and stoppages of long duration.
Vehicles at signalized intersections usually have to wait through
one or more signal changes, and “upstream” intersections may be
blocked by the long queues. Average delays at signalized
intersections are 80 seconds or more.
Liquefaction. A sudden large decrease in the shearing resistance
of a cohesionless soil, caused by a collapse of the structure by
shock or strain, and associated with a sudden but temporary
increase of the pore fluid pressure.
Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). A five- or seven-
member commission within each county that reviews and
evaluates all proposals for formation of special districts,
incorporation of cities, annexation to special districts or cities,
consolidation of districts, and merger of districts with cities. Each
county’s LAFCO is empowered to approve, disapprove, or
conditionally approve such proposals.
Local Street. Provides direct access to properties; generally they
carry the lowest traffic volumes.
Manufactured Home. A factory-built home on a permanent frame
to enable transportability.
Master Plan. Master Plans are documents that implement the
General Plan. Examples include the Water, Sewer, and
Stormwater Master Plans or the Bikeways, Trails, Parks and
Recreation Master Plan. A land use master plan is a document that

describes, in narrative and with maps, an overall development
concept including both present property uses as well as future
land development plans. The plan may be prepared by the City to
guide private and public development or by a developer on a
specific project.
Mitigation. A specific action taken to reduce environmental
impacts to insignificant levels. Mitigation measures are required
as a component of an environmental impact report (EIR).
Mixed Use. Any mixture of land uses on a single parcel, including
mixtures of residences with commercial, offices with retail, or
visitor accommodation with offices and retail. As distinguished
from a single use land use designation or zone, mixed use refers to
an authorized variety of uses for buildings and structures in a
particular area.
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
built on a permanent chassis and designed for use as a single-
family dwelling unit and which: (1) has a minimum of 400 square
feet of living space; (2) has a minimum width in excess of 102
inches; (3) is connected to all available permanent utilities; and (4)
is tied down (a) to a permanent foundation on a lot either owned
or leased by the homeowner or (b) is set on piers, with wheels
removed and skirted, in a mobile home park.
Mobile Home Park. A parcel of land under one ownership that
has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
mobile homes for rental purposes for non-transient use.
Modular Home. A factory-built home with either an on-frame or
off-frame design.
Multi-Family: For the purposes of this General Plan, “multi-
family” refers to homes in three or more attached units.
Natural Community. A distinctive group of different organisms
that inhabit a common environment, interact with each other, and
are relatively independent of other groups.

Noise Contour. A line connecting points of equal noise level as
measured on the same scale. Noise levels greater than the 60 Ldn
contour (measured in dBA) require noise attenuation in
residential development.
Noise-Sensitive Use. A location where people reside or where the
presence of unwanted sound could adversely affect the use of
land, such as residences, schools, and hospitals.
Open Space. Open Space encompasses lands that essentially are
unimproved and that have limited development potential due to
the physical characteristics of the land, due to the land being
restricted to agricultural production, due to the location of the
land as a buffer between urban areas, or due to the scenic value of
the land and its role in maintaining a community's sense of
character or heritage.
Overlay. A land use designation or zoning designation that
modifies the basic underlying designation or designations in some
specific manner.
Parcel. A lot, or contiguous group of lots, in single ownership or
under single control, usually considered a unit for purposes of
development.
Particulate Matter. Minute, separate airborne solid or liquid
particles including smoke, dust, aerosols, metallic oxides, and
pollen.
Peak Hour Traffic. The number of vehicles passing over a
designated section of a street during the busiest one-hour period
during a 24-hour period.
Policy. A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions that
implies clear commitment but is not mandatory. A general
direction that a governmental agency sets to follow, in order to
meet its goals before undertaking an implementing action or
program. (See “Action”)

Recycled Water. Water that has gone through a sewage treatment
plant and is then re-used for irrigation or other purposes. (Santa
Clara Valley Water District)
Response Time. The amount of time for an emergency services
response, measured from the time of the distress call until arrival
on the scene.
Right-of-Way. 1. The total street width needed to accommodate
travel lanes, sidewalks and curbs, and gutters. 2. A strip of land
acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication,
prescription or condemnation, and intended to be occupied or
usually occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric
transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm
sewer, or other similar use.
Riparian Corridor. A habitat and vegetation zone that is
associated with the banks and floodplains of a river, stream, or
lake. Riparian trees and shrubs are typically phreatophytes, plants
whose root systems are in constant contact with groundwater.
Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan (HCP). A countywide plan to
preserve habitat for endangered, threatened, and special concern
plants and animals present in the county.
Safe Routes to Schools. Pedestrian and bicycling routes that
provide safe access to and from schools.
Senate Bill (SB), California. Precedes digits indicating specific bill
number, e.g., SB 375.
Sensitive Receptors. Members of the population who are most
sensitive to air quality, including children, the elderly, the acutely
ill, and the chronically ill. The term “sensitive receptors” can also
refer to the land use categories where these people live or spend a
significant amount of time. Such areas include residences, schools,
playgrounds, child care centers, hospitals, retirement homes, and
convalescent homes.
Single-Family: For the purposes of this General Plan, single-
family refers to stand-alone detached homes, including mobile

homes, as well as duplexes, duets, and zero-lot-line homes of no
more than two attached units.
Slope Failure. The process, often sudden, in which a steep slope
collapses, usually carrying along structures and vegetation.
Slope, Steep. An area with a greater than 5 percent slope.
Solid Waste. Unwanted or discarded material, including garbage,
with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing.
Small Lot Single Family Home. A detached residential structure
on a small lot that provides a complete, independent home for one
household.
Specific Plan. Under Article 8 of the Government Code (Section
65450 et seq), a legal tool for detailed design and implementation
of a defined portion of the area covered by a General Plan. A
specific plan may include all detailed regulations, conditions,
programs, and/or proposed legislation which may be necessary or
convenient for the systematic implementation of any General Plan
element(s). The contents are the same as those of a policy plan
except they will be more comprehensive with respect to utilities
and public facilities and their funding. (See also “Policy Plan” and
“Planned Development”)
Sphere of Influence (SOI). The probable physical boundaries and
service area of the city, as determined by the Local Agency
Formation Commission (LAFCO) of the county.
Stacked Flats. A residential structure that contains two or more
dwellings stacked above each other.
Subdivision. The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two
or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for sale,
development, or lease.
Subsidence. The gradual sinking of land as a result of natural or
man-made causes.

Sustainable. Describes practices that meet the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs.1
Topography. The configuration of a land surface, including its
relief and the position of its natural and manmade features.
Townhouse/Townhome. A series of residences, often two to three
stories in height, that are connected side by side in a row with
each having a separate street-level entrance.
Traffic Calming. Measures designed to reduce motor vehicle
speeds and to encourage pedestrian use, including:
     Narrow streets
     Tight turning radii
     Sidewalk bulbouts
     Parking bays
     Textured paving at intersections
     Parkways between sidewalks and streets
Transfer of Development Rights (TDR). The exchange of
development rights from areas where development is prohibited
(e.g. environmentally sensitive areas) to a location where
development is encouraged.
Transportation Demand Management (TDM). TDM includes
programs to reduce single occupancy vehicle travel. Programs
include: carpools, vanpools, park and ride lots, transit, bicycle
facilities, parking restrictions, flex-time, work hours, and
pedestrian facilities. TDM programs are most effective in large
office and industrial areas or large employment centers.
Trip Generation Rate. The number of vehicle trips per unit of
measure during a 24-hour period. Measured trip-generation rates
    1

are used to project the impact of development on the traffic
circulation system.
Triplex. A free-standing house divided into three separate living
units or residences, usually having separate entrances.
Unincorporated Area. Encompasses properties that are located
outside of cities. Development in the unincorporated area is
subject to County jurisdiction.
Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). The statutory boundary
implemented by the City indicating the maximum allowable
extent of urbanization. Beyond this boundary, only agricultural or
open space uses are typically permitted.
Urban Service Area: The Urban Service Area refers to the area
within the UGB where utilities, such as gas, water, sewer, and
electricity, and public services, such as police, fire, schools, and
parks and recreation, are and will be provided by the City or other
service provider agencies.
Use. The purpose for which a lot or structure is or may be leased,
occupied, maintained, arranged, designed, intended, constructed,
erected, moved, altered and/or enlarged in accordance with the
City Land Use and Development Code and General Plan land use
designations.
Vehicle Trip. A trip made by a vehicle (may equal one or more
person-trips).
Vertical Mixed Use. A building that provides a mix of uses. It
typically consists of retail, service and/or office uses on the ground
floor and residential uses on the upper floors.
Waste Stream. All solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes including
garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes,
demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and
parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure,
vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other
discarded solid and semisolid wastes.
Wastewater. Water that has already been used for washing,
flushing, or in a manufacturing process, and therefore contains
waste products such as sewage or chemical by-products.
Watershed. The total area above a given point on a watercourse
that contributes water to the flow of the watercourse; the entire
region drained by a watercourse.
Waterway. A waterway can support its own environment of
vegetation, fowl, fish, and reptiles, and appears natural.
Wetlands. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Williamson Act. Formerly known as the California Land
Conservation Act of 1965, it was designed as an incentive to retain
prime agricultural land and open space in agricultural use,
thereby slowing its conversion to urban and suburban
development. The program entails a 10-year contract between the
City or County and an owner of land whereby the land is taxed on
the basis of its agricultural use rather than its market value. The
land becomes subject to certain enforceable restrictions, and
certain conditions need to be met prior to approval of an
agreement.
Zoning. The division of a city by ordinance or other legislative
regulation into districts or zones, which specify allowable uses for
real property and size restrictions for buildings constructed in
these areas; a program that implements the land use policies of the
General Plan.
Zoning District. A designated area of the city for which
prescribed land use requirements and building and development
standards are or will be established.

APPENDIX A
GENERAL PLAN UPDATE PROCESS
This Appendix provides an overview of the General Plan Update
process.
EXISTING CONDITIONS WHITE PAPERS
The first phase of the General Plan Update process was devoted to
researching and documenting baseline conditions, trends, and
opportunities in Morgan Hill, as well as investigating best
practices from other communities. This effort resulted in a series
of white papers covering the following topics: economics,
population and housing, growth management, environmental
resources and hazards, land use and design, and transportation
and public infrastructure. These memoranda informed the later
development of the community’s vision and goals, policy options,
and land use alternatives. They also provided the foundation of
baseline conditions for the Environmental Impact Report (EIR),
which is a document required by State law to evaluate and
mitigate the potential environmental effects of implementing the
General Plan.
ISSUES IDENTIFICATION AND INFORMATION GATHERING
Simultaneously with developing a body of existing conditions
data, the City gathered information from both the community and
external experts to identify issues, concerns, and ideas to address
in the General Plan update. Two symposia were held coincident
with the development of the white papers to discuss economic
development and growth management, both important public
issues in Morgan Hill.
At a daylong Economic Development Symposium at Mama Mia’s
restaurant, industry experts discussed best practices and
answered questions about bringing jobs to Morgan Hill,
supporting local retailers, enhancing downtown, and attracting
tourists. A few weeks later, residents were invited to attend a
similar Growth Management Symposium at the Morgan Hill
                                                                    A-1

M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
A P P E N D I X   A :   G E N E R A L  P L A N  U P D A T E  P R O C E S S
                                                            Community and Cultural Center. Attendees gained insight from
                                                            experts into how Morgan Hill manages growth and lessons
                                                            learned in other communities. The symposia informed the
                                                            community about recent approaches to these topics, and also
                                                            provided a forum for the public to discuss their ideas and
                                                            concerns.
                                                            VISION AND GOALS
                                                            The vision and goals phase involved a public process to identify a
                                                            vision and set of overarching goals for the General Plan Update.
                                                            This task included a community workshop, General Plan
                                                            Advisory Committee (GPAC), and City Council Study Session.
                                                            These events offered the public and decision-makers information
                                                            on the General Plan Update, as well as a chance to ask questions
                                                            and make comments on the process and the update itself, and to
                                                            identify the issues they felt were most important to the
                                                            community.
                                                            GROWTH STRATEGIES
                                                            The growth strategies development phase involved crafting
                                                            growth and land use alternatives in response to the issues the
                                                            community had identified in previous phases. Three preliminary
                                                            development options were developed and accompanied by land
                                                            use maps that showed growth focused on different areas:
                                                            complete neighborhoods, downtown and corridors, and new
                                                            neighborhoods. Over the course of three GPAC meetings; a
                                                            community workshop; a City Council/Planning Commission
                                                            study session; a joint City Council, Planning Commission and
                                                            GPAC meeting; and an online Open Town Forum, the project
                                                            team refined these into three alternatives for more in-depth
                                                            analysis.
                                                            ALTERNATIVES EVALUATION AND WORKBOOK
                                                            After finalizing three study alternatives, those alternatives were
                                                            then evaluated and compared in relation to market and financing
                                                            feasibility, utilities and transportation infrastructure needs, public
A-2
                                                                        M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                        A P P E N D I X A : G E N E R A L  P L A N  U P D A T E P R O C E S S
service needs, and impacts on environmental resources. A Growth
Alternatives Workbook provided analyzed the potential
environmental and fiscal impacts of the alternatives. The GPAC,
Planning Commission, and City Council used this evaluation to
select a Preferred Land Use Plan based on the best features of each
of the alternatives. This Preferred Land Use Plan formed the basis
for the General Plan Land Use Map, and guides the nature,
pattern, and location of land development and conservation in the
City. The growth strategies and land use alternatives did not
include the Southeast Quadrant area, which was the subject of a
separate, multi-year planning process.
POLICIES DEVELOPMENT
Following selection of the Preferred Land Use Alternative, the
project team developed goals, policies, and actions for each
element of the General Plan. Policies were designed to support the
Preferred Land Use Alternative and reflect the issues the
community identified throughout the process. Many policies from
the prior General Plan were carried forward or adapted to meet
Morgan Hill’s current needs. In addition, a number of other
policies were included in order to respond to specific
environmental concerns and avoid common environmental
impacts associated with new development under the General
Plan. Three GPAC meetings, one Planning Commission meeting,
and one City Council meeting provided guidance on the major
policy issues for this General Plan.
DRAFT DOCUMENTS
The City published a draft version of the General Plan for public
review and comment on November 5, 2015. The City published
the associated Draft Environmental Impact Report (EIR) in
January 2016. The Draft General Plan was based upon the
Preferred Land Use Alternative and the goals, policies, and
actions were developed with community feedback collected
during the prior phases. The completed EIR evaluates this General
Plan. By preparing the EIR concurrent with the Draft General
Plan, the City was able to incorporate necessary mitigation
                                                                                                                         A-3

M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
A P P E N D I X   A :   G E N E R A L  P L A N  U P D A T E  P R O C E S S
                                                            measures directly into the Plan, ensuring that it is “self-
                                                            mitigating.”
                                                            PUBLIC REVIEW AND ADOPTION
                                                            The final phase of the General Plan Update process included
                                                            reviewing and adopting final documents and certifying the EIR.
                                                            This process included the 45-day public review period of the EIR,
                                                            followed by revising the Draft EIR based on the public comments
                                                            received, and completing of the Final EIR. Finally, the Planning
                                                            Commission and City Council held hearings to certify and adopt
                                                            the Final General Plan and EIR.
                                                            PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
                                                            The Morgan Hill 2035 General Plan was developed with extensive
                                                            community input. The public process included a total of two
                                                            symposia, 23 General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC)
                                                            meetings, eight City Council/Planning Commission study
                                                            sessions, and four community workshops, including one held at
                                                            St. Catherine’s Catholic Church entirely in Spanish.
                                                            In addition, to ensure the General Plan incorporated feedback
                                                            from stakeholders across the spectrum of the community, the City
                                                            invited 150 representatives of key businesses, property owners
                                                            and developers, commercial brokers, housing advocates and
                                                            builders, government partners, and nonprofit partners to a series
                                                            of interviews to discuss housing and growth management, growth
                                                            alternatives, policy options, and the zoning ordinance.
                                                            To increase involvement in the process from all residents, the
                                                            Morgan Hill Times, Morgan Hill Life magazine, and the City’s
                                                            Recreation Activity Guide published advertisements and articles
                                                            about the General Plan Update and its public workshops. The City
                                                            sent over 300 letters to community members, in both Spanish and
                                                            English. Throughout the process, the City kept the public updated
                                                            through the Morgan Hill 2035 website, Facebook page, Twitter
                                                            feed, and newsletters; advertised meetings with banners and
                                                            digital signs; gave the community opportunities to provide
                                                            feedback online through a web-based Open Town Hall forum;
A-4

                                                                    M O R G A N  H I L L  2 0 3 5  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                    A P P E N D I X A : G E N E R A L  P L A N  U P D A T E P R O C E S S
and staffed information booths at events such as Freedom Fest
and Taste of Morgan Hill.
                                                                                                                     A-5
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
A P P E N D I X   A :   G E N E R A L  P L A N  U P D A T E P R O C E S S
A-6
APPENDIX B
POLICY GUIDE
City Neighborhood Form
CNF-1.1 Coordinated Planning Decisions
CNF-1.2 Annual General Plan Review
CNF-1.3 Regional Coordination
CNF-1.4 Pipeline Provisions
CNF-2.1 Orderly Development
CNF-2.2 A Balanced Community
CNF-2.3 Quality of Life
CNF-2.4 Changing Demographics
CNF-2.5 Morgan Hill 2035 EIR Projections
CNF-3.1 RDCS Purpose
CNF-3.2 Relationship to General Plan
CNF-3.3 Basic Principles
CNF-3.4 Population Limit
CNF-3.5 Rate of Growth
CNF-3.6 Adequate Services and Infrastructure
CNF-3.7 Jobs/Housing Balance
CNF-3.8 Allotments Required
CNF-3.9 Annual Allotments
CNF-3.10 Multi-Family Housing
CNF-3.11 Competition for Allotments
CNF-3.12 Weighting of Points
CNF-3.13 Downtown Set-Asides
CNF-3.14 Agricultural Preservation Set-Asides
CNF-3.15 Voluntary Features
CNF-3.16 Competition Criteria
CNF-4.1 Future Growth Areas
CNF-4.2 Urban Growth Boundary
CNF-4.3 Prerequisites for Urban Development
CNF-4.4 Adding Developed Lands into Urban Growth
          Boundary
CNF-4.5 Urban Growth Boundary Modifications
CNF-4.6 City/County Role in Urban Growth Boundary
          Modifications
CNF-4.7 Urban Growth Boundary Modification Criteria
                                                    B-1
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          CNF-4.8  Land Supply
                                                          CNF-4.9  Orderly Growth
                                                          CNF-4.10 Urban Service Area Expansions
                                                          CNF-4.11 Urban Service Area Expansions Within UGB
                                                          CNF-5.1  Land Use Conflicts
                                                          CNF-5.2  Road and Infrastructure Extensions
                                                          CNF-6.1  Services to Serve Growth
                                                          CNF-6.2  Service Standards
                                                          CNF-6.3  New Public Facilities
                                                          CNF-6.4  Public Facilities Upgrades
                                                          CNF-6.5  Development Review Procedure
                                                          CNF-6.6  Urban Level of Public Services
                                                          CNF-6.7  Impacts on City Infrastructure
                                                          CNF-6.8  Service and Utility Plans
                                                          CNF-7.1  County General Plan Policies
                                                          CNF-7.2  Rural Landowner Home Occupation
                                                          CNF-7.3  Rural Land Uses
                                                          CNF-7.4  Agricultural Land Use Conflicts
                                                          CNF-7.5  Inter-Jurisdictional Support for Agriculture
                                                          CNF-8.1  High Quality Design
                                                          CNF-8.2  Design Features
                                                          CNF-8.3  Changes in Building Scale
                                                          CNF-8.4  Architectural Quality
                                                          CNF-8.5  Building Façade
                                                          CNF-8.6  Franchise Architecture
                                                          CNF-8.7  Design Sensitivity
                                                          CNF-8.8  Blighted Buildings
                                                          CNF-8.9  Commercial Landscaping
                                                          CNF-8.10 Public Landscaping
                                                          CNF-8.11 Pedestrian Spaces
                                                          CNF-8.12 Visual Impact of Parking
                                                          CNF-8.13 Permeable Surface Materials
                                                          CNF-8.14 Sound Walls
                                                          CNF-8.15 Streetscape Improvement Maintenance
                                                          CNF-8.16 Undergrounding of Utilities
                                                          CNF-8.17 Public Art
                                                          CNF-8.18 Monterey Road Development Form
                                                          CNF-8.19 Incompatible Uses
                                                          CNF-8.20 Nighttime Lighting
                                                          CNF-8.21 Nighttime Lighting Technology
B-2

                                                      M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                  A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
CNF-9.1 Density Feathering from High to Low Densities
CNF-9.2 Density Feathering West of Highway 101
CNF-9.3 Density Feathering in South Morgan Hill
CNF-10.1 Range of Residential Densities
CNF-10.2 Single-Family and Multi=Family Housing Ratio
CNF-10.3 Adequate Supply of Multi-Family Housing
CNF-10.4 Single-Family Housing Supply
CNF-10.5 Affordable Single-Family Housing
CNF-10.6 Density Near Infrastructure
CNF-10.7 Range of Parcel Sizes
CNF-11.1 Preservation of Single-Family Neighborhoods
CNF-11.2 Well-Designed Residential Neighborhoods
CNF-11.3 Appropriate Residential Transitions
CNF-11.4 Internal Connectivity
CNF-11.5 Outside Connections
CNF-11.6 Open Space Connections
CNF-11.7 Clustering of Residential Units
CNF-11.8 Multi-Modal Transportation System
CNF-11.9 Continuous Sidewalks
CNF-11.10 Open Space
CNF-11.11 Mix of Housing Types
CNF-11.12 Design Variation
CNF-11.13 Active Public Realm
CNF-11.14 Residential Development
CNF-11.15 Architectural Style
CNF-11.16 360-Degree Design
CNF-11.17 Architectural Details
CNF-11.18 Orientation to the Street
CNF-11.19 Parking and Driveways
CNF-11.20 Infill Compatibility
CNF-11.21 Neighbor Privacy
CNF-11.22 Minimized Mass and Scale
CNF-11.23 Individual Units
CNF-11.24 Ground Level Entries
CNF-11.25 Prominent Entries
CNF-11.26 Multi-Family Entrances
CNF-11.27 Ground-Floor Transition Zones
CNF-11.28 Bicycles and Pedestrians
CNF-11.29 Multi-Family Open Space
CNF-12.1 Neighborhood Center Design
                                                                                                         B-3
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          CNF-12.2 Well-connected Neighborhood Centers
                                                          CNF-12.3 Neighborhood-serving Retail in Neighborhood Centers
                                                          CNF-12.4 Neighborhood Center Requirements
                                                          CNF-13.1 Mixed Use Flex Development
                                                          CNF-13.2 Density Feathering
                                                          CNF-13.3 Maximize Land Use
                                                          CNF-13.4 Block-level Master Plans
                                                          CNF-14.1 Mixture of Uses Downtown
                                                          CNF-14.2 Downtown as Local Retail Destination
                                                          CNF-14.3 Downtown Specific Plan
                                                          CNF-14.4 Downtown Retail Uses
                                                          CNF-14.5 Downtown Residential Uses
                                                          CNF-14.6 RDCS to Support Downtown Residential
                                                          CNF-14.7 Pedestrian-Oriented Downtown
                                                          CNF-14.8 Downtown Streetscape
                                                          CNF-14.9 Downtown Transit Stops
                                                          CNF-14.10 Adequate Downtown Parking
                                                          CNF-14.11 Downtown Parking Sharing
                                                          CNF-14.12 Downtown Transportation Improvements
                                                          CNF-14.13 Downtown Special Events
                                                          CNF-14.14 Relocation of Industrial Uses from Downtown
                                                          CNF-15.1 Mix of Commercial Uses
                                                          CNF-15.2 Successful Commercial Uses
                                                          CNF-15.3 Retail Uses at Major Intersections
                                                          CNF-15.4 Commercial Uses Along Monterey Road north of
                                                                    Watsonville Road
                                                          CNF-15.5 Office Development
                                                          CNF-15.6 Preservation of Homes Along Monterey Road
                                                          CNF-16.1 Tourist and Sub-regional Uses at the Northeast
                                                                    Cochrane and Southwest Tenant Freeway Interchange
                                                          CNF-16.2 Ancillary Commercial Uses Limitations
                                                          CNF-17.1 Industrial Land Conversion
                                                          CNF-17.2 Industrial Land Use Conflicts
                                                          CNF-17.3 Buffer between Industrial and Incompatible Uses
                                                          CNF-17.4 Property between Monterey Road and UPRR Tracks
                                                          CNF-17.5 Industrial Design Standards
                                                          CNF-18.1 Vibrant Job Centers
                                                          CNF-18.2 Thoughtful Design
                                                          CNF-18.3 Compatible Industrial Uses
                                                          CNF-18.4 Commercial/Industrial Area East of Highway 101
B-4
                                                               M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                           A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
CNF-19.1 Unique Gateways
CNF-19.2 Visual Integrity of Gateways
CNF-19.3 Freeway Gateway Design Standards
CNF-19.4 Landmark Buildings
CNF-20.1 East of 101 Area Land Use Planning
CNF-20.2 East of 101 Area Land Use Mix
CNF-20.3 East of 101 Area Design
CNF-20.4 East of 101 Integrated Agriculture
CNF-21.1 County Land Use Policies
CNF-21.2 City and County Land Use Policies
CNF-21.3 City/County Land Use Referral Process
CNF-21.4 Incorporation
Economic Development
ED-1.1   Local Wage Levels
ED-1.2   Jobs/Housing Balance
ED-1.3   Regional Housing Needs Allocation
ED-1.4   Local Higher Education Resources
ED-1.5   Higher Education as a Local Targeted Industry
ED-2.1   Robust Mix of Land Uses
ED-2.2   Economic Development to Manage Fiscal Impacts
ED-2.3   Economic Diversity
ED-2.4   Fiscal Impact Analysis
ED-2.5   Fiscal Mitigation
ED-3.1   Business Retention, Expansion, and Attraction Efforts
ED-3.2   Employment Land Supply
ED-3.3   Use of City Funds to Increase Impact
ED-3.4   Business Attraction and Retention Strategy
ED-3.5   Diverse Housing Stock
ED-3.6   Business Friendly Environment
ED-3.7   Flexible Business District Zoning
ED-3.8   Dynamic Working Environments
ED-4.1   Public Assets to Support Tourism
ED-4.2   Wine Tourism
ED-4.3   Sports Tourism
ED-4.4   Arts and Culture
ED-4.5   Publicly Accessible Artwork
ED-4.6   Public Artwork Installations
ED-4.7   Public Art at Key Destinations
ED-4.8   Public Art in the Planning Process
                                                                                                                  B-5
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          ED-4.9   Overnight Accommodations
                                                          ED-4.10  Regional Freeway Visibility and Access
                                                          ED-4.11  Tourism Support Services
                                                          ED-4.12  Tourism Marketing and Branding
                                                          ED-5.1   Downtown Specific Plan
                                                          ED-5.2   Public/Private Partnerships to Enhance the Downtown
                                                                   Environment
                                                          ED-5.3   Mixed-Use Downtown
                                                          ED-5.4   Downtown as Cultural Center
                                                          ED-6.1   Monterey Corridor Non-Residential Development
                                                          ED-6.2   Monterey Corridor Residential Development
                                                          ED-7.1   Shopping Center and Other Commercial Development
                                                          ED-7.2   Regional Retail Facilities
                                                          ED-7.3   Commercial Center Revitalization and Reuse
                                                          ED-7.4   Compatible Uses in Retail Centers
                                                          ED-7.5   Incentives to Revitalize and Reuse Shopping Centers
                                                          ED-7.6   Enhanced Shopping Center Functionality
                                                          ED-7.7   Viability of Ongoing Retail Uses
                                                          ED-7.8   Tenant Assistance
                                                          ED-8.1   Office and Industrial Development
                                                          ED-9.1   Robust Telecommunications
                                                          ED-9.2   Roadway Capacity to Support Business
                                                          ED-9.3   Robust Transportation Options
                                                          Healthy Community
                                                          HC-1.1   Neighborhood Schools
                                                          HC-1.2   Coordinate School Development
                                                          HC-1.3   Quality Education
                                                          HC-1.4   Strategic Plan
                                                          HC-1.5   Site Selection
                                                          HC-1.6   Efficient Siting
                                                          HC-1.7   Neighborhood Activities
                                                          HC-1.8   Park Coordination
                                                          HC-1.9   Impact Mitigation
                                                          HC-1.10 Community Issues
                                                          HC-1.11 Comparable Fees
                                                          HC-1.12 School Availability
                                                          HC-2.1   Increased Services
                                                          HC-2.2   Coordinated Senior Services
                                                          HC-2.3   New Development
B-6
                                  M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                              A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
HC-2.4  Universal Design
HC-2.5  Community Representation
HC-2.6  Healthy Kids
HC-2.7  Underage Tobacco Access
HC-2.8  Underage Alcohol Access
HC-3.1  Universal Recreation
HC-3.2  Parkland Standard
HC-3.3  Park Land Fees
HC-3.4  New Facilities
HC-3.5  Mini-Parks
HC-3.6  Flood Control Basins
HC-3.7  Maintenance
HC-3.8  Private Open Space
HC-3.9  Open Space Requirements
HC-3.10 Walking Distance
HC-3.11 Conservation Coordination
HC-3.12 Bikeways
HC-3.13 Sports Fields
HC-3.14 Streamside Trails
HC-3.15 County Parkland
HC-3.16 Greenbelt Areas
HC-3.17 Regional Needs
HC-3.18 Minimizing Impacts
HC-3.19 Community Involvement
HC-3.20 Safety
HC-3.21 Multiuse Facilities
HC-3.22 School Coordination
HC-3.23 Educational Joint Use
HC-3.24 Parkland Acquisition
HC-3.25 Partnerships
HC-3.26 Long-Term Operations
HC-3.27 Business Plans
HC-3.28 Funding
HC-3.29 Development Requirements
HC-3.30 Case-by-case Programs
HC-3.31 HOA Park Guidelines
HC-4.1  City Facilities
HC-4.2  Accessibility
HC-4.3  Cultural Awareness
HC-4.4  Historical Awareness
                                                                                     B-7
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          HC-4.5    Arts Promotion
                                                          HC-4.6    Placemaking
                                                          HC-4.7    Villa Mira Monte
                                                          HC-4.1    Civic Arts
                                                          HC-4.8    Conversions
                                                          HC-5.1    County Partnership
                                                          HC-6.1    Garden Partnerships
                                                          HC-6.2    School Gardens
                                                          HC-6.3    Zoning
                                                          HC-6.4    Open Space Requirements
                                                          HC-6.5    Food Education
                                                          HC-6.6    Residential Gardens
                                                          HC-6.7    Agricultural Retention
                                                          HC-6.8    School Wellness
                                                          HC-7.1    Mental Health
                                                          HC-7.2    Professional Education
                                                          HC-7.3    Transit
                                                          HC-8.1    Identify and Protect Resources
                                                          HC-8.2    Historic Structures
                                                          HC-8.3    Demolition
                                                          HC-8.4    Tribal Consultation
                                                          HC-8.5    Mitigation
                                                          Transportation
                                                          TR-1.1    System Efficiency
                                                          TR-1.2    Highway 101 Widening
                                                          TR-1.3    Transportation Safety
                                                          TR-1.4    Local Right-of-Way for Highway 101 Widening
                                                          TR-2.1    Multi-Modal System for All Users
                                                          TR-2.2    Integrated Land Use/Transportation Planning
                                                          TR-3.1    Funding and Expenditure System
                                                          TR-3.2    Safe and Complete Improvements
                                                          TR-3.3    Timing of Street Construction from Private
                                                                    Development
                                                          TR-3.4    Level of Service Standards
                                                          TR-3.5    Mitigation and Environmental Review Requirements
                                                          TR-3.6    Unacceptable Impacts from Mitigation Measures
                                                          TR-3.7    Alternate Mitigation Measures and Conditions of
                                                                    Approval
                                                          TR-3.8    Monitoring for Safety and Congestion Improvements
B-8
                                                      M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                  A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
TR-3.9  Monitoring for Signalization Projects
TR-3.10 Priority Funding to Address Deficiencies
TR-3.11 Arterial Roadways
TR-3.12 Collector Roadways
TR-3.13 Unsignalized Intersection Monitoring
TR-3.14 Main/Monterey Intersection Improvements
TR-3.15 Depot Street Rerouting and Extension
TR-3.16 Private Development Access along Arterials
TR-3.17 Planned Development Access near Highway 101
TR-3.18 Grade-Separated Railroad Crossings
TR-3.19 Monterey Road Functionality
TR-3.20 Arterial Design and Landscaping
TR-3.21 Review of Speed Limits
TR-3.22 Future Transportation Facilities
TR-4.1  Right-of-Way for Butterfield Boulevard
TR-4.2  Monterey Road Extension
TR-5.1  Adequate Parking Supply
TR-5.2  Linkage of Off-Street Parking Facilities
TR-5.3  Parking Lot Connection
TR-5.4  Long-Term On-Street Parking Prohibition
TR-6.1  Street Design for Improved Bus Service
TR-6.2  Commuter Bus Service
TR-6.3  Transfer Center
TR-6.4  Monterey Road Design for Commuter Bus Service
TR-6.5  Local Shuttle Service
TR-6.6  Employer Support for Transit
TR-6.7  Advanced Technologies
TR-6.8  Transit for Changing Needs
TR-6.9  Funding Partnerships
TR-6.10 Transit for Senior Citizens
TR-6.11 Transit for a Healthy and Active Community
TR-6.12 Bus Shelters from Private Development
TR-7.1  Planning for High-Speed Rail
TR-7.2  Neighborhood Impacts
TR-7.3  Rail Crossings
TR-7.4  Preferred Alignment
TR-8.1  Bikeways for All Abilities
TR-8.2  Bicycle Commuting
TR-8.3  Alternative Routes
TR-8.4  Coordinated Bicycle Planning
                                                                                                         B-9
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          TR-8.5    Bicycle Facility Standards
                                                          TR-8.6    Multi-Use Trail Accessibility
                                                          TR-8.7    Bikeways and Private Roads
                                                          TR-8.8    Priorities for Bikeways Implementation
                                                          TR-8.9    Emergency Services Review for Bikeways
                                                          TR-8.10   Safe Routes to Schools
                                                          TR-8.11   Multi-Jurisdictional Bikeway Alignments
                                                          TR-8.12   Bicycle Parking
                                                          TR-8.13   Cul-de-Sac Connectivity
                                                          TR-8.14   Bikeways Master Plan
                                                          TR-8.15   Bicycle Outreach
                                                          TR-8.16   Bicycle Paths and Flood Control
                                                          TR-9.1    Private Development Connections
                                                          TR-9.2    Walking as an Alternate Mode
                                                          TR-9.3    Pedestrian System for Diverse Users
                                                          TR-9.4    Coordination with Pedestrian Planning
                                                          TR-9.5    Trail Guidelines
                                                          TR-9.6    Pedestrian Facility Accessibility
                                                          TR-9.7    Concurrent Implementation
                                                          TR-9.8    Emergency Services Review for Trails
                                                          TR-9.9    Multi-Jurisdictional Trail Alignments
                                                          TR-9.10   Sidewalk Connectivity
                                                          TR-9.11   Trail System Standards
                                                          TR-9.12   Trails and Flood Control
                                                          TR-10.1   Transportation Demand Management
                                                          TR-10.2   TDM Monitoring
                                                          TR-10.3   Flexible Work Hours
                                                          TR-10.4   Carpooling
                                                          TR-10.5   Air Quality and Transportation Demand Management
                                                          TR-11.1   Long-Range System
                                                          TR-11.2   Sub-Regional System
                                                          TR-11.3   Freeway Access
                                                          TR-11.4   Highway 101 Capacity
                                                          TR-11.5   VTA Long-Term Transportation Planning
                                                          Natural Resources and Environment
                                                          NRE-1.1 Natural Features
                                                          NRE-1.2 Large Open Space Areas
                                                          NRE-1.3 Designated Open Space
                                                          NRE-1.4 South County Open Space
B-10
                                                            M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                        A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
NRE-1.5  Coordinated Action
NRE-1.6  Open Space Preservation Tools
NRE-1.7  Priority Areas for Preservation
NRE-1.8  County Parks and Open Space Programs
NRE-1.9  Poppy Jasper
NRE-1.10 Wetland Delineation and Mitigation
NRE-1.11 Wetlands Enhancement
NRE-2.1  Hillside and Ridgeline Views
NRE-2.2  El Toro Mountain as Landmark Feature
NRE-2.3  Scenic Hillside Preservation
NRE-2.4  Building Distance below Ridgelines
NRE-3.1  Greenbelt as a Community Separator
NRE-3.2  San Jose Coyote Valley Greenbelt
NRE-3.3  Greenbelt Easements
NRE-3.4  Land in Fee Title for Greenbelts
NRE-3.5  “Willing Seller” Greenbelt Acquisition
NRE-3.6  No Commercial/Industrial Uses within Greenbelts
NRE-3.7  Appropriate Greenbelt Land Uses
NRE-3.8  Appropriate Greenbelt Land Uses
NRE-3.9  Greenbelt Areas on Private Land
NRE-4.1  Agriculture Retention and Transition to Urban Uses
NRE-4.2  Support for Agricultural Activity
NRE-4.3  Agriculture in the Sphere of Influence
NRE-4.4  Farming Cooperatives in Buffer Areas
NRE-4.5  Local Agricultural Products
NRE-4.6  Agricultural Education
NRE-4.7  Long-Term Maintenance of Agriculture
NRE-4.8  Policy Support for Agriculture
NRE-4.9  Urban Encroachment
NRE-4.10 Land Use to Support Agricultural Viability
NRE-4.11 Agricultural Mitigation
NRE-4.12 Permanent Preservation of Agriculture
NRE-4.13 Urban Growth
NRE-4.14 LAFCO Policies
NRE-4.15 Conversion to Urban Use
NRE-4.16 Prioritization of Agricultural Land
NRE-4.17 Williamson Act Contracts
NRE-4.18 Agricultural Operations Disclosure
NRE-4.19 Agricultural Lands Preservation Program
NRE-5.1  Reclamation of Streams and Riparian Areas
                                                                                                             B-11

M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          NRE-5.2  Other Agencies and Environmental Review
                                                          NRE-5.3  Natural State of Streamside and Riparian Areas
                                                          NRE-5.4  Development Impacts in Riparian Areas
                                                          NRE-5.5  Flood Control Projects
                                                          NRE-5.6  Stream Channel Protection
                                                          NRE-5.7  Creek Visibility
                                                          NRE-5.8  Creeks Access
                                                          NRE-6.1  Natural State of Habitat
                                                          NRE-6.2  Habitat Conservation Plan
                                                          NRE-6.3  Urban Expansion Impacts
                                                          NRE-6.4  Tree Preservation and Protection
                                                          NRE-6.5  Soil and Erosion
                                                          NRE-6.6  Use of Native Plants
                                                          NRE-6.7  Habitat Protection and Enhancement
                                                          NRE-7.1  Water Standards for Private Development
                                                          NRE-7.2  Water Standards for Public Development
                                                          NRE-7.3  Water Efficiency and Landscaping
                                                          NRE-7.4  Non-Potable Water for Irrigation
                                                          NRE-7.5  Dual Plumbing
                                                          NRE-8.1  Contamination from Toxic Chemicals
                                                          NRE-8.2  Septic Systems
                                                          NRE-8.3  Water Quality Monitoring
                                                          NRE-8.4  Sewer Service for Future Development
                                                          NRE-8.5  Hazardous Waste Facilities
                                                          NRE-8.6  Percolation Rates
                                                          NRE-8.7  Aquifer Protection
                                                          NRE-8.8  Water Quality Compliance
                                                          NRE-9.1  Interjurisdictional Coordination
                                                          NRE-9.2  Water Board Standards
                                                          NRE-9.3  Solid Waste Facility Impacts and Benefits
                                                          NRE-9.4  Compatibility of Regulations
                                                          NRE-10.1 Regional and Subregional Cooperation
                                                          NRE-10.2 State and Federal Regulation
                                                          NRE-10.3 Automobile Emissions
                                                          NRE-10.4 Reduced Automobile Use
                                                          NRE-11.1 TACs and Proposed Sensitive Uses
                                                          NRE-11.2 TACs and Existing Sensitive Uses
                                                          NRE-11.3 Health Risk Assessments
                                                          NRE-11.4 Truck Routes
                                                          NRE-11.5 Truck Idling
B-12
                                                    M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
NRE-11.6 Vegetation Buffers
NRE-12.1 Best Practices
NRE-12.2 Conditions of Approvals
NRE-12.3 Control Measures
NRE-12.4 Grading
NRE-13.1 Building Materials
NRE-13.2 Construction and Pre-Occupancy Practices
NRE-14.1 New Odor Sources
NRE-14.2 Odors and Proposed Sensitive Uses
NRE-15.1 Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Targets
NRE-15.2 Linking Land Use and Transportation
NRE-15.3 Climate Action Plan
NRE-15.4 Sustainable Land Use
NRE-15.5 Jobs Housing Balance
NRE-15.6 Residential Near Transit
NRE-15.7 Mix of Uses in Employment Centers
NRE-15.8 Walkable City
NRE-15.9 Urban Forest
NRE-15.10 VMT Reduction
NRE-15.11 Green Building
NRE-15.12 Municipal Fleet Alternative Fuel Vehicles
NRE-16.1 Energy Standards for New Development
NRE-16.2 Energy Conservation
NRE-16.3 Energy Use Data and Analysis
NRE-16.4 Retrofit Financing
NRE-16.5 Energy Efficiency
NRE-16.6 Landscaping for Energy Conservation
NRE-16.7 Renewable Energy
NRE-16.8 Residential Development Code
NRE-16.9 Subdivision Design
Safety, Services, and Infrastructure
SSI-1.1    New Development and Hazards
SSI-1.2    Hazard Reporting
SSI-1.3    Safety Public Education Programs
SSI-1.4    Development Regulations and Hazards
SSI-1.5    Cluster Development
SSI-2.1    Land Use and Geologic Hazards
SSI-2.2    Site Preparation for Geologic Stability
SSI-2.3    Site Preparation in Hazardous Areas
                                                                                                     B-13
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          SSI-2.4  Code Requirements for Critical Structures
                                                          SSI-2.5  Design of Critical Structures
                                                          SSI-2.6  Hillside Development
                                                          SSI-2.7  Landslides
                                                          SSI-2.8  Runoff and Slope Stability
                                                          SSI-2.9  Geologic Studies
                                                          SSI-2.10 Slope Stability
                                                          SSI-2.11 Geotechnical Investigations
                                                          SSI-3.1  Development in Fire Hazard Areas
                                                          SSI-3.2  Wildfire Risks
                                                          SSI-3.3  Public Facilities Location
                                                          SSI-3.4  Adequate Infrastructure
                                                          SSI-3.5  Fire Risks
                                                          SSI-3.6  Fire Hazard Severity Zones
                                                          SSI-3.7  Inspection Program
                                                          SSI-4.1  Hazardous Materials Manufacture
                                                          SSI-4.2  On-Site Pretreatment
                                                          SSI-4.3  Use and Handling Requirements
                                                          SSI-4.4  Industrial and Commercial Users and Generators
                                                          SSI-4.5  Storage and Usage
                                                          SSI-4.6  Short-Term Storage
                                                          SSI-4.7  Handling
                                                          SSI-4.8  County and Water District Programs
                                                          SSI-4.9  Leaking Equipment
                                                          SSI-4.10 Public Education Programs
                                                          SSI-4.11 Transportation Monitoring
                                                          SSI-4.12 Annual Records
                                                          SSI-4.13 Household Waste
                                                          SSI-4.14 Santa Clara County Hazardous Waste Management
                                                                   Plan
                                                          SSI-4.15 Small Quantity Generators
                                                          SSI-4.16 Contaminated Site Mitigation
                                                          SSI-4.17 Legislative Updates
                                                          SSI-4.18 High-Pressure Gas Lines
                                                          SSI-5.1  Development in Floodways and Floodplains
                                                          SSI-5.2  Private Development in Flood-Prone Areas
                                                          SSI-5.3  Flood Clearance
                                                          SSI-5.4  Floodwater Diversion
                                                          SSI-5.5  Off-Site Impacts
                                                          SSI-5.6  New Development in Hazard Areas
B-14
                                                         M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                     A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
SSI-5.7  Raised Structures
SSI-5.8  Water District Project Review
SSI-5.9  Riparian Natural Functions
SSI-5.10 Development along Reservoirs
SSI-5.11 New Development in Dam Inundation Areas
SSI-5.12 Public Facilities Maintenance
SSI-5.13 Public Facilities Location
SSI-5.14 Evacuation and Rescue Maps
SSI-5.15 Waterway Access Dedication
SSI-6.1  Flood Control Projects
SSI-6.2  Minimize Future Flood Control Costs
SSI-6.3  Existing and Planned Development
SSI-6.4  Flood Protection Priority
SSI-6.5  Flood Risks
SSI-6.6  Flood Management Design
SSI-6.7  Urban Creeks and Channels
SSI-6.8  Increased Capacity
SSI-7.1  Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
SSI-7.2  Airspace Protection
SSI-8.1  Exterior Noise Level Standards
SSI-8.2  Impact Evaluation
SSI-8.3  Commercial and Industrial Noise Level Standards
SSI-8.4  Office Noise Level Standards
SSI-8.5  Traffic Noise Level Standards
SSI-8.6  Stationary Noise Level Standards
SSI-8.7  Other Noise Sources
SSI-8.8  Screening
SSI-8.9  Site Planning and Design
SSI-9.1  Techniques to Reduce Traffic Noise
SSI-9.2  Noise Barrier Dimensions
SSI-9.3  Sound Wall Design
SSI-9.4  Sound Barrier Vandalism
SSI-9.5  Noise Studies for Private Development
SSI-9.6  Earth Berms
SSI-9.7  Sound Barrier Design
SSI-10.1 Public Information
SSI-10.2 Emergency Response Planning
SSI-10.3 Building Design
SSI-10.4 Heat Island Mitigation
SSI-10.5 Community Capacity
                                                                                                          B-15
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
                                                          SSI-11.1  Staffing
                                                          SSI-11.2  Prevention through Design
                                                          SSI-11.3  Medical Services
                                                          SSI-12.1  Emergency Response Public Awareness
                                                          SSI-12.2  Emergency Response Education
                                                          SSI-12.3  Disaster Preparedness
                                                          SSI-12.4  Maintenance of Emergency Access Routes
                                                          SSI-12.5  Emergency Response Plan
                                                          SSI-12.6  Accessibility
                                                          SSI-13.1  Underground Utilities
                                                          SSI-13.2  System Assessment
                                                          SSI-14.1  Efficient Water Management
                                                          SSI-14.2  Water Conservation
                                                          SSI-14.3  SB-X7-7
                                                          SSI-14.4  Drought Planning
                                                          SSI-14.5  Water Supply
                                                          SSI-14.6  Well Pumping
                                                          SSI-14.7  Water District Programs
                                                          SSI-14.8  Sufficient Supply
                                                          SSI-14.9  Well Monitoring
                                                          SSI-14.10 Private Well Monitoring Programs
                                                          SSI-14.11 Urban Encroachment
                                                          SSI-14.12 Water Reclamation Facilities
                                                          SSI-14.13 Use of Recycled Water
                                                          SSI-15.1  Septic Systems
                                                          SSI-15.2  Wastewater Treatment Facility and Growth
                                                          SSI-15.3  Wastewater Treatment Facility Funding
                                                          SSI-15.4  Alternative Sewer Systems
                                                          SSI-15.5  County and Water District Assistance
                                                          SSI-15.6  Regional Infrastructure Planning
                                                          SSI-16.1  Drainage Facilities Payment
                                                          SSI-16.2  Drainage System Capacity
                                                          SSI-16.3  Stormwater Management Plans
                                                          SSI-16.4  Regional System Compatibility
                                                          SSI-17.1  Waste Diversion
                                                          SSI-17.2  Waste Management Technologies
                                                          SSI-17.3  Public Waste Reduction
                                                          SSI-17.4  Food Scrap and Yard Waste Diversion
                                                          SSI-17.5  Single-Use Materials
                                                          SSI-17.6  Local Materials
B-16
                                                      M O R G A N   H I L L 2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                  A P P E N D I X B :  P O L I C Y  G U I D E
SSI-17.7  Citywide Recycling Program
SSI-17.8  Public Participation
SSI-17.9  Litter Control
SSI-17.10 Energy Generation
SSI-17.11 Hard-to-Recycle Materials
SSI-17.12 Building Reuse
SSI-17.13 Public Venues and Events
SSI-18.1  Access and Availability
SSI-18.2  Telecommunications Marketplace Competition
SSI-18.3  Retrofitting
SSI-18.4  Telecommunication Planning
SSI-18.5  Collocation of Telecommunication Facilities
SSI-18.6  Telecommunications Master Plan
                                                                                                       B-17
M O R G A N     H I L L   2 0 3 5   G E N E R A L P L A N
A P P E N D I X   B :   P O L I C Y  G U I D E
B-18
APPENDIX C
POSSIBLE SCHOOL SITES
                      C-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MORGAN HILL 2035 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee                                                          CITY OF MORGAN HILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w
Fis
    h   er
             C re
                                                                                                                                          City of San Jose
                    ek
                                                                                                                    Ø
                                                                                                                    /101
                                                                                                                                                                              eC
                                                                                                                                                                                r ee
                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                          Fis                                                                                                                   Coyo t
                                                he
                                                  rC
                                                       re
                                                          e   k                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                     Av                                                                                                                                                 Anderson
                                                                                                                                 t
                                          Coyote                                                                              et                                                                                                                                                           Reservoir
                                                                                                                         rn
                                                                                                                    Bu
                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                               S                                                y
                                                                                                                                                                                   Co
                                                                                                                                                                                      c
                                                                                                                                                                                        hran                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Nordstrom Elementary
                                                                                                                                                       w
                                                                                                                                                    Pk                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                              e                                                       a                         H
                                                                                                                                         n                                     e                   Ch
                                                                                                                                      ro                                  an
                                                                                                                           ad                                 c      hr                                   el                                              Hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                        nn
                                                                      e ek                                                M                                Co                                                                                               ll Rd
                                                                  s Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                             nte
                                                   r ing
                                              w Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                   s C el Mo
                                         Willo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                 Burnett Elementary                                           !
                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                              S                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S           ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                     B lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                     e            S                                                                                                 D r Du n
                                                                                                                            d                                                                     Av                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                                                                                               al                                                                                                            ak                ne
                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                         sR                                                                                  St   er
                                                                                                                                                  ld
                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                   ag
                                                                                                                     a               Ha                                                 nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ai
                                                                                                                                                                                                         n              e Dr                                                                            nO        l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tai            Trai
                                                                                                                                             rfie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                              Ll                                                                   Ce                                 en
                                                                                                                                                                     ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e                          un
                                                                                                                                                                El Toro Elementary
                                                                                 a                                                                                                                 M                                                         Av
                                                                             Par
                                                                                                                                                                 te r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fo
                                                                                                                                         tte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nne                                                                                     lC
                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Du                                                                                             r ee
                                                                                                                                      Bu                       n
                                                                               dise                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                            Mo          st L
                                                                                                                                                                    tl                                                                                                                                                                       thil
                                                                                     Cre                                                                                                 e                                                                                                            l Rd
                                                                                                                                                                    We                Av
                                                                                                                                                                           Llaga                                                                                                                                                            Foo
                                                                                      ek                                                                                                                                                   ve                                                      Hil                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                            re                                          oA                                                                              Fo o
                                                                                                                                                                                   ak                                                                                                                         Jackson Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed r
                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                                              ek                          P                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Te n
                                                                                                                                                                   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San                                                               Av e
                                                                                                          Walsh Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           hill
                                                                                                                                                                                Pe
                               Chesbro   Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n   an t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ten                               an t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ave                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                               le                                                                 r e tt                                                                          ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ba r                                         rp                                  Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ur                                                      Mu                                                                 Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ave              Ch                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          hy                                                 llito
                                                                                                                                                  De Witt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ch                                                                                                     rra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vd                      ad             n                                 Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St                Bl                          M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                         Barrett Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r                                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ya                                         Ave e
                                                                                           g
                                                                                       Lla                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                             as
                                                                                                                                                                                   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                      e                           Vi                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ro
                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                        ek                                                                      on
                                                                                                      re                                                                  n   ds                                                                                                    nel
                                                                                                                                                                     mu
                                                                                                                                                                Ed                                 La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Martin Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                    A la
                                                                                                                                                                                                         m   ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              liv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Martin/Gwinn Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e                                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ek
                                                                                                        Paradise Valley Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cre                                                                                                                        Ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nte
                                                                                 M                                                                                                                                                      g     as                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                  ac                                                                                                                                                Lla
                                                                                           ha
                                                                                              d   o
                                                                                                      Cr
                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Martin
                                                                                                          k
              0          0.5   1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sources: PlaceWorks, City of Morgan Hill, SchoolWorks, Inc, Morgan Hill Unified School District, 2016.
 Barrett Elementary                         Nordstrom Elementary
 Burnett Elementary                         Paradise Valley Elementary
                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                S                     Potential Elementary School Sites
 El Toro Elementary                         San Martin/Gwinn Elementary                                                                               City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure C-1
 Jackson Elementary                         Walsh Elementary                                                                                          Sphere of Influence                                                                                                                                        Elementary School Boundaries

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MORGAN HILL 2035 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee                                                           CITY OF MORGAN HILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w
    Fis
        h   er
                 C re
                                                                                                                                         City of San Jose
                        ek
                                                                                                                   Ø
                                                                                                                   /101
                                                                                                                                                                             eC
                                                                                                                                                                               r ee
                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                              Fis                                                                                                              Coyo t
                                                    he
                                                      rC
                                                           re
                                                             ek                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                    Av                                                                                                                                                 Anderson
                                                                                                                                t
                                              Coyote                                                                         et                                                                                                                                                           Reservoir
                                                                                                                        rn
                                                                                                                   Bu
                                                                                                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                                                                                                  Co
                                                                                                                                                                                         an                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                               y                       hr                                            fR
                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                      w                                                                            al
                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                             e                                                       a                         H
                                                                                                                                        n                                     e                   Ch
                                                                                                                                     ro                                  an
                                                                                                                          ad                                 c      hr                                   el                                              Hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                       nn
                                                                      e ek                                               M                                Co                                                                                               ll Rd
                                                                  s Cr
                                                                  Murphy Middle                                                                                                             nte
                                                       r ing
                                                  w Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                  s C el Mo
                                             Willo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           na
                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ia
                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                    B lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                    e            S                                                                                                  D r Du n
                                                                                                                           d                                                                     Av                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                                                                                              al                                                                                                             ak                ne
                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                        sR                                                                                  St   er
                                                                                                                                                 ld
                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                  ag
                                                                                                                    a               Ha                                                 nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ai
                                                                                                                                                                                                        n              e Dr                                                                            nO         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tai             Trai
                                                                                                                                            rfie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                             Ll                                                                   Ce                                 en
                                                                                                                                                                    ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                  M                                                            e                          un
                                                                                   a                                                                                                                                                                        Av
                                                                               Par
                                                                                                                                                                te r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fo
                                                                                                                                        tte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nne                                                                                      lC
                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Du                                                                                              r ee
                                                                                                                                     Bu                       n
                                                                                 dise                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                           Mo          st L                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                   tl                                                                                                                                                                        thil
                                                                                          ek                                                                                            e                                                                                                             l Rd
                                                                                                                                                                   We                Av
                                                                                                                                                                          Llaga
                                                                                       Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Foo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve                                                      Hi l                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                           re                                          oA                                                                               Fo o
                                                                                                                                                                                  ak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ed r
                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                             ek                          P                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Te n
                                                                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San                                                               Av e                                hill
                                                                                                                   Britton Middle                                              Pe
                                   Chesbro   Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n   an t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ten                                an t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ave                                                                                    Ave
                                                                                                                                                              le                                                                 r e tt                                                                           ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ba r                                         rp                                   Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ur                                                      Mu                                                                  Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                           Ave              Ch                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         hy                                                  llito
                                                                                                                                                 De Witt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ch                                                                                                      rra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            vd                      ad             n                                  Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     St                Bl                          M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ya                                         Ave e
                                                                                             g
                                                                                         Lla                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                               as
                                                                                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                     e                           Vi                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ro
                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                       ek                                                                      on
                                                                                                     re                                                                  n   ds                                                                                                    nel
                                                                                                                                                                    mu
                                                                                                                                                               Ed                                 La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Martin Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                   A la
                                                                                                                                                                                                        m   ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             liv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cre                                                                                                                         Ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nte
                                                                                   M                                                                                                                                                   g     as                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                    ac                                                                                                                                             Lla
                                                                                          ha
                                                                                             d   o
                                                                                                     Cr
                                                                                                       ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Martin
                                                                                                         k
                  0          0.5   1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sources: PlaceWorks, City of Morgan Hill, SchoolWorks, Inc., Morgan Hill Unified School District, 2016.
     Britton Middle School                                                   City Boundary
     Murphy Middle School                                                    Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure C-2
(
S    Potential Middle High School Site                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Middle School Boundaries

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MORGAN HILL 2035 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee                                                           CITY OF MORGAN HILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w
    Fis
        h   er
                 C re
                                                                                                                                         City of San Jose
                        ek
                                                                                                                   Ø
                                                                                                                   /101
                                                                                                                                                                             eC
                                                                                                                                                                               r ee
                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                              Fis                                                                                                              Coyo t
                                                    he
                                                      rC
                                                           re
                                                             ek                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                    Av                                                                                                                                                  Anderson
                                                                                                                                t
                                              Coyote                                                                         et                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir
                                                                                                                        rn
                                                                                                                   Bu
                                                                                                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                                                                                                  Co
                                                                                                                                                                                         an                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                               y                       hr                                             fR
                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                      w                                                                             al
                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                             e                                                       a                          H
                                                                                                                                        n                                     e                   Ch
                                                                                                                                     ro                                  an
                                                                                                                          ad                                 c      hr                                   el                                               Hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                       nn
                                                                        e ek                                             M                                Co                                                                                                ll Rd
                                                                    s Cr
                                                                       Sobrato High                                                                                                         nte
                                                       r ing
                                                  w Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                  s C el Mo
                                             Willo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Live Oak High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            na
                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ia
                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                    B lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve            S                                                                                                  D r Du n
                                                                                                                             Rd                                                                   lA                                                                                                          ak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s              ne
                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                    as                                                                    ra                 St   er
                                                                                                                                                 ld
                                                                                                                  ag
                                                                                                                                    Ha                                                 nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ai
                                                                                                                                                                                                         n              e Dr                                                                            nO         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tai             Trai
                                                                                                                                            rfie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                             Ll                                                                   Ce                                  en
                                                                                                                                                                    ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                   M                                                            e                          un
                                                                                   a                                                                                                                                                                         Av
                                                                               Par
                                                                                                                                                                te r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fo
                                                                                                                                        tte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nne                                                                                      lC
                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Du                                                                                              r ee
                                                                                                                                     Bu                       n
                                                                                 dise                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                           Mo          st L
                                                                                                                                                                   tl                                                                                                                                                                         thil
                                                                                          ek                                                                                            e                                                                                                              l Rd
                                                                                                                                                                   We                Av
                                                                                                                                                                          Llaga
                                                                                       Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Foo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ve                                                      Hi l                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                           re                                           oA                                                                               Fo o
                                                                                                                                                                                  ak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed r
                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                             ek                           P                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Te n
                                                                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San                                                               Av e                                hill
                                                                                                                                                                               Pe
                                   Chesbro   Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n   an t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ten                                an t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ave                                                                                    Ave
                                                                                                                                                              le
                                                                                                                                                                                           Ave               Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ba r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r e tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rp   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S                               Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          hy                                                  llito
                                                                                                                                                 De Witt Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ch                                                                                                      rra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vd                      ad             n                                  Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St                Bl                          M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ya                                         Ave e
                                                                                             g
                                                                                         Lla                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                               as
                                                                                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                     e                            Vi                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ro
                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                       ek                                                                      on
                                                                                                     re                                                                  n   ds                                                                                                     nel
                                                                                                                                                                    mu
                                                                                                                                                               Ed                                 La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San Martin Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                    A la
                                                                                                                                                                                                         m   ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              liv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cre                                                                                                                         Ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nte
                                                                                   M                                                                                                                                                    g     as                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                    ac                                                                                                                                              Lla
                                                                                          ha
                                                                                             d   o
                                                                                                     Cr
                                                                                                       ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Martin
                                                                                                         k
                  0          0.5   1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sources: PlaceWorks, City of Morgan Hill, SchoolWorks, Inc., Morgan HIll Unified School District, 2016.
     Live Oak High School                                         City Boundary
     Sobrato High School                                          Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure C-3
!
(
S Potential High School Site                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 High School Boundaries


MORGAN HILL 2035 GENERAL PLAN
            CITY OF MORGAN HILL
             ADOPTED JULY 27, 2016
       CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION NO. 16-128
