                                                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                                                      Introduction
                                                   The Community Services and Facilities Element
                                                   addresses the services and infrastructure needed to
                                                   serve the community. Much of the Planning Area is
                                                   undeveloped or under agricultural production and
                                                   is not adequately served by existing community
                                                   services and facilities to meet the needs of future
                                                   development. As a result, future development will
                                                   require the expansion of services and facilities to
                                                   meet this increase in demand. Planning for this
                           future increase in demand will ensure that the community service and
                           facility need of future residents are met, while avoiding adverse
                           impacts to the existing community.
          PURPOSE OF THE   The purpose of the Community Services and Facilities Element is to
   COMMUNITY SERVICES      ensure that sufficient levels of community services and facilities are
            AND FACILITIES provided as San Jacinto develops. This Element plans for the needed
                           expansion of services and facilities to coincide with new development.
                  ELEMENT
                           Many of the public services providers are contracted by the City to
                           provide services, such as fire protection. To ensure a sufficient level of
                           public services, the City will work with these agencies to ensure that
                           service to existing residents does not diminish with future development
                           and the resulting increase in population.
   SCOPE AND CONTENT       The Community Services and Facilities Element comprises three sections:
     OF THE COMMUNITY      1) Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; 3) and the Community
 SERVICES AND FACILITIES   Services and Facilities Plan. In the Issues, Goals, and Policies section,
                  ELEMENT  major issues related to the provision of community services and facilities
                           are identified and related goals and policies are established to address
                           these issues. The goals, which are overall statements of the community’s
                           desires, are comprised of broad statements of purpose and direction.
                           The policies serve as guides for working with the local and regional
                           agencies for planning infrastructure and facility improvements to provide
                           sufficient levels of service. The Plan explains how the goals and policies
                           will be achieved and implemented, while the General Plan
                           Implementation Program, contained in the appendix of this Element,
                           identifies the specific action programs for this element.
            RELATED PLANS  A number of plans and programs exist that are directly related to the
          AND PROGRAMS     goals of the Community Services and Facilities Element. Enacted
                           through State and local action, these plans and programs are
                           administered by agencies with responsibility for their enforcement.
San Jacinto General Plan                         CSF-1                                        May 2006

                                                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
       City of San Jacinto   The City of San Jacinto provides water to the urbanized area
       Water Master Plan     surrounding the downtown area. A Water Master Plan was adopted for
                             the City’s service area in 1992 to guide future water operations. Based
                             on an analysis of the existing water system and anticipated future
                             demand within the service area, system improvements and fee rate
                             changes are identified.
              Lake Hemet     The Lake Hemet Water District provides water service to the Park Hill
          Municipal Water    area, in the southeastern portion of the City. To plan for the future
            District Master  water needs of its service area, the Lake Hemet Water District adopted a
                        Plan Water Master Plan in 1999. This plan estimates future demand for
                             water and identifies future water sources and conservation methods to
                             meet this demand.
        Eastern Municipal    The Eastern Municipal Water District provides water and sewer service to
             Water District  those portions of the Planning Area not otherwise served by the City or
              Master Plan    the Lake Hemet Water District. The District is updating its Master Plan in
                             2002 to reflect changes in conditions within the service area. The
                             current Master Plan was adopted in 1990, and the various volumes of
                             the Master Plan address water and sewer provision.
       City of San Jacinto   The City’s 1992 Sewer Master Plan evaluates the City’s sewer collection
       Sewer Master Plan     system, which serves the developed eastern portion of San Jacinto.
                             Recommendations, such as increased fees and a flow monitoring
                             program, are included to address inadequacies in the existing system.
                             Since the City’s sewer system is closely tied to the Eastern Municipal
                             Water District sewer system, continued communication and meetings are
                             identified as necessary.
         Integrated Waste    The California Integrated Waste Management Plan Act (AB 939) of
       Management Plan       1989 changed the focus of solid waste management from landfill to
                             diversion strategies such as source reduction, recycling, and composting.
                             The purpose of the diversion strategies is to reduce dependence on
                             landfills for solid waste disposal. AB 939 required a 25 percent
                             reduction in the solid waste stream by 1995 and a 50 percent reduction
                             by 2000.
San Jacinto General Plan                         CSF-2                                        May 2006

                                                        COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
         San Jacinto Parks The City of San Jacinto adopted a Parks Master Plan in the early 1990’s.
               Master Plan The Parks Master Plan analyzes the current and future needs of
                           San Jacinto residents for park and recreational facilities, using the City’s
                           goal of providing five acres of parks and open space per 1,000
                           residents. Future additions and improvements to the city’s recreational
                           facilities are identified to meet the future recreational needs.
Valley-Wide Recreation     The purpose of the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District’s Master
and Park District Master   Plan, which was adopted in 1999, is to provide a planning tool for the
Plan                       acquisition, development, and operation of a park and recreation
                           system from the present to the year 2010. The Master Plan also
                           analyzes ways to implement the park and recreation system.
     The Americans With    The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1991 was adopted to make
    Disabilities Act (ADA) public areas, including parks and play areas, accessible to all persons.
                           The ADA requires that all playground equipment, trails, and recreational
                           facilities be usable by adults and children with disabilities.
          The Quimby Act   The Quimby Act (State of California Planning Law Section 66477)
                           allows the legislative body of a city or county to require by ordinance the
                           dedication of land, the payment of in-lieu fees, or a combination of both
                           for parks and recreational purposes as a condition to the approval for a
                           final tract or parcel map. In cases where such dedication or fees are not
                           obtained through a map, they may be imposed when building permits
                           are issued. The following conditions must be met to comply with the
                           Quimby Act:
                           ¾ The city or county ordinance must include definite standards for
                                determining the proportion of a subdivision to be dedicated and the
                                amount of any fee to be paid in-lieu therefore.
                           ¾ The legislative body has adopted a General Plan containing a
                                recreation element, and any proposed park or recreational facility
                                must be consistent with the principles and standards established in
                                the element.
San Jacinto General Plan                          CSF-3                                       May 2006

                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER     According to State planning law, the Community Services and Facilities
            GENERAL PLAN  Element must be consistent with the other General Plan elements. While
                 ELEMENTS all of the elements are interdependent, they are also interrelated to a
                          degree. Certain goals and policies of each element may also address
                          issues that are primary subjects of other elements. This integration of
                          issues throughout the General Plan creates a strong basis for the
                          implementation of plans and programs and achievement of community
                          goals. The Community Services and Facilities Element is most directly
                          related to the Land Use, Resource Management, and Public Safety
                          Elements.
                          Land use policies contained in the Land Use Element determine the
                          pattern and intensity of future population growth, and this in turn
                          determines the type, size and location of certain public facilities.
                          The Public Safety Element contains policies related to the location of
                          public facilities and services that ensure the safety of San Jacinto
                          residents such as police and fire. Additionally, the Element directs
                          location and development of public facilities such as schools, libraries,
                          and civic centers away from natural hazards to public safety, such as
                          floodplains and seismic faults.
                          Transportation policies contained in the Circulation Element direct
                          development in a manner providing efficient access to public facilities
                          throughout San Jacinto.
                          Future development potential is determined by the availability of
                          community services and facilities. The effectiveness of housing policies
                          contained in the Housing Element rely upon the planning and provision
                          of community services and facilities, especially sewer and water.
San Jacinto General Plan                     CSF-4                                             May 2006
                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                               Issues, Goals and Policies
                                                Community services and facilities are necessary to
                                                support urban development. The quality of life
                                                experienced by residents of the community is
                                                directly related to how effectively these services are
                                                provided.
                                                The following thirteen issues are addressed by the
                                                goals and policies of the Community Services and
                                                Facilities Element: 1) law enforcement; 2) fire
                         services; 3) public education; 4) water service; 5) sewer service;
                         6) power; 7) communications; 8) flood control; 9) waste disposal;
                         10) recreational and open space facilities; 11) libraries; 12) senior and
                         youth services; and 13) human resources. Each issue and the related
                         goals and policies are identified and discussed in the following section.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT    The City of San Jacinto began contracting for law enforcement services
                         with the Riverside County Sheriff Department effective June 1, 2004.
                         The Riverside County Sheriff Department maintains a Police Station at
                         160 W. 6th Street. The Police Department is a full-service public safety
                         agency, offering a range of programs and services. The Police
                         Department is necessary to provide sufficient levels of law enforcement
                         for existing and future development within the community.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 1: Provide for the protection of
                         San Jacinto residents and businesses through maintenance of an
                         adequate force of police officers, appropriate physical planning of new
                         development, and a high level of public involvement in crime
                         prevention.
                         Policy 1.1:      Maintain adequate levels of law enforcement service.
                         Policy 1.2:      Improve law enforcement services through increased
                                          cooperation with County, State, and Federal law
                                          enforcement agencies.
                         Policy 1.3:      Provide sufficient staffing and facilities to minimize
                                          response times to emergency situations.
                         Policy 1.4:      Continue collaboration with other jurisdictions in
                                          providing back-up services, equipment, and personnel,
                                          when feasible and necessary.
                         Policy 1.5:      Expand community outreach programs and promote
                                          community involvement in crime prevention.
San Jacinto General Plan                     CSF-5                                           May 2006
                                                     COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         Policy 1.6:       Require design features in new development to reduce
                                           potential for crime.
                         Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                         Programs: CSF-1 through CSF-6
         FIRE PROTECTION The Riverside County Fire Department (RCOFD) and United States
                         Department of Agriculture - Forest Service (USDAFS) provide fire
                         protection to San Jacinto. This service is essential to the safety of the
                         population of San Jacinto, especially with the threat of wildfires. Since
                         fire protection is a contracted service, the City must be involved in close
                         coordination with RCOFD to ensure that appropriate levels of service
                         are provided to the community.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 2: Work with RCOFD to
                         provide a sufficient level of fire protection.
                         Policy 2.1:       Work closely with RCOFD in determining and meeting
                                           community needs for fire protection services, facilities,
                                           and personnel.
                         Policy 2.2:       Periodically evaluate the level of fire protection service to
                                           ensure that San Jacinto has appropriate levels of fire
                                           protection service to maintain the adopted level of
                                           service standards.
                         Policy 2.3:       Enforce the continued maintenance of private property,
                                           such as weed abatement, to reduce the incidents of fire
                                           hazards.
                         Policy 2.4:       Plan for the location of convenient and adequate fire
                                           stations to serve the existing and future residents of
                                           San Jacinto.
                         Policy 2.5:       Provide and maintain adequate infrastructure, including
                                           fire hydrants, fire stations, fire flows, and access points,
                                           that meet RCOFD's standards.
                         Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                         Programs: CSF-7, CSF-8, CSF-9
      PUBLIC EDUCATION   San Jacinto is located within the San Jacinto Unified School District
                         (SJUSD) and the Hemet Unified School District (HUSD). Mount
                         San Jacinto College (MSJC) is also located within the City. The City
                         must closely coordinate with SJUSD, HUSD, and MSJC to ensure a
                         sufficient level of public education is available to the community.
San Jacinto General Plan                       CSF-6                                           May 2006
                                                  COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 3: Work with San Jacinto
                         Unified School District, Hemet Unified School District, and Mount
                         San Jacinto College to provide a sufficient level of public education.
                         Policy 3.1:    Work closely with San Jacinto Unified School District,
                                        Hemet Unified School District, and Mount San Jacinto
                                        College to maintain the educational standards adopted
                                        by the three districts.
                         Policy 3.2:    Promote the development and siting of quality
                                        educational facilities to meet the needs of future
                                        residents through increased cooperation between the
                                        City and school districts.
                         Policy 3.3:    Discourage the designation of school attendance
                                        boundaries that split neighborhoods.
                         Policy 3.4:    Maintain appropriate land use regulations to permit the
                                        development of public and private educational facilities
                                        at appropriate locations within the Planning Area.
                         Policy 3.5:    Minimize the impacts of schools on adjacent properties.
                         Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                         Programs: CSF-10, CSF-11, CSF-12
           WATER SERVICE Water service is an essential component of the infrastructure system
                         needed to support urban development. Water service is provided to the
                         community through the City of San Jacinto Water Department, the
                         Eastern Municipal Water District, and the Lake Hemet Municipal Water
                         District.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 4: Work with local, regional,
                         and State water agencies to provide sufficient levels of water service.
                         Policy 4.1:    Provide sufficient levels of water service to meet the
                                        water needs of the community through the orderly
                                        extension of infrastructure and provision of adequate
                                        water supplies.
                         Policy 4.2:    Work closely with the Eastern Municipal Water District
                                        and the Lake Hemet Municipal Water District to maintain
                                        an adequate level of water service in the planning area.
                         Policy 4.3:    Encourage water conservation as a means of preserving
                                        water resources.
San Jacinto General Plan                    CSF-7                                          May 2006
                                                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                          Policy 4.4:     Maintain and improve existing levels of water service by
                                          protecting and improving infrastructure and the efficiency
                                          of water transmission facilities.
                          Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                          Programs: CSF-13, CSF-14
            SEWER SERVICE As with water, sewer is a necessary component of the infrastructure
                          system required to support existing and future development within the
                          community. The City’s sewage is treated by the Eastern Municipal Water
                          District.
                          Community Services and Facilities Goal 5: Work with the Eastern
                          Municipal Water District to provide a wastewater collection, treatment,
                          and disposal system to adequately serve existing and future development
                          in San Jacinto.
                          Policy 5.1:     Work closely with the Eastern Municipal Water District to
                                          maintain adopted level of service standards.
                          Policy 5.2:     Maintain and improve existing levels of sewer service by
                                          improving infrastructure and repairing existing
                                          deficiencies.
                          Policy 5.3:     Ensure compatible development occurs surrounding the
                                          San Jacinto Waste Water Treatment Facility.
                          Policy 5.4:     Encourage water conservation as a means of reducing
                                          sewage generation.
                          Policy 5.5:     Expand the use of reclaimed water.
                          Policy 5.6:     To reduce potential negative impacts to groundwater,
                                          minimize the use of septic systems.
                          Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                          Programs: CSF-13, CSF-14
                    POWER Southern California Gas Company provides natural gas to San Jacinto,
                          while Southern California Edison provides electricity. These sources of
                          energy, are necessary to support existing and future development in the
                          community.
San Jacinto General Plan                     CSF-8                                        May 2006

                                                      COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 6: Work effectively with
                         providers of natural gas and electricity to provide sufficient levels of
                         these services.
                         Policy 6.1:       Work closely with local service providers in determining
                                           and meeting the needs of the community for energy.
                         Policy 6.2:       Encourage the expanded use of natural gas whenever
                                           feasible.
                         Policy 6.3:       Ensure land uses and development are compatible with
                                           existing and proposed utility facilities.
                         Policy 6.4:       Minimize the visual and environmental impacts of the
                                           development and operation of energy facilities on the
                                           community.
      COMMUNICATIONS     Telephone service is provided by the General Telephone Company, and
                         cable is provided by Adelphia. These sources of communications are
                         necessary to support existing and future development in the community.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 7: Work effectively with
                         providers of communications to provide sufficient levels of these
                         services.
                         Policy 7.1:       Continue to monitor cable services and encourage
                                           competition to ensure the highest quality service is
                                           provided consistent with Federal Communications
                                           Commission guidelines.
                         Policy 7.2:       Encourage all new development to provide the
                                           technology to support multiple telecommunications
                                           facilities and providers such as multi-media products,
                                           wireless technologies, and satellite communications.
        FLOOD CONTROL    Flood control facilities for the City are largely provided and maintained
                         by the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District.
                         An adequate and well-maintained flood control system is necessary to
                         support existing and future development in the community.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 8: Work effectively with
                         providers of flood control services and facilities to provide and maintain
                         sufficient levels of service.
San Jacinto General Plan                       CSF-9                                       May 2006
                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         Policy 8.1:     Ensure that adequate flood control facilities are provided
                                         to protect the lives and property of San Jacinto's
                                         residents.
                         Policy 8.2:     Whenever feasible, preserve drainage courses in their
                                         natural condition while still providing for the adequate
                                         protection of life and property.
          WASTE DISPOSAL The community disposes of its waste in the Lamb Canyon Landfill. The
                         County of Riverside Waste Management Department provides for the
                         disposal of hazardous wastes generated within the community. These
                         sources of waste disposal are necessary to support existing and future
                         development in the community.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 9: Work effectively with
                         providers of waste disposal to provide sufficient levels of these services.
                         Policy 9.1:     Reduce the amount of solid waste requiring disposal at
                                         landfills.
                         Policy 9.2:     Expand public education programs involving waste
                                         reduction, recycling, and household hazardous wastes.
                         Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                         Programs: CSF-15 through CSF-21
         RECREATION AND  San Jacinto and the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District provide a
              OPEN SPACE mixture of recreational and open space facilities for the community’s
                         use. Other organizations, such as Mount San Jacinto College and the
                         San Jacinto Library provide additional recreational activities. There
                         should be a range of recreational and open space facilities available for
                         all members of the community.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 10: Provide sufficient parks,
                         recreational, and open space facilities.
                         Policy 10.1:    Work with the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District
                                         and other organizations to provide active and passive
                                         parks, recreational, and open space facilities that meet
                                         the needs of all segments of the community.
                         Policy 10.2:    Cooperate with private developers and public agencies
                                         to create a network of equestrian, biking, and hiking
                                         trails that link to adjacent regional and local trails
                                         networks.
                         Policy 10.3:    Use flood control facilities for passive recreational
                                         activities when appropriate.
San Jacinto General Plan                    CSF-10                                           May 2006

                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                            Policy 10.4:      Encourage the joint use of City and other public agency
                                              facilities for recreational purposes, education, and flood
                                              control whenever feasible.
                            Policy 10.5:      When feasible, use less developable or undevelopable
                                              lands, including utility corridors, fault zones, channels,
                                              and easements for passive and active recreational uses
                                              that have minimal potential for impacts on the
                                              environment.
                            Policy 10.6:      Encourage the development of private recreational
                                              facilities to expand recreational opportunities of the City's
                                              residents.
                            Policy 10.7:      Encourage neighborhood groups, organization, clubs
                                              and businesses to take a greater interest and financial
                                              responsibility in the improvement of the park and
                                              recreation system in the City.
                            Policy 10.8:      Actively pursue all available sources of financing for
                                              parkland acquisition and maintenance.
                            Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                            Programs: CSF-22 through CSF-28
                  LIBRARIES The Riverside County Library System provides library services to
                            San Jacinto. The availability of reading and reference material to all
                            members of the community is an important measure of the quality of life
                            in San Jacinto.
                            Community Services and Facilities Goal 11: Encourage sufficient library
                            facilities and services in the community.
                            Policy 11.1:      Work closely with the Riverside County Library System to
                                              provide library facilities and services necessary to meet
                                              the needs of all segments of the community.
                            Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                            Programs: CSF-29, CSF-30
              SENIOR AND    A large portion of San Jacinto’s population is elderly and requires
          YOUTH SERVICES    specialized services targeting their needs. Several community groups
                            serving the elderly are already active in the San Jacinto area.
                            As more families with young children move to the community, a variety
                            of youth programs and activities are needed that provide healthy and
                            productive recreational choices for all juvenile age groups.
San Jacinto General Plan                         CSF-11                                          May 2006

                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 12: Provide sufficient senior
                         and youth targeted services and facilities.
                         Policy 12.1:    Work closely with senior and youth groups in providing
                                         services and facilities to meet the needs of San Jacinto’s
                                         senior and youth population.
                         Policy 12.2:    Work with school districts and other agencies to develop
                                         cooperative programs where the joint use of facilities
                                         would lead to enhanced and more efficient facility
                                         utilization.
                         Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                         Programs: CSF-31
      HUMAN RESOURCES    San Jacinto has many community groups and business groups that
                         represent important resources for accomplishing long-term community
                         goals. These groups often include volunteer leaders and workers who
                         have a distinct understanding of their neighborhoods. These significant
                         human resources may be used to establish and achieve community
                         goals.
                         Community Services and Facilities Goal 13: Enhance and cultivate the
                         City’s human resources.
                         Policy 13.1:    Solicit citizen participation during the early stages of
                                         major public and regulatory programs.
                         Policy 13.2:    Encourage active citizen involvement and volunteer
                                         activities to help establish and achieve the community’s
                                         goals.
                         Policy 13.3:    Develop appropriate vehicles, such as newsletters,
                                         informational brochures, web-site, and cable television
                                         programming and announcements to communicate
                                         important information about opportunities for community
                                         involvement.
                         Related Community Services and Facilities Element Implementation
                         Programs: CSF-32
San Jacinto General Plan                     CSF-12                                       May 2006

                                                     COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                           Community Services and Facilities Plan
                                                The provision of sufficient community services and
                                                facilities to its residents is a primary function of a
                                                City. The City of San Jacinto currently provides
                                                basic services and facilities, contracts with certain
                                                appropriate agencies that provide other services,
                                                and receives additional services from special
                                                districts.      Community services and facilities
                                                provided within San Jacinto include: parks and
                                                recreation, educational facilities, library facilities,
                                                police facilities, fire stations, senior and youth
                         services, and sewer and water systems.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT    Sufficient law enforcement is necessary to ensure the public health and
                         safety of its residents and businesses. The City of San Jacinto began
                         contracting for law enforcement services with the Riverside County Sheriff
                         Department effective June 1, 2004. The Riverside County Sheriff
                         Department maintains a Police Station at 160 W. 6th Street. Services
                         offered by the Police Department include police patrol, traffic
                         enforcement, Community Oriented Policing and Problem Solving
                         (COPPS), investigations, bicycle patrol, canine team, Allied Riverside
                         Cities Narcotics Enforcement Team (ARCNET), animal control, police
                         explorers, citizen volunteers, Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE),
                         and neighborhood watch.
                         In 2002, the standard for law enforcement was 1.3 sworn officers per
                         1,000 residents.
                         For law enforcement, ensuring public safety requires maintaining
                         adequate staffing, equipment, and facilities. The City continues to
                         ensure that the level of service provided by the Police Department
                         corresponds to the number of residents and businesses within
                         San Jacinto, as well as the current law enforcement problems.
         FIRE PROTECTION As with law enforcement, fire protection is necessary to ensure the public
                         health and safety. Riverside County Fire Department (RCOFD) is
                         contracted to provide fire protection service to the City. Riverside
                         County in turn has contracted with the State to administer RCOFD. The
                         City is served by a fire station in located on First Street. Two additional
                         fire stations are located south of San Jacinto in Hemet and the
                         unincorporated portion of the County. During fire season (seven months
                         of the year), the California Department of Forestry (CDF) staffs an engine
                         at the San Jacinto Station. In 2002, the standard for fire protection was
                         3.0 firefighters per shift.
San Jacinto General Plan                     CSF-13                                           May 2006
                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         The provision of adequate fire protection staffing, equipment and
                         facilities is necessary to ensure public safety. San Jacinto continues to
                         work with RCOFD to ensure that the level of service provided by RCOFD
                         corresponds to the level of development within the City, as well as the
                         risk of fire hazards.
      PUBLIC EDUCATION   San Jacinto is served by SJUSD and HUSD. SJUSD serves the majority
                         of the Planning Area, with a section of the southern portion of the City,
                         including Park Hill, located within HUSD (See Figure CSF-1). Eight
                         SJUSD schools are located within the City limits, including four primary
                         (K-4), one intermediate (5-6), one middle (7-8) and two 9-12 high
                         schools (one comprehensive and one continuation). The SJUSD schools
                         are: Hyatt Elementary (K-4), Park Hill Elementary (K-4), San Jacinto
                         Elementary (K-4), De Anza Elementary (K-4), Monte Vista School (5-6),
                         North Mountain Middle (7-8), San Jacinto High (9-12), and Mountain
                         View Alternative Learning Center (9-12). No HUSD school is located
                         within the Planning Area. Students from San Jacinto attend six HUSD
                         schools.
                         The funding of school facilities has been impacted by the passing of SB
                         50. The new law limits the impact fees school districts can charge to off-
                         set the impact of new development on the school system and provides
                         for three levels of fees. The applicable level depends on whether
                         (1) State funding is available, (2) the school district is eligible for State
                         funding, and (3) the school district meets certain additional criteria
                         involving bonding capacity, year round school, and the percentage of
                         relocatable classrooms in use. Few school districts anticipate ever
                         achieving full mitigation through the imposition of fees under this system.
                         New residential development in the City will create additional demand
                         for schools. To meet this demand, additional school facilities will be
                         required. The City continues to work with SJUSD and HUSD to update
                         information in their Long-Range Facility and Master Plans, identify future
                         facility, student generation formulas, and facilities improvement plans.
San Jacinto General Plan                     CSF-14                                          May 2006
May 200

                                                     COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                          The City also reviews development proposals to ensure that the
                          proposals are consistent with school facility requirements. Additionally,
                          the City reviews proposals to ensure that all required fees have been
                          included in the proposals and that the school district receives the fees.
           WATER SERVICE  Good municipal water service is necessary to protect public health in
                          urban settings. Three water districts provide water to San Jacinto. These
                          include the City of San Jacinto Water Department, the Eastern Municipal
                          Water District, and the Lake Hemet Municipal Water District (See Figure
                          CSF-2). The City is currently updating their Water Master Plan that was
                          originally prepared in 1992 for the developed, central portion of the
                          City. This updated Water Master Plan will be adopted by mid-2008.
                          The City is currently applying for federal assistance to install water
                          facilities on the west side of the Planning Area. Additionally, the City will
                          review proposed development projects to ensure that approved projects
                          do not degrade water pressure or reduce supplies available to the rest of
                          the community. Those projects found to be subject to California State
                          Water Code 10910-10915 are required to undergo review by the
                          applicable water purveyor to ensure adequate water supplies are
                          available.
            SEWER SERVICE The Eastern Municipal Water District provides sewer services to the
                          community. The Eastern Municipal Water District owns and operates an
                          industrial waste and sewer treatment plant, and has a capacity of 11.0
                          million gallons per day. As with water, the City is applying for federal
                          assistance to install sewer facilities on the west side of the City.
                    POWER Sufficient levels of power are necessary to provide the energy necessary
                          for a successful community. Southern California Gas Company provides
                          natural gas to San Jacinto, while Southern California Edison provides
                          electricity.
        COMMUNICATION     Communications services are a necessary component of a community’s
                          infrastructure system. Telephone service is provided by the General
                          Telephone Company, and cable television is provided by Adelphia.
        FLOOD CONTROL     The City is located within the Riverside County Flood Control and Water
                          Conservation District. To address flooding concerns with the San Jacinto
                          River, the City is working with the Flood Control District to construct a
                          100-year levee along the river to remove dairy land and properties
                          designated for residential and non-residential uses from the flood zone.
          WASTE DISPOSAL  The community disposes of its waste in the Lamb Canyon Landfill,
                          located between the City of Beaumont and the City of San Jacinto at
                          16411 Lamb Canyon Road (State Route 79), with Interstate 10 the north
                          and Highway 74 to the south. The landfill is owned and operated by
                          Riverside County and encompasses approximately 1,088 acres, 144.6
                          of which are permitted for waste disposal. The landfill is currently
                          permitted to receive 3,000 tons of refuse per day, and as of
San Jacinto General Plan                       CSF-17                                          May 2006

                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         November 6, 2002, had a remaining disposal capacity of approximately
                         13.330 million tons.
                         As of January 1, 2006, the landfill had a total remaining capacity of
                         12,338 million tons. The current remaining disposal capacity is
                         estimated to last until approximately 2016. Further landfill expansion
                         potential exists at the Lamb Canyon Landfill site..
         RECREATION AND  The City and the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District provide a wide
             OPEN SPACE  range of recreational activities and facilities for the residents of
                         San Jacinto. The City has responsibility for ten parks, including Sallee
                         Park, Rancho Park, Francisco Estudillo Heritage Park, Mistletoe Park,
                         Harvest Park, Sagecrest Park, Skyview Park, Soboba Springs Park,
                         Druding Park, and Hoffman Park. In addition, the Rancho San Jacinto
                         Parks are scattered throughout the City provide an additional 20 acres
                         of park land at multiple sites, and the 35-acre Valley-Wide Regional
                         Park, operated by the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District, is
                         located within the City limits. Table CSF-1 provides a complete list and
                         description of existing park facilities within the City. Figure CSF-3
                         illustrates the location of these parks. The majority of the existing park
                         facilities are located within the developed core of the City, where they
                         best serve the residents of the community. The approximate location,
                         acreage and features of planned parks are also illustrated in Figure
                         CSF-3 and summarized in Table CSF-2.
                         Other recreational opportunities include the two golf courses within the
                         sphere of influence, the Soboba Springs and Golden Era Golf Courses.
                         The unimproved San Jacinto River Park is also within the City’s sphere of
                         influence. The new Diamond Valley Lake recreational area to the south
                         of the City also offers the residents of San Jacinto additional outdoor
                         recreation.
                         Open space within San Jacinto is characterized by large tracts of
                         agricultural land in the western portion of the City, and the foothills
                         along the western and northeastern borders of the Planning Area. A trail
                         system within the Rancho San Jacinto community provides additional
                         passive recreational opportunities to local residents.
                         To ensure sufficient park and recreational opportunities, the City has
                         established a parkland standard of five acres per 1,000 residents. The
                         standard is useful in determining existing parkland deficiencies and
                         predicting the demand from future population growth. Table CSF-3
                         summarizes the parkland requirements for the existing population and
                         the anticipated population from development of planned land uses (as
                         established in the Land Use Element). The City’s Parks Master Plan
                         provides detailed recommendations and standards for future park
                         growth in the community. A Trails Master Plan is needed to identify
                         potential locations and standards for trails in the community.
San Jacinto General Plan                      CSF-18                                       May 2006

May 200

May 200

                                                               COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                     Table CSF-1
                                Existing Parks and Recreational Facilities Inventory
                          Name                       Size                       Location
                                                                Bordered by Ramona Blvd, Pico Ave,
              Druding Park                    1.0 acres
                                                                and 2nd St.
              Francisco Estudillo Heritage
                                              5.0 acres         Dillon Ave., Main St., Ash St., and 7th St.
              Park
              Harvest Park                    2.0 acres         Ramona Blvd. and Savory Lane
                                                                At Community Center – west side of
              Hoffman Park                    2.0 acres
                                                                San Jacinto Ave, south of 6th St.
                                                                South side of Main St between Hewitt
              Mistletoe Park                  2.5 acres
                                                                Ave and Mistletoe Ave.
              Rancho San Jacinto Parks        20 acres          Multiple locations
                                                                Sagecrest lane, southwest of Skyview
              Sagecrest Park                  4.5 acres
                                                                Park
                                                                On Idyllwild Dr between Tahquitz and
              Sallee Park                     5.0 acres
                                                                Monte Vista Avenues.
              Skyview Park                    4.0 acres         Ramona Blvd. at Skyview
              Soboba Springs Park             2.5 acres         Verona, west of Soboba Rd.
                                                                North side of Esplanade Ave between
              Valley-Wide Regional Park       35 acres
                                                                State Street and Palm Ave.
              Total Acres                     83.5
San Jacinto General Plan                                 CSF-23                                             May 2006

                                                                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                       Table CSF-2
                                      Planned Parks and Recreational Facilities
                                                Net New
                             Site                                    Location              Possible Features
                                                Acreage
                                                             East of Camino Los
                                                                                       Typical neighborhood
                Camino Los Banos Park          10 acres      Banos, between Main
                                                                                       park facilities.
                                                             St and 7th St.
                Cottonwood Park                15 acres      N/A                       N/A
                                                                                       Multi-purpose
                                                                                       soccer/football fields,
                                                             De Anza Elementary        softball/baseball fields,
                De Anza Park                   10 acres
                                                             School                    basketball court, tot
                                                                                       lot, and picnic
                                                                                       facilities.
                                                             South of Record Rd,
                                                                                       Typical neighborhood
                Potter Road Park               10 acres      between Chase St
                                                                                       park facilities.
                                                             and Potter Road
                                                             Monte Vista Middle
                                                                                       Tennis courts and
                Sallee Park (expansion)        5 acres       School, adjacent to
                                                                                       baseball/softball fields.
                                                             existing Sallee Park
                Total Acres                    50 acres
                                                       Table CSF-3
                                       Existing and Future Park Acreage Needs
                                                                      Available Acreage
                                                   Park Acreage                                Surplus/(Shortfall) of
                                     Population                       from Existing and
                                                     Required                                        Acreage
                                                                      Planned Parkland
            Existing City (2000)    28,479        142 acres         354 acres                 212 acres
            Future                  108,541       543 acres         649 acres                 106 acres
             1. Existing City population from 2000 Census.
             2. Projected population from Table LU-3. Buildout estimates include sphere of influence.
             3. Five acres per 1,000 persons.
             4. Existing and Planned Parkland includes Open Space Recreation.
San Jacinto General Plan                                  CSF-24                                                      May 2006
                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                          The Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District provides another important
                          resource for the City to ensure the provision of adequate amounts of
                          parkland for residents. The District has access to additional funding
                          sources and operational expertise that can expand the recreational
                          opportunities for San Jacinto residents.
                          The facilities comprising the recreation and open space plan are
                          described in the following sections, and standards and criteria for
                          developing new park sites are established.
              Park System The City’s park system consists of existing mini parks, neighborhood
                          parks, and community parks. San Jacinto currently has six developed
                          parks which range in size from the 0.7-acre Hofmann Park to the
                          36-acre Valley-Wide Regional Park. Several public parks are small and
                          function as passive parks. Active recreational parkland is provided in the
                          City at four parks.
San Jacinto General Plan                      CSF-25                                       May 2006

                                                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         Mini Park
                         A mini park is typically one acre or less in size and has a service area of
                         ¼ mile or less. A mini park may take the form of a city’s entry feature, a
                         viewpoint, a small downtown plaza, or a vest pocket park. Examples of
                         mini parks within San Jacinto include Druding Park and Hofmann Park.
                         This type of small park is best suited to areas of higher density housing
                         or commercial uses where it becomes a substitute for a backyard or
                         provides a retreat from heavy vehicular congestion. While there may be
                         a few appropriate examples for the future use of mini parks within
                         San Jacinto, such as existing apartment complexes or senior housing
                         where little open space if available for a larger park, mini parks will
                         generally be discouraged since they serve a very limited area, offer
                         minimal recreational opportunities, and are expensive to maintain.
                         Neighborhood Parks
                         There are two neighborhood parks within San Jacinto: Mistletoe Park
                         and Rancho Park. The following criteria are considered when developing
                         neighborhood parks:
                         ¾ The park should serve an area of approximately one square mile
                             and be centrally located so that its service area has no more than a
                             ½ mile radius, allowing residents to walk to the park.
                         ¾ The park size should generally range from five (5) to 15 acres in
                             size, depending on the facilities provided.
                         ¾ The park should provide for the daily recreational needs of residents
                             in the immediate area, and should provide a variety of active and
                             passive recreational facilities. Facilities may include picnic areas, tot
                             lots, court areas, multipurpose ball fields, and limited parking to
                             meet the needs of the on-site activities.
                         The City implements its policy of providing well distributed neighborhood
                         parks to serve the local communities within San Jacinto. The City
                         implements the Quimby Act, which requires parkland dedication of three
                         acres per 1,000 residents or an in-lieu fee payment as a required
                         condition for approval of a residential subdivision. During the review of
                         proposed subdivisions and during the planning of future park facilities,
                         the City will include the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District to
                         ensure that all potential funding sources for the development and
                         operation of neighborhood parks are considered. Finally, the City will
                         work with the San Jacinto Unified School District to enter into joint use
                         agreements for community use of the school’s recreational facilities.
San Jacinto General Plan                    CSF-26                                           May 2006

                                                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                         Community Parks
                         The City currently has two parks with community park facilities that serve
                         the community: Sallee Park and Valley-Wide Regional Park. The
                         following criteria are considered when developing community parks:
                         ¾ The park should serve a radius of up to two miles, and should be
                              centrally located with adequate parking facilities.
                         ¾ The park should be 15 to 25 acres in size.
                         ¾ The park should provide adequate facilities which can include
                              swimming pools, tennis courts, ballfields which are designed to allow
                              league play, recreation buildings, picnic facilities, and walking trails.
                         The City continues to implement its policies regarding the expansion,
                         provision, maintenance, and funding of parks in order to expand the
                         recreational opportunities at its community parks.
                         Regional Parks
                         While there are no improved regional parks within the Planning Area,
                         the unimproved San Jacinto River Park provides a good opportunity for
                         the development of a regional park. Regional parks typically provide
                         service to persons living within one hour driving of the park. These
                         parks, particularly linear parks, can range in size from a few acres, but
                         are usually larger in size, reaching sizes in excess of 1,000 acres,
                         depending on the facilities provided within the park. Regional parks
                         often are associated with large natural areas, and provide a range of
                         passive activities, such as trails and camping. The City continues to
                         work with the County and other agencies responsible for the provision of
                         large scale regional parks to promote the development of regional parks
                         within the Planning Area.
San Jacinto General Plan                      CSF-27                                          May 2006

                                                      COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                            Linear Parks and Trails
                            The Rancho San Jacinto community was designed with a linear park and
                            trail system. The 38-acre linear park system uses storm water detention
                            basins to connect with a system of bicycle/pedestrian paths. Additional
                            opportunities for future trails and linear parks include bike and
                            pedestrian paths along the river levee. Linear parks do not serve a
                            specific service area, nor is there a standard size for these facilities.
                            Typical facilities associated with linear parks include pathways,
                            horseback riding trails, and hiking and bicycling trails, often located
                            along a scenic or otherwise interesting corridor. Linear parks are
                            appropriate uses for drainage courses, utility easements, fault zones, and
                            river levees and should connect uses such as parks and schools to
                            populated areas. The City continues to review subdivision proposals for
                            the potential inclusion of linear parks along required flood control
                            facilities. The City will also work to include bicycle and pedestrian
                            pathways along the river levees. Figure CSF-4 identifies trails and linear
                            park opportunities in the community.
                  LIBRARIES Public libraries serve several community purposes including, education,
                            recreation, and dissemination of public information. The Riverside
                            County Library System provides library services to the City through
                            Library Systems and Services, which has been contracted by the County
                            to operate the various county libraries. A new library branch was
                            recently constructed next to the high school at 500 Idyllwild Drive.
                            As development occurs, the City will continue to work with the Riverside
                            County Library System to ensure that community needs for library
                            services are met.
              SENIOR AND    San Jacinto contains a large senior population that requires specialized
          YOUTH SERVICES    resources. The Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District provides
                            recreational activities targeting senior citizens. Several community
                            organizations active within the area also provide senior services.
                            Swimming lessons and a variety of team oriented sports for young boys
                            and girls are also available.
      HUMAN RESOURCES       San Jacinto’s history is marked by an engaged public and concern for
                            civic issues. The City considers human resources a valuable asset to be
                            enhanced and continually cultivated. Making information accessible to
                            all groups within the community will support public involvement and
                            stimulate community interest. Various media approaches include
                            newsletters, information brochures, cable television programming, radio
                            and newspaper announcements, and presentations to community
                            groups. Citizen input will be actively solicited during the early stages of
                            major public or private development projects and regulatory programs.
                            In addition, the potential of the San Jacinto volunteer sector will be
                            explored. Homeowner associations, community groups, business groups
                            and interested individuals may be utilized as sources for appointees on
                            City commissions, boards and tasks forces.
San Jacinto General Plan                        CSF-28                                        May 2006

May 200

                                                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                  Appendix: Implementation Program
                                                  This Implementation Program provides actions to
                                                  implement the adopted policies and plans identified
                                                  in this Element. The Community Services and
                                                  Facilities Element Implementation Program is a
                                                  series of actions, procedures and techniques that
                                                  includes a description of the responsible
                                                  agency/department, funding source, time frame and
                                                  related policies in the Community Services and
                                                  Facilities Element.
                            Law Enforcement
                     CSF-1  Adopt and maintain level of service (e.g., response times, call handling)
         Law Enforcement    and staffing standards as well as a developer fee program for the Police
   Service Standards and    Department. Review the level of services and funding levels at budget
             Fee Program    time, adjusting when necessary to ensure that adequate levels of service
                            and facilities are provided and maintained based on short-term and
                            long-term growth projections. Future developers will contribute funds for
                            police services through the adopted developer fees.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Police Department, City Council
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds, developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing and annual review during budget and CIP process
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.3,
                     CSF-2  Continue to work with the school districts to provide School Resource
 School Resource Officer    Officers (SROs) to assist the school districts with safety and security
                            concerns. Review the success of the program and funding/staffing levels
                            on an annual basis, adjusting when necessary to ensure that adequate
                            levels of service are provided and maintained.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Police Department, City Council, school districts
          Funding Source:   State and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing and annual review during budget and CIP process
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2
                     CSF-3  Continue to improve the City’s ability to enforce traffic laws and respond
      Traffic Enforcement   to accidents through the Traffic Enforcement program. Review the level
                  Program   of services and funding levels at budget time, adjusting when necessary
                            to ensure that adequate levels of service and equipment/fleet
                            maintenance are provided and maintained.
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix CSF-1                                   May 2006

                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
               Responsible  Police Department, City Council
    Agency/Department:      State and federal funds
          Funding Source:   Ongoing and annual review during budget and CIP process
              Time Frame:   1.1, 1.2
          Related Policies:
                            In cooperation with the school districts, police and fire departments, and
                     CSF-4  local, state, and federal emergency management agencies, implement
   Emergency Operation      an Emergency Operation Center (EOC) to respond to and manage
            Center (EOC)    disasters.     Provide annual training for City staff in emergency
                            management so that when they are called into action, they will be able
                            to distribute information and resources to the public effectively.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Police Department, Fire Department, federal, state, and local emergency
                            management agencies
          Funding Source:   General Fund, staff time, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4
                     CSF-5  During the development review process, require design features that
         Crime Prevention   reduce the potential for crime. New projects should:
  Through Environmental
          Design (CPTED)    ¾ Provide well-lighted and visible streets and street names, building
                                entrances and addresses, common areas, and parking facilities.
                            ¾ Limit access into and between buildings to reduce escape routes and
                                to make undetected entry difficult.
                            ¾ Provide landscaping that permits the natural surveillance of open
                                areas and entryways, and avoids creating places for concealment.
                            ¾ Be designed to permit emergency vehicle access to all sides of
                                buildings located in multi-family and non-residential developments.
                            ¾ Be designed to allow for defensible space.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Police Department
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.6
                     CSF-6  At City Hall and on the City's website, promote the establishment and
   Neighborhood Watch       operation of Neighborhood Watch programs throughout the City.
                            Assign a police officer or volunteer patrol person to each Neighborhood
                            Watch group for assistance in launching and maintaining a successful
                            program.
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix CSF-2                                    May 2006

                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Police Department
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.5
                            Fire Protection
                     CSF-7  In cooperation with the Riverside County Fire Department, adopt and
   Fire Protection Service  maintain level of service (e.g., response times, call handling) and staffing
       Standards and Fee    standards, as well as a developer fee program for fire services. Review
                  Program   the level of services and funding levels at budget time, adjusting when
                            necessary to ensure that adequate levels of service and facilities are
                            provided and maintained. Future developers will contribute funds for
                            fire services through the adopted developer fees. During the budget and
                            CIP process, reserve future sites through purchase, eminent domain,
                            dedication, donation, or a combination of these procedures.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      City Council, Riverside County Fire Department
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds, developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing and annual review during budget process
          Related Policies: 2.1, 2.2, 2.4, 2.5
                     CSF-8  Adopt and implement a monitoring mechanism to ensure that the
  Annual Fire Flow Tests    Riverside County Fire Department, in cooperation with local water
                            companies, conducts annual fire flow tests, especially in or adjacent to
                            areas of high fire hazard such as the hillsides.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      City Engineer, Riverside County Fire Department, local water companies
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing annual review
          Related Policies: 2.1, 2.2, 2.5
                     CSF-9  During the development review process, the Community Development
Development Review for      Department in cooperation with the City Engineer and the Riverside
                Fire Safety County Fire Department, shall ensure that:
                            ¾ New private access roads are at least 24 feet wide and provide
                                 adequate turning radius for fire and emergency vehicles.
                            ¾ A fire management plan is prepared for all development located in
                                 or adjacent to wildfire-prone areas such as naturally vegetated
                                 hillsides. The fire management plan may require fire protection
                                 measures such as landscape or open space buffers, maintenance
                                 programs for weed and vegetation abatement and fire resistant
                                 plants, as well as non-combustible building materials, including
                                 roofing.
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix CSF-3                                   May 2006

                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                            ¾ Adequate service and response times can be provided to the
                                development without reducing service to existing areas.
                            ¾ Development plans clearly identify fire flows, hydrant siting, and
                                access points.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, City Engineer,                Riverside  County   Fire
                            Department
          Funding Source:   Developer fee
              Time Frame:   Ongoing during development review process
          Related Policies: 2.3
                            Public Education
                    CSF-10  Continue to work with the school districts to the extent allowed by State
     Schools to Serve the   law to ensure adequate school facilities are provided and maintained in
               Community    the community to the full extent of the law. Specifically, the City should:
                            ¾ During the processing of residential and non-residential
                                development proposals, ensure the school districts are consulted
                                regarding the potential impact of the project on educational services
                                and facilities. When proposed developments cannot be served by
                                existing facilities and services, the City shall work with the developer
                                and the school district in exploring options for service provision and
                                facility funding.
                            ¾ Prior to approving a project that is likely to generate students,
                                require the applicant to mitigate school impacts to the full extent
                                permitted by State law through land dedications, payment of fees,
                                participation in a special assessment district, or any combination of
                                the above.
                            ¾ Cooperate with school districts to update population projections,
                                student generation formulas, potential school sites, and facilities
                                improvement plans in their Long Range Facility and Master Plans.
                            ¾ Work with school districts to expedite the construction of new
                                schools, when necessary.
                            ¾ Cooperate with school districts and recommend appropriate sites for
                                new school development as proposals for new school facilities come
                                forward.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, school districts
          Funding Source:   General Fund, developer fees, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 3.1, 3.2, 3.3
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix CSF-4                                     May 2006

                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                    CSF-11   During the development and environmental review process for future
                 Minimize    schools located in San Jacinto, cooperate with the appropriate school
    Incompatibilities with   district to minimize the impacts of school development through traffic
                    Schools  management and parking measures, and the use of appropriate site
                             layout and buffering techniques. When feasible, encourage the location
                             of new schools at the periphery of residential neighborhoods and
                             provide buffers at all common property lines with residential uses.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, school districts
          Funding Source:    General Fund, developer fees, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5
                    CSF-12   As more schools are built within the City, maximize the joint use of
      Joint Use of School    facilities by the City and the local school districts, including joint
                  Facilities school/park sites, joint use of athletic fields, community meeting
                             facilities, and provision of child and senior care facilities, where feasible.
                             Develop joint funding for such facilities through a combination of school
                             district and City sources in level consistent with the availability of the
                             facilities to meet non-school recreational and community needs. Enter
                             into formal agreements with the districts to establish the usage, funding,
                             and maintenance terms of the joint facilities.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, school districts, City Attorney
          Funding Source:    General Fund, developer fees, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  3.1, 3.2, 3.3
                             Water and Sewer Service
                    CSF-13   Continue to cooperate with the water districts to ensure adequate water
         Water and Sewer     supply and sewage treatment facilities are provided and maintained in
         Services for New    the community. Specifically, the City should:
             Development
                             ¾ During the processing of development proposals, ensure the water
                                  districts are consulted regarding the potential impact of the project
                                  on water supplies and sewage treatment facilities. When requested
                                  by the district or City Engineer, require proposed developments to
                                  include a water quality assessment as part of the application
                                  materials, and implement identified mitigation measures during
                                  construction and development.
                             ¾ Ensure the project applicant has paid the required fees prior to
                                  occupancy of any new development.
                             ¾ Require water conservation devices and xeriscape landscaping in
                                  new public and private development and redevelopment projects.
San Jacinto General Plan                       Appendix CSF-5                                     May 2006

                                                          COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                            ¾ Cooperate with the water districts to update population projections,
                                 water use and sewer generation formulas, needed improvements,
                                 and programs within the Water and Sewer Master Plans at least
                                 every five years.
                            ¾ Work with the water districts to expedite the improvement and
                                 expansion of water, reclaimed water, and sewer facilities, when
                                 necessary.
                            ¾ Whenever feasible, require the installation and use of reclaimed
                                 water systems for irrigation purposes in new developments.
                            ¾ Adopt, implement, and update as necessary, a Ground Water
                                 Management Plan.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Public Works, City Engineer, water districts, California Department of
                            Water Resources
          Funding Source:   State and federal funds, user fees, developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 5.1, 5.2, 5.4, 5.5
                    CSF-14  During the development review process, the City shall allow new septic
            Septic Systems  systems only for low density projects if they have met the RWQCB’s
                            minimum lot size requirement of one half acre per subsurface disposal
                            system and where sewer connection is infeasible.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Public Works, City Engineer, water districts
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 5.6
                            Energy
                    CSF-15  During the development review process, require that all new
              Natural Gas   developments adjacent to or near natural gas lines, install and connect
                            to the lines.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, City Engineer, energy providers
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2
                    CSF-16  Work with Southern California Edison (SCE) to improve compatibility of
  Reduce Energy Facility    its facilities with other development and scenic resources. On an
          Incompatibilities ongoing basis and through the development review process, the City
                            shall:
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix CSF-6                                  May 2006

                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                              ¾ Request SCE improve transmission line corridors with attractive
                                  ornamental plantings, landscape screening, and trails.
                              ¾ Require new development to underground all utility lines needed to
                                  serve the development.
                              ¾ Work with SCE to coordinate the undergrounding of new utilities
                                  with the undergrounding of existing utilities whenever financially and
                                  physically feasible.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:        Community Development, City Engineer, energy providers
          Funding Source:     State and federal funds, user fees, developer fees
              Time Frame:     Ongoing
          Related Policies:   6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4
                              Communications
                     CSF-17   Develop and implement appropriate siting regulations for the installation
         Communications       of communications facilities that will minimize impacts to the community.
            Facilities Siting
               Regulations
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:        Community Development
          Funding Source:     General Fund
              Time Frame:     Develop and adopt siting regulations by the end of 2007, ongoing
                              implementation through the development review process
          Related Policies:   7.1, 7.2
                              Flood Control
                     CSF-18   ¾ Continue to work with the Riverside County Flood Control District to
 San Jacinto River Levee          complete the construction of a 100-year levee along the river to
                    Projects      remove dairy land and properties designated for non-residential uses
                                  from the flood zone.
                              ¾ Include bicycle, hiking, and horseback riding trails along the levees
                                  when possible.
                              ¾ Ensure the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) updates
                                  the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) to account for updated flood
                                  control facilities.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:        Public Works, Engineering, Riverside County Flood Control District
          Funding Source:     State and federal funds
              Time Frame:     Ongoing
          Related Policies:   8.1, 8.2
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix CSF-7                                   May 2006

                                                         COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                    CSF-19  Review projects for project-related flood control and stormwater
    Project-Related Flood   management impacts to ensure that all proposed development comply
 Control and Stormwater     with the City’s MS4 permit (Order No. R8-2002-0011 (NPDES No. CAS
             Management     618033)). As a condition of project approval, require new development
                            to provide adequate on-site and off-site stormwater and flood
                            management facilities to control direct and indirect erosion and
                            discharges of pollutants and/or sediments so that “no net increase in
                            runoff” occurs as a result of the proposed project. In order to determine
                            the facility and Best Management Practices (BMPs) needed, the City will
                            require, when necessary, a hydrological/drainage analysis be performed
                            by a certified and City-approved engineer, with the cost of said analysis
                            the responsibility of the project applicant.
                            Additionally, all development located within a 100-year flood plain shall
                            be consistent with the requirements of the Federal Emergency
                            Management Agency.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Public Works, Engineering, Riverside County Flood Control District
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 8.1
                    CSF-20  Update the City's Master Flood Control and Drainage Plan by the end of
    Master Flood Control    2008. In the updated plan, develop standards that encourage the
      and Drainage Plan     development and maintenance of multi-use channels such as wide
                            grass-lined swales that can be used as bicycle/pedestrian trails.
                            During the annual budget and CIP process, refer to the Plan to identify
                            the resources needed to designate, preserve, and acquire land for
                            necessary flood control and drainage facilities.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Public Works, Engineering, Riverside County Flood Control District
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Adopt new Master Plan by the end of 2008
          Related Policies: 8.1, 8.2
                            Solid Waste
                    CSF-21  On an ongoing basis and in compliance with State law, ensure solid
               Solid Waste  waste collection activities, facility siting and construction of transfer
             Management     and/or disposal facilities, operation of waste reduction and recycling
                            programs, and household hazardous waste disposal and education
                            programs are consistent with the County Solid Waste Management Plan.
San Jacinto General Plan                    Appendix CSF-8                                    May 2006

                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Public Works, Engineering
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Adopt new Master Plan by the end of 2008
          Related Policies: 9.1, 9.2
                            Recreation and Open Space
                    CSF-22  Review development proposals for their potential demand for and
      Parkland Standards    impact on parks and recreational facilities in the community by:
                            ¾ Requiring developers of residential projects to provide adequate
                                 parkland equal to five acres per 1,000 residents (0.005 acre per
                                 resident), or pay an in-lieu fee prior to occupancy of the project.
                            ¾ Requiring non-residential development to provide parkland equal to
                                 2.5 acres per 1,000 employees (0.0025 acre per employee), or pay
                                 an in lieu fee prior to occupancy of the project.
                            ¾ Work with developers to identify the appropriate park type(s), size(s),
                                 facilities, and location(s) for required park facilities.
                            ¾ Ensure parkland facilities provided meet the standards identified in
                                 the Community Services and Facilities Plan.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District
          Funding Source:   Developer fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 10.1, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 10.7, 10.8
                    CSF-23  For projects located along the river levees or fault zones, or that include
  Linear Parks and Trails   drainage courses, utility easements, and/or flood control facilities,
                            require the project to provide easements for the provision of linear
                            parks, pathways, horseback riding trails, and/or hiking and biking trails
                            within these areas, linking to the regional park and trail system where
                            possible. Development and maintenance of the parks and/or trails
                            would be come the responsibility of the City upon occupancy of the
                            proposed project.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, County of Riverside, Valley-Wide Recreation
                            and Park District
          Funding Source:   Developer, state and federal funds, general fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.8
                    CSF-24  Cooperate with regional, State, and federal agencies to explore the
            Regional Parks  development of a regional park that includes facilities such as hiking
                            trails, camping, and fishing opportunities.
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix CSF-9                                    May 2006

                                                            COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District,
                             Economic Development Specialist
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Develop an in-house team to explore this option by the end of 2004
          Related Policies:  10.1, 10.8
                    CSF-25   Cooperate with the school districts and private schools to implement
   Joint Use Agreements      joint use agreements for the after school and weekend use of school
                             district recreational facilities and sports fields. See also Implementation
                             Program CSF-12.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District,
                             school districts
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  10.1, 10.4, 10.6, 10.7, 10.8
                    CSF-26   Develop a committee of City staff and residents to define additional
         Cultural Facilities cultural facilities (community center, theater, etc.) needed to meet the
                             needs of the community, potential locations and sizes for any identified
                             facilities, and funding sources. Make the findings of the committee
                             available to all appropriate City and outside agencies.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Cultural Facilities Committee
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  10.1, 10.6, 10.7, 10.8
                    CSF-27   In conjunction with the Valley Wide Park and Recreation District and the
 Parks and Trails Master     County of Riverside, develop and implement a realistic 5-year and
         Plan and Capital    10-year Parks and Trails Master Plan and Capital Facilities Plan that
             Facilities Plan identifies areas needs, phasing, and funding mechanisms. Potential
                             trails opportunities are identified on Figure CSF-4.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District,
                             County of Riverside
          Funding Source:    General Fund, State and federal funds, developer fees
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.8
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix CSF-10                                   May 2006
                                                           COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                    CSF-28   Develop a comprehensive parkland funding program that consists of the
     Park and Recreation     following:
                   Funding
                             ¾ Pursue all forms of federal, State, local, private foundation, and
                                  endowment support to assist in the continuing acquisition,
                                  development, and maintenance of parkland and recreational
                                  resources.
                             ¾ Establish a system for parkland dedication and development fees
                                  that ensures that fees from a particular development projects are
                                  used to provide parks and recreational programs to serve that
                                  project.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development
          Funding Source:    Developer fees, State and federal funds, private funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  10.8
                             Libraries
                    CSF-29   Continue to work with the Riverside County Library System to ensure that
          Library Facilities library development keeps pace with overall City development and
                             population growth. As part of the development review process, ensure
                             developers pay all required library fees prior to occupancy of their
                             projects which currently stand at $630 per single family unit and $532
                             per apartment.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:
          Funding Source:    Riverside County Library System
              Time Frame:    State and federal funds, developer fees
          Related Policies:  Ongoing
                             11.1
                    CSF-30   Secure State and federal funds for the expansion and renovation of the
           Library Funding   existing library as well as satellite library facilities.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Riverside County Library System
          Funding Source:    State and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  11.1
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix CSF-11                                  May 2006

                                                         COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                            Senior and Youth Services
                    CSF-31  Cooperate with the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District, Mount
         Senior and Youth   San Jacinto Community College, and other public and private service
  Services and Programs     providers to identify additional needed senior and youth programs and
                            services in the community. Work with these organizations to develop
                            programs and expand access to and participation in senior and youth
                            programs without duplicating efforts. Encourage the use of public transit
                            and alternative modes of travel to these facilities and programs.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Riverside Transit Agency, Riverside Metrolink
          Funding Source:   Private for profit and non profit monies, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 12.1, 12.2
                            Human Resources
                    CSF-32  Continue to actively solicit public input and involvement by using a
   Community Outreach       variety of methods to make information accessible to all groups of the
          and Involvement   community. Work with the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District, the
                            Riverside County Library System, and the school districts to increase the
                            public’s access to information about the community. Use various media
                            approaches including newsletters, flyers, informational brochures, cable
                            television programming, radio and newspaper announcements, and
                            presentation to community groups to inform the community of important
                            public projects, activities, and services, and solicit involvement in City
                            programs and civic volunteer activities.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District,
                            Riverside County Library System, school districts
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 13.1, 13.2, 13.3
San Jacinto General Plan                   Appendix CSF-12                                    May 2006

                                                                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                   Introduction
                                                 San Jacinto is served by a diverse circulation
                                                 network consisting of roadways, rail service and
                                                 trails. Convenient access to the community has
                                                 been provided for many years by a combination of
                                                 regional and local roadways. The Burlington
                                                 Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) Rail Road enters the
                                                 eastern portion of the City from the south and
                                                 terminates just north of 7th Street. Established
                                                 public transit provided by the Riverside Transit
                         Agency and RCTC provides alternative transportation opportunities for
                         commuters, residents and visitors to the community. A partially
                         developed trails network also provides recreational opportunities within
                         the Planning Area.
                         The Circulation Element guides the continued development and
                         improvement of the circulation system to support existing and planned
                         development, while the Land Use Element identifies the City’s existing
                         and planned development pattern. The development of additional land
                         in the future will increase the demand for local and regional roadway
                         improvements and construction.            The Circulation Element also
                         establishes acceptable roadway service levels and identifies
                         improvements to maintain the service levels. The use of other modes of
                         transportation, such as transit, walking and bicycling is promoted to
                         reduce the demand on the circulation system and to improve air quality.
          PURPOSE OF THE The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide a safe, efficient and
  CIRCULATION ELEMENT    adequate circulation system for the City. State planning law requires:
                         “. . . a circulation element consisting of the general location for major
                         thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals and other local public
                         utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the
                         plan.”
                         The State General Plan Guidelines recommend that the circulation
                         policies and plans:
                         ¾ Coordinate the transportation and circulation system with planned
                               land uses;
                         ¾ Promote the safe and efficient transport of goods and the safe and
                               effective movement of all segments of the population;
San Jacinto General Plan                        C-1                                        May 2006

                                                                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                          ¾ Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities; and
                          ¾ Protect environmental quality and promote the wise and equitable
                                use of economic and natural resources.
                          The Guidelines indicate that the Circulation Element should address all
                          facets of circulation including streets and highways, transportation
                          corridors, public transit; railroads; bicycle and equestrian facilities; and
                          commercial, general and military airports. This Circulation Element
                          fulfills state requirements with a plan to provide efficient and adequate
                          circulation facilities to support planned community development.
                          Along with the circulation system, public utilities must be addressed in
                          the General Plan. Rather than address public utilities within the
                          Circulation Element, the San Jacinto General Plan contains a
                          Community Services and Facilities Element that discusses the provision
                          of utilities and public services.
   SCOPE AND CONTENT      This element contains goals and policies to improve overall circulation in
    OF THE CIRCULATION    the City. For vehicle transportation a hierarchical roadway network is
                  ELEMENT established with designated roadway types and design standards. The
                          roadway type is linked to anticipated traffic levels, and acceptable levels
                          of service are established to determine when capacity improvements are
                          necessary. Alternative modes of transportation are also emphasized in
                          this Element in order to suggest ways to reduce dependency on the
                          automobile, which thereby improves air quality.
                          Because local circulation and land use planning is linked with the
                          regional transportation system, this Element focuses on regional
                          transportation plans and programs that serve to alleviate traffic
                          congestion and construct capacity improvements. A particular focus of
                          the regional circulation system portion of this Element is the planned
                          realignment of State Route 79.
                          The Circulation Element consists of three sections: 1) this Introduction;
                          2) Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3) the Circulation Plan. The
                          Implementation Program is provided as an appendix to the Element. In
                          the Issues, Goals and Policies section, major issues pertaining to the
                          transportation system are identified and related goals and policies are
                          established. The goals are statements of the City’s desires and consist of
                          broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as
                          guidelines for: a) planning circulation improvements to accommodate
                          anticipated population growth; b) maintaining acceptable levels of
                          service while development proceeds; c) promoting alternative modes of
                          transportation; and d) coordinating with regional jurisdictions to plan,
                          fund and phase regional transportation facilities. The Plan explains how
                          the goals and policies will be achieved and implemented. Specific
                          action programs for the Circulation Element are contained in the
                          appendix to this Element.
San Jacinto General Plan                          C-2                                        May 2006

                                                                            CIRCULATION ELEMENT
            RELATED PLANS Several transportation plans prepared by the County of Riverside and the
          AND PROGRAMS    Riverside County Transportation Commission (RCTC) focus on the
                          regional transportation system. Strategies to handle anticipated traffic
                          levels from future development are discussed. Other plans have also
                          been prepared to locate future routes for mass transit including rail and
                          express bus service. Plans and programs related to the Circulation
                          Element include:
      County of Riverside The County of Riverside Highway Plan forms part of the Riverside County
             Highway Plan General Plan and designates the arterial system in the Circulation
                          Element of the General Plan. San Jacinto is within Circulation Study
                          Area 3 of the County of Riverside Highway Plan. Defined according to
                          specific arterial functional classifications, the Highway Plan serves to
                          define the intended future roadway system in the County.
      County of Riverside Urbanized areas such as Riverside County are required to adopt a
               Congestion Congestion Management Program (CMP). The goals of the CMP are to
       Management Plan    reduce traffic congestion and to provide a mechanism for coordinating
                          land use development and transportation improvement decisions. The
                          Riverside Congestion Management Program (CMP) is updated every five
                          years in accordance with Proposition 111, passed in June 1990. The
                          CMP was established in the State of California to more directly link land
                          use, transportation and air quality and to prompt reasonable growth
                          management programs that would more effectively utilize new and
                          existing transportation funds, alleviate traffic congestion and related
                          impacts, and improve air quality.
                          The Circulation Element describes how the future transportation system
                          will function. This is important for congestion management, since
                          deficiencies along the CMP system must be mitigated when they occur.
                          The ability to address such deficiencies now, instead of when they occur,
                          is critical.   Understanding the reason for these deficiencies and
                          identifying ways to reduce the impact of future growth and development
                          along a critical CMP corridor will conserve scarce funding resources and
                          help target hose resources appropriately.
      County of Riverside This ordinance was established to meet the requirements of the Riverside
   Ordinance No. 726 –    County Congestion Management Program and the Air Quality
 Transportation Demand    Management Plan as well as to promote consideration of transportation
             Management   demand management objectives early in the development process. This
   Requirements for New   ordinance establishes policies and procedures to encourage and
   Development Projects   promote the use of alternative transportation modes through project
                          design and facility planning. This Ordinance also identifies potential
                          transportation demand management measures associated with project
                          design and facility improvements and operation programs such as
                          carpooling and vanpooling that new developments in San Jacinto may
                          be required to implement.
San Jacinto General Plan                       C-3                                        May 2006

                                                                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
      County of Riverside  The County of Riverside Bicycle Plan is a component of the County of
              Bicycle Plan Riverside General Plan circulation system. The bikeways system is
                           guided through the application of the Plan’s policies, programs and
                           standards in conjunction with adopted bicycle routes. Several County
                           designated Class I Bike Paths traverse the Planning Area. The City’s
                           Circulation Plan calls for the establishment and implementation of a
                           bikeway plan that utilizes the countywide classification system and links
                           to County routes.
 South Coast Air Quality   The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) mandates a
       Management Plan     variety of measures to reduce traffic congestion and improve air quality.
                           The Circulation Element identifies Circulation Programs to be
                           implemented in San Jacinto that may help improve regional air quality.
         Riverside County  Western Riverside County’s population is projected to grow from its
Integrated Project (RCIP)  current 1.2 million persons to 2.0 million persons in 2020. In an effort
                           to improve the quality of life for current and future residents, the County
                           of Riverside, the Riverside County Transportation Commission (RCTC)
                           and Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) have
                           embarked on a planning process to determine future placement of
                           buildings, roads and open spaces for Riverside County. This process is
                           named the Riverside County Integrated Project (RCIP) and will create
                           three plans that are interrelated. The plans include a General Plan for
                           land use and housing, a Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan
                           (MSHCP) to determine open spaces and conservation areas, and the
                           Community and Environmental Transportation Acceptability Process
                           (CETAP), which identifies improvements for highways and transit systems.
                           The main purposes of CETAP that apply to San Jacinto’s Circulation
                           Element are: 1) identifying and setting aside of areas for major
                           transportation facilities; 2) ensuring that the transportation infrastructure
                           will be in place to foster the economic development of Riverside County;
                           and 3) providing access to schools, jobs, shopping and other daily
                           activities. A major focus of the CETAP is identifying the location for the
                           Hemet to Corona/Lake Elsinore Corridor, which will involve the
                           realignment of State Route 79. Other goals include providing expanded
                           rail service and express bus service throughout Riverside County.
                           Decisions reached by the RCIP will affect transportation facilities and
                           opportunities within San Jacinto.
 Regional Transportation   The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) is a component of the Regional
                Plan (RTP) Comprehensive Plan and Guide prepared by the Southern California
                           Association of Governments (SCAG) to address regional issues, goals,
                           objectives, and policies for the Southern California region into the early
                           part of the 21st century. The RTP, which SCAG periodically updates to
                           address changing conditions in the Southland, has been developed with
                           active participation from local agencies throughout the region, elected
                           officials, the business community, community groups, private institutions,
San Jacinto General Plan                         C-4                                           May 2006

                                                                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                            and private citizens. The RTP sets broad goals for the region and
                            provides strategies to reduce problems related to congestion and
                            mobility.
             SR-79 Project  Realigning SR-79 as a freeway from Gilman Springs Road on the north
                            to Domenigoni Parkway on the south would offer significant traffic
                            capacity and continuity between communities to meet increasing traffic
                            demands in this expanding region of western Riverside County.
                            Improvements to SR-79 north of Gilman Springs Road have been
                            completed, and Caltrans in cooperation with Riverside County
                            Transportation Department is preparing improvement plans for the
                            widening of SR-79 from Domenigoni Parkway on the north to Thompson
                            Road on the south. As a result of these projects, traffic would be
                            improved between SR-79, SR-74, I-215, I-15, and I-10.
                            RCTC, in cooperation with Caltrans District 8, the County of Riverside,
                            and the cities of Hemet and San Jacinto, is in the process of preparing
                            an Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report for the
                            SR-79 Realignment Project from Domenigoni Parkway to Gilman Springs
                            Road. To date, the Project Study Report/Project Development Support,
                            Purpose and Need, and Project Criteria and Alternatives Selection for
                            Preliminary Agreement documents have been completed. The public
                            scoping process has also been completed and RCTC has held numerous
                            public meetings. Based on the conclusion of these items, draft
                            alignment alternatives are currently under technical review.         The
                            currently proposed concept for SR-79 in this Circulation Element
                            includes a section of the City of San Jacinto.
  Mid County Parkway        The Mid County Parkway is a proposed 32 mile east-west limited access
                    Project route for western Riverside County to relieve congestion, improve safety,
                            and help address future traffic demands. The route will connect the
                            San Jacinto area with the Corona area. A Study is being prepared to
                            determine feasible alignments for this roadway. The study is being
                            conducted by the RCTC. Draft alignment alternatives are currently
                            under technical review. There are two alternative alignments within the
                            City of San Jacinto, and they are shown on Figure C-2. The currently
                            proposed concept for MCP in the Circulation Element includes a freeway
                            section in the City of San Jacinto.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER       According to state planning law, the Circulation Element must be
            GENERAL PLAN    independent, yet consistent with other General Plan elements. All
                 ELEMENTS   elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a degree and certain
                            goals and policies of each element may also address issues that are the
                            primary subjects of other elements. The integration of overlapping
                            issues throughout the General Plan elements provides a strong basis for
                            implementation plans and programs, and achievement of community
                            goals.
San Jacinto General Plan                         C-5                                        May 2006
                                                                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                         The Circulation Element is firmly linked to the Land Use Element as the
                         land uses identified in the Land Use plan provide the basis for
                         determining future roadway improvements.             Furthermore, planned
                         roadway alignments strongly affect the planned land uses along the
                         arterials within the City. The Circulation policies and plans ensure that
                         existing transportation facilities will be improved and new facilities will be
                         constructed to adequately serve traffic generated by planned
                         development. An efficient and well planned circulation system is also a
                         critical factor for diversifying and expanding local economic activities,
                         which is also discussed in the Land Use Element.
                         The Circulation Element provides for a trail system that offers
                         recreational opportunities within and adjacent to the open space areas
                         and easements identified in the Resource Management Element. The
                         provision of a trail system is also related to the Resource Management
                         Element in that the trails system may also be used for alternative modes
                         of transportation, such as walking and bicycling that reduce the demand
                         placed on the transportation system and improve air quality.
San Jacinto General Plan                       C-6                                            May 2006
                                                                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                 Issues, Goals and Policies
                                                  San Jacinto has a circulation system that includes:
                                                  vehicular travel; public transit; and bicycle,
                                                  pedestrian and equestrian trails. An independent
                                                  system is created by the connection of this local
                                                  system with a larger regional circulation system. A
                                                  safe and convenient circulation system is needed to
                                                  support a variety of land uses in the community.
                                                  Five major issues are addressed by the goals,
                           policies and plans of the Circulation Element. These major issues
                           include: 1) providing an appropriate and efficient local circulation
                           system; 2) coordinating with other agencies to provide an adequate
                           regional circulation system; 3) ensuring that the State Route 79 (SR 79)
                           alignment benefits San Jacinto; 4) increasing the use of alternative
                           modes of transportation; and 5) implementing transportation
                           management strategies.
     LOCAL CIRCULATION     Safe and convenient access to activities in the community can be
                    SYSTEM provided by a well-designed local roadway system. As new development
                           occurs within the City, the existing roadway system will become more
                           congested, negatively impacting the current residents. To allow for new
                           development to occur without negatively affecting the existing
                           community, improvements to the circulation system will be required.
                           Circulation Goal 1:       Provide a circulation system that meets the needs
                           of existing and future land uses.
                           Policy 1.1:   Provide a balanced circulation system that ensures the safe
                                         and efficient movement of people and goods throughout
                                         the City.
                           Policy 1.2:   Improve the San Jacinto circulation system to desired
                                         standards in concert with land development to maintain
                                         sufficient levels of service.
                           Policy 1.3:   Coordinate with other major transportation improvement
                                         programs and agencies such as Caltrans and the Riverside
                                         County Transportation Commission (RCTC) to implement
                                         roadway improvements that promote the safe and efficient
                                         flow of traffic through San Jacinto.
                           Policy 1.4:   Provide additional infrastructure, such as flood control,
                                         bridges, and miscellaneous rights-of-way, to support the
                                         circulation system.
San Jacinto General Plan                         C-7                                          May 2006
                                                                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                           Policy 1.5:   Establish a truck route system that ensures the efficient
                                         movement of goods through the City, while minimizing
                                         noise and safety hazards within the community.
                           Policy 1.6:   Require new development to provide roadway, sidewalk,
                                         and median improvements that enhance the visual
                                         character of the roadway system and encourage
                                         pedestrian and bicycle safety.
                           Policy 1.7:   Encourage the provision of traffic calming measures in
                                         new residential areas and planned developments.
                           Related Circulation Element Implementation Programs: C-1, C-2, C-3,
                           C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, C-9
                REGIONAL   Transportation and travel through San Jacinto is directly related to the
             CIRCULATION   overall transportation network for the region as surrounding area
                    SYSTEM residents pass through San Jacinto on SR 79 and other major roadways.
                           A healthy economy depends on convenient access to employment and
                           commercial uses and the ability of businesses to move their goods from
                           one location to another. To support the continued success of local
                           business, the local circulation system, including rail transportation, must
                           provide adequate local and regional access. Planning for the needs of
                           the community necessarily includes recognition of the related
                           transportation needs and planning efforts of the surrounding cities,
                           County of Riverside, regional agencies, state of California and federal
                           government.
                           Circulation Goal 2: Achieve a circulation system that is integrated with
                           the larger regional transportation system to ensure the economic
                           well-being of the community.
                           Policy 2.1:   Coordinate planning and construction of local circulation
                                         improvements, public transit systems and regional highway
                                         facilities (SR-79 and Mid County Parkway) with adjacent
                                         jurisdictions and regional transportation agencies.
                           Policy 2.2:   Work closely with adjacent jurisdictions and transportation
                                         agencies to ensure that development projects outside
                                         San Jacinto do not adversely impact the City or providers
                                         of public transportation service within the City.
                           Policy 2.3:   Monitor the effectiveness of alternative transportation
                                         programs, such as bus systems that provide service to the
                                         City.
                           Policy 2.4:   Minimize the impact of regional through traffic on
                                         residential neighborhoods.
San Jacinto General Plan                         C-8                                          May 2006
                                                                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                           Policy 2.5:    Work with regional and State transportation agencies to
                                          ensure that the construction of regional roadways
                                          minimally disrupts access to existing businesses and
                                          employment centers.
                           Policy 2.6:    Acquire adequate right-of-way prior to development
                                          occurring to allow for the ultimate alignment of the future
                                          regional roadways and interchanges identified in the
                                          Circulation Plan.
                           Related Circulation Element Implementation Programs: C-1, C-2, C-3,
                           C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, C-9
          STATE ROUTE 79   State Route 79 is the major roadway connecting San Jacinto with the
                   (SR 79) surrounding region. The County of Riverside and RCTC are in the
                           planning stage of realigning the roadway. A final design is expected to
                           be determined within the next few years. Since this roadway provides
                           much of the drive-by traffic for local businesses, realignment can
                           significantly impact the local economy. In addition, noise created by
                           vehicles traveling on the new alignment will affect adjacent land uses.
                           The City prefers a freeway section in the City of San Jacinto as shown on
                           the Circulation Plan.
                           Circulation Goal 3: Work to ensure that the alignment of SR 79 benefits
                           the community.
                           Policy 3.1:    Work closely with Caltrans and RCTC to ensure that the
                                          preferred realignment of SR 79 benefits San Jacinto.
                           Policy 3.2:    Coordinate with Caltrans and RCTC to implement freeway
                                          ramp interchange improvements that promote efficient
                                          traffic flow and minimize impacts to the local roadway
                                          system.
                           Policy 3.3:    Work with Caltrans and RCTC to ensure that the
                                          construction of the SR 79 minimally disrupts access to
                                          existing businesses and employment centers.
                           Related Circulation Element Implementation Programs: C-4, C-5, C-6,
                           C-8, C-9
     ALTERNATIVE MODES     Public transportation and alternative modes of travel, such as bicycling
                OF TRAVEL  and walking, are an important component of a comprehensive
                           circulation system. Public and alternative modes of transportation offer
                           an alternative to the use of the automobile and help reduce air pollution
                           and road congestion. To promote the increased usage of these modes
                           of transportation, adequate facilities must be provided.
San Jacinto General Plan                          C-9                                        May 2006
                                                                              CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                           Circulation Goal 4: Promote the increased use of public and multi-
                           modal transportation, and provide adequate facilities for these modes of
                           transportation.
                           Policy 4.1:   Require developers to incorporate facilities for public and
                                         other alternative modes of transportation, such as park-
                                         and-ride lots, bicycle and pedestrian trails, bicycle racks,
                                         and bus turnouts in the design of future developments.
                           Policy 4.2:   Incorporate design features such as bus turnouts, bicycle
                                         racks and park-and-ride lots into public improvement
                                         projects that promote and support the use of public and
                                         alternative modes of transportation.
                           Policy 4.3:   Link Community Commercial development, employment
                                         centers, public facilities, and community parks and open
                                         spaces to the alternative transportation system, wherever
                                         feasible.
                           Policy 4.4:   Require Specific Plans and Planned Unit Developments to
                                         include      well-developed      and     funded    alternative
                                         transportation features.
                           Related Circulation Element Implementation Programs:           C-3, C-8,
                           C-10, C-11, C-12
             TRAILS SYSTEM Non-vehicular modes of travel offer an option to the traditional use of
                           automobiles. These modes of transportation, such as bicycling, walking
                           and horseback riding also provide recreational opportunities for the
                           community.
                           Circulation Goal 5: Provide an extensive and regionally linked public
                           bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian trails system.
                           Policy 5.1:   Provide and maintain an extensive trails network that
                                         supports bicycles, pedestrians and horses and is linked to
                                         the trails systems of adjacent jurisdictions.
                           Policy 5.2:   Link major activity centers, residential neighborhoods,
                                         schools, shopping centers and employment centers
                                         through bicycle, equestrian and pedestrian trails.
                           Policy 5.3:   Encourage the use of open space and utility easements for
                                         bicycle and pedestrian trails, where feasible.
                           Policy 4.4:   Require Specific Plans and Planned Unit Developments to
                                         include well-developed and designed trails that link to
                                         adjacent existing or planned local and/or regional trails.
San Jacinto General Plan                       C-10                                           May 2006
                                                                           CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                         Related Circulation Element Implementation Programs: C-3, C-8, C-12
         TRANSPORTATION  As the community of San Jacinto grows, increased traffic congestion will
 DEMAND MANAGEMENT       occur on local roadways, decreasing the quality of life and creating
                         additional air pollution. To minimize the impacts of future development
                         on the City’s circulation system, transportation demand management
                         strategies and the Congestion Management Plan must be implemented.
                         Areas that already experience traffic congestion will also benefit from
                         these methods, and improve quality of life for the entire community.
                         Circulation Goal 6: Create transportation management strategies to
                         comply with the County Congestion Management Plan.
                         Policy 6.1:   Create     and     implement      transportation   demand
                                       management and congestion management mitigation
                                       measures in areas experiencing high levels of congestion.
                         Policy 6.2:   Review development proposals for compliance with the
                                       Congestion Management Plan.
                         Policy 6.3:   Require developers to assist with improvements to the
                                       circulation system that will minimize congestion related to
                                       their projects.
                         Related Circulation Element Implementation Programs: C-13
San Jacinto General Plan                     C-11                                        May 2006

                                                                           CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                            Circulation Plan
                                                A well-planned and designed street and highway
                                                system facilitates the movement of vehicles and
                                                provides convenient access to surrounding
                                                developments. The City’s circulation system is
                                                supported primarily by vehicle linkages and transit
                                                services. A limited number of partially developed
                                                pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian paths also exist.
                                                The local roadway system connects with the larger
                                                regional system and operation of the two systems is
                         interdependent. This section of the Element establishes the Circulation
                         Plan. The Plan summarizes the approach to ensure safe and convenient
                         operation of the circulation system.
                         Vehicle transportation is presently the primary mode of travel and a
                         Roadway Plan is established with hierarchical roadway designations,
                         physical design standards for the roadway designations, and level of
                         service standards. The Roadway Plan includes regional arterials and
                         anticipated regional traffic levels. Alternative modes of transportation
                         are promoted to reduce dependency on automobile transportation and
                         improve air quality.
                         The Plan is based on issues, goals and policies identified in the previous
                         section. The Circulation Element Implementation Program, which is an
                         appendix to the Circulation Plan, contains specific programs to
                         coordinate planned development with vehicular and non-vehicular
                         circulation improvements.
   LOCAL AND REGIONAL    Safe and convenient access to employment, housing, and other activities
    CIRCULATION SYSTEM   in the community can be provided by a well-designed local roadway
                         system that connects to a well-developed regional circulation system.
                         Planning for the needs of the local business and residential communities
                         necessarily includes recognition of the related transportation needs and
                         planning efforts of the surrounding cities, County of Riverside, regional
                         agencies, state of California and federal government.
 Roadway Classifications The roadway system in San Jacinto is defined using a hierarchical
                         classification system. Roadway classifications are differentiated by size,
                         function, and capacity. There are six basic categories within the
                         functional classification hierarchy in San Jacinto, ranging from two-lane
                         undivided roadways with the lowest capacity to eight-lane divided
                         roadways with the highest capacity. Freeways, like the proposed
                         classification of the SR 79 through San Jacinto are not considered "City"
                         categories due to their operation and maintenance by the State.
                         The roadway classification categories are described in Table C-1 and
                         illustrated in Figure C-1.
San Jacinto General Plan                       C-12                                        May 2006

                                                                            CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              Table C-1
                                  Overview of Street Classifications
                                                                                      Maximum
                                                    Required          Number of
                                                                                       Two-Way
                                                  Right-of-Way          Lanes
Classification             Definition                                                    Traffic
                                                      Width            Required
                                                                                        Volume
                                                 (Approximate)     (Approximate)
                                                                                         (ADT)
Collector       Roadway providing access            78-90 feet    2 lanes                13,000
                to abutting property and
                activity nodes, and linking
                properties to the secondary
                or major system.
Secondary       Roadway intended to carry            100 feet     4 lanes, with          25,900
                traffic between the local                         turn lanes
                street system and the                             where needed,
                arterial highway system.                          and additional
                                                                  right-of-way
                                                                  may be
                                                                  required at
                                                                  some
                                                                  intersections.
Major           Highway that complements             112 feet     4 lanes with           34,100
                the Arterial system.                              striped median,
                Normally links and may be                         additional turn
                continuous over shorter                           lanes may be
                distances than arterials.                         required at
                                                                  intersections.
Arterial        Highway carrying the traffic         122 feet     4 lanes with       18,000-35,900
                of local and collector                            raised median,
                streets to and from freeways                      additional turn
                and other major streets with                      lanes may be
                controlled intersections and                      required at
                generally provide direct                          intersections.
                access to properties.
Urban Arterial  Highways carrying                    146 feet.    6 lanes with       35,900-71,800
                moderately high volumes of                        raised medina,
                long distance and local                           additional turn
                traffic. Although access to                       lanes may be
                abutting property is                              required at key
                permitted, priority is given to                   intersections.
                through traffic mobility.
Limited         Highways that carry large         146-184 feet    6 to 8 lanes,      40,900-81,700
Access          volumes of traffic relatively                     additional turn
Conventional    long distances through an                         lanes needed
Highway         urban or rural area. Also                         at key
                serve considerable local                          intersections.
                traffic traveling over short
                distances. Priority is placed
                on through-traffic rather
                than access to fronting
                property. Direct access to
                individual fronting parcel is
                limited. Should be
                continuous through the
                community they serve and
                link to arterial routes.
San Jacinto General Plan                        C-13                                       May 2006
May 200
                                                                              CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                          Figure C-1 shows schematic cross sections of each category of roadway.
                          These sections represent the desirable standards, but variation in right-
                          of-way width and specific road improvements will occur in certain cases
                          due to physical constraints and/or right-of-way limitations.
                          In particular, the median width in four-lane roadways will vary according
                          to the area being served, right-of-way constraints and turn-lane
                          requirements.. Any of the roadway classifications may deviate from the
                          standards where physical constraints exist or where preservation of
                          community character dictates special treatment. In some locations,
                          augmented cross-sections may be required in order to accommodate
                          physical improvements needed to mitigate traffic congestion along a
                          certain roadway segment or at an intersection. Bikeways and sidewalks
                          also affect the specific standards applied to various facilities. However,
                          the overriding circulation goal is that all roadways carry the designed
                          volumes of traffic at the desired level of service.
     Performance Criteria Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve existing and
                          proposed land uses requires establishing suitable performance criteria.
                          These are the means by which traffic volumes are compared to
                          circulation system capacity, and the adequacy of the circulation system is
                          assessed.
                          The City uses the methodology described in the Highway Capacity
                          Manual (HCM) to evaluate traffic operations in the City. The HCM
                          defines level of service (LOS) as a qualitative measure that describes
                          operational conditions within a traffic stream, generally in terms of such
                          factors as speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic
                          interruptions, comfort and convenience, and safety. The criteria used to
                          evaluate LOS conditions vary based on the type of roadway and whether
                          the traffic flow is considered uninterrupted (flow unrestrained by the
                          existence of traffic control devices, such as signals, etc.) or interrupted
                          (flow restrained by the existence of traffic signals and other control
                          devices).
                          The definitions for level of service for uninterrupted flow are:
                          LOS A represents free-flow. Individual users are virtually unaffected by
                          the presence of others in the traffic stream.
                          LOS B is in the range of stable flow, but the presence of other users in
                          the traffic stream becomes noticeable. Freedom to select desired speeds
                          is relatively unaffected, but there is a slight decline in the freedom to
                          maneuver.
                          LOS C is in the range of stable flow, but marks the beginning of the
                          range of flow in which the operation of individual users becomes
                          significantly affected by interactions with others in the traffic stream.
San Jacinto General Plan                       C-15                                              May 2006
                                                                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                         LOS D represents high density but stable flow. Speed and freedom to
                         maneuver are severely restricted, and the driver experiences a generally
                         poor level of comfort and convenience.
                         LOS E represents operating conditions at or near capacity. All speeds
                         are reduced to low, but relatively uniform value. Small increases in flow
                         will cause breakdowns in traffic movement.
                         LOS F is used to define forced or breakdown flow. This condition exists
                         wherever the amount of traffic approaching a point exceeds the amount
                         that can traverse the point. Queues form behind such locations.
                         The definitions of level of service for interrupted traffic flow differ slightly
                         depending on the type of traffic control, and the HCM uses different
                         procedures depending on the type of intersection control.
                         Level of service is typically dependent on the quality of traffic flow at the
                         intersections along a roadway. For signalized intersections, average
                         total delay per vehicle for the overall intersection should be used to
                         determine level of service.           For all way stop (AWS) controlled
                         intersections, the ability of vehicles to enter the intersection is not
                         controlled by the occurrence of gaps in the flow of the main street. The
                         level of service for this type of intersection analysis should also be based
                         on average total delay per vehicle for the overall intersection. For
                         unsignalized intersections, the calculation of level of service is dependent
                         on the occurrence of gaps occurring in traffic flow of the main street.
                         The level of service criteria for this type of intersection should be based
                         on average total delay per vehicle for the worst minor street movement.
                         Table C-2 illustrates the level of service criteria for signalized and
                         unsignalized intersections.
                                                            Table C-2
                                              Intersection Level of Service Criteria
                                  Level of               Average Total Delay per Vehicle
                                   Service            Signalized               Unsignalized
                                      A                0-10.00                   0-10.00
                                      B            10.01 to 20.00             10.01 to 15.00
                                     C             20.01to 35.00              15.01 to 25.00
                                     D             35.01 to 55.00             25.01 to 35.00
                                      E            55.01 to 80.00             35.01 to 50.00
                                      F             80.01 and up               50.01 and up
San Jacinto General Plan                       C-16                                            May 2006
                                                                            CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                           The City has established a peak hour Level of Service D or better as
                           acceptable for all intersections along the designated street and highway
                           system. Projects that may result in an increase in traffic must prepare a
                           traffic analysis that evaluates long-term impacts of the project and any
                           mitigation necessary to ensure the project achieves or maintains the
                           peak hour intersection LOS D standard.
         Roadway System    The circulation goals and policies emphasize the need for a circulation
                           system capable of serving both existing and future local and regional
                           traffic. The location, design, and constituent modes of the circulation
                           system have major impacts on air quality, noise, community
                           appearance, and other scenic and environmental resources. The
                           San Jacinto Roadway Plan depicted in Figure C-2 delineates the
                           planned circulation system identifying roadway segments with the Limited
                           Access Conventional Highway, Urban Arterial, Arterial, Major,
                           Secondary, and Collector designations. Regional routes SR-79 and the
                           Ramona Expressway are anticipated to carry the highest volumes of
                           traffic.
             Truck Routes  An efficient and effective goods movement system is essential to the
                           economic livelihood of urban areas. Trucking dominates goods
                           movement within and through regions.            San Jacinto experiences
                           moderate amounts of truck traffic generated by commercial and light
                           industrial uses. Truck traffic will continue to increase to support new
                           businesses. Noise impacts and congestion can be caused by truck traffic
                           in urban areas. To avoid such impacts, truck routes are oriented to the
                           Ramona Expressway and on SR-79 through the study area.
                           To minimize noise impacts on residential areas, trucks will be
                           consolidated along arterial roadways. In evaluating routes for truck
                           traffic traveling through the City, steps will be taken to minimize the
                           amount of truck traffic on roadways in residential areas that are sensitive
                           to congestion and noise impacts.
          STATE ROUTE 79   The County of Riverside and the Riverside County Transportation
                   (SR-79) Commission (RCTC) are in the planning stages of realigning the SR-79
                           and have identified several alternative alignments. Figure C-2 identifies
                           the alignment and classification of SR-79 preferred by the City. As
                           shown on Figure C-2, the City supports extending SR-79 through
                           San Jacinto as a Freeway, traversing the community in a generally north-
                           south direction located to the east of Sanderson from the San Jacinto
                           River to the San Jacinto Reservoir. In the vicinity of the reservoir, the
                           SR-79 curves west and traverses Sanderson, ultimately crossing
                           Esplanade Avenue at the southwestern corner of the community. The
                           City will continue to work with the County of Riverside and the RCTC to
                           support this alignment of the SR-79, which is currently one of the
                           alternatives being considered by these agencies.
San Jacinto General Plan                        C-17                                        May 2006
                                                                                CIRCULATION ELEMENT
     Mid County Parkway      RCTC is in the planning stages of the Mid County Parkway (MCP)
                     Project project. The MCP is a proposed 32-mile transportation corridor that will
                             relieve traffic congestion for east-west travel in western Riverside County
                             between the San Jacinto and Corona areas and help address future
                             transportation needs through 2030.
                             The proposed corridor is a component of the Riverside County
                             Integrated Project, a region wide transportation and environmental
                             planning project undertaken over several years by the Riverside County
                             Transportation Commission (RCTC) and the County of Riverside. The
                             Project determined that a corridor in the vicinity of Cajalco Road in the
                             west and Ramona Expressway in the east would significantly reduce
                             congestion, improve traffic flow, and reduce travel times on I-215,
                             SR 91, SR 74, and SR 60. County residents, through their input at public
                             meetings, helped determine the general corridor locations under
                             consideration. Further study of potential route locations is being
                             conducted by RCTC. The three potential MCP alignments currently
                             identified are shown on Figure C-2.
 ALTERNATIVE MODES OF        Public transportation and alternative modes of travel are an important
                     TRAVEL  component of a comprehensive circulation system.                Public and
                             alternative modes of transportation offer an alternative to the use of
                             automobiles and help reduce air pollution and road congestion. In
                             addition to the trails system, which is outlined in more detail below,
                             alternative modes of travel in San Jacinto include the bus system and
                             Riverside Metrolink system. To promote the increased use of these
                             modes of travel, adequate facilities must be provided. Also, see Trails
                             System discussion below.
               Bus Service   Public bus service is provided by the Riverside Transit Agency. Three bus
                             routes currently operate in the City of San Jacinto. Route 31 provides
                             access along State Street and to the north and south ends of the City.
                             Route 32 serves Mount San Jacinto Community College. Route 42
                             provides service from the eastern portion of the City to shopping areas in
                             the south. These existing bus routes provide limited access to the
                             employment centers, shopping, and recreational areas within the City.
                             The City is committed to ensuring that public transportation improves as
                             a viable alternative to the automobile for San Jacinto residents. To
                             achieve this objective, the City coordinates with the Riverside Transit
                             Agency in developing future scheduling and route alignments to serve
                             San Jacinto.
                 Metrolink   Commuter rail in the Southern California region has grown extensively
                             with the Riverside Metrolink system, which now provides service from
                             Riverside County to Orange and Los Angeles counties. Long-term plans
                             call for the extension of the Riverside Transit Corridor along the
                             San Jacinto Branch line to the City of Hemet.
San Jacinto General Plan                          C-18                                          May 2006
May 200

                                                                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
             TRAILS SYSTEM One of the key components of the Circulation Plan is to promote the use
                           of alternative modes such as bicycling, walking, and equestrian riding.
                           A comprehensive trails system to link residential areas, schools, parks
                           and commercial centers so that residents can travel within the
                           community without driving is the primary goal of the City’s trails system.
                           The County's regional bikeway system is shown in Figure C-3. The
                           primary component of this system is the proposed bikeway network
                           illustrated on Figure C-4.
                           This system comprises Class I and Class II bikeways located on or
                           adjacent to the roadway segments illustrated in Figure C-3. Class I
                           bikeways provide a completely separated right-of-way designated for the
                           exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians. The only Class I bikeway in
                           San Jacinto is along the Ramona Expressway. The remaining bikeways
                           in the community are proposed as Class II facilities. Class II bikeways
                           provide a restricted right-of-way on a roadway’s shoulder designated for
                           the exclusive or semi-exclusive use of bicycles. Figure C-5 illustrates the
                           bikeway cross sections to be implemented in San Jacinto. Additional
                           trails opportunities are illustrated in Figure CSF-4 in the Community
                           Services and Facilities Element.
                           Enhanced local bicycle and pedestrian linkages are anticipated to occur
                           throughout buildout of the General Plan. New development projects will
                           be required to include safe and attractive sidewalks, walkways, and bike
                           lanes, and developers of residential and nonresidential projects will be
                           encouraged to construct links adjacent to areas and communities where
                           appropriate. Figure C-3 identifies potential alignments and extensions
                           of the City's trail system.
         TRANSPORTATION    In recent years, the region’s number of trips and amount of travel has
 DEMAND MANAGEMENT         grown at a faster rate than population growth. Transportation demand
                           management (TDM) strategies are designed to counter this trend. TDM
                           strategies reduce dependence on the single-occupant vehicle, increase
                           the ability of the existing transportation system to carry more people, and
                           enhance mobility along congested corridors. The goal of TDM is to
                           reduce single occupant motor vehicle trips during peak hours and
                           modify the vehicular demand for travel.
                           A reduction in peak hour trips, overall roadway congestion, and a
                           decrease in non-attainment pollutants can be achieved through the
                           implementation of TDM strategies. Examples of TDM strategies include:
                           telecommuting, flexible work hours, and electronic commerce that
                           allows people to work and shop from home. The City supports TDM
                           strategies that are consistent with the South Coast Air Quality
                           Management District (SCAQMD) and County of Riverside TDM
                           Guidelines.
San Jacinto General Plan                          C-21                                        May 2006

May 200
May 200

                                                CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                        CLASS I
                                TWO-
                                TWO-WAY BIKE PATH
                            ON SEPARATE RIGHT-
                                           RIGHT-OF- OF-WAY
                                  CLASS II
                          TYPICAL CROSS-
                                   CROSS-SECTION
                        OF BIKE WAY ALONG HIGHWAY
                       ROADWAY
San Jacinto General Plan           C-25                       May 2006
                                                                                CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                         Appendix: Implementation Plan
                                                    This Implementation Program provides actions to
                                                    implement the adopted policies and plans
                                                    identified in the Circulation Element.           The
                                                    Circulation Element Implementation Program is a
                                                    series of actions, procedures and techniques that
                                                    includes a description of the responsible
                                                    agency/department, funding source, time frame
                                                    and related policies in the Circulation Element.
                             Local and Regional Circulation System
                         C-1 Review discretionary development proposals for potential impacts to the
Circulation Planning and     transportation and infrastructure system and to ensure the roadway
            Traffic Analysis system meets City standards. The Level of Service Standards established
                             in the Circulation Element will be used to determine the significance of
                             impacts. Intersection level of service will be determined by the Vehicle
                             Delay and the Highway Capacity Manual calculations. Mitigation in the
                             form of physical improvements and/or impact fees will be required to
                             reduce the significant impacts.
                             When development is proposed that is shown to impact the intersections
                             of State St, (NS) at Cottonwood Avenue (EW), State St, (NS) at
                             Esplanade Avenue (EW), and San Jacinto Av. (NS) at Esplanade Avenue
                             (EW), the City may require roadway improvements, including roadway
                             widening beyond the normal General Plan cross-sections. Adequate
                             right-of-way along new roadways will also be required to permit
                             pedestrian and bicycle facilities, where applicable. Proper roadway
                             drainage must also be provided to ensure a safe system.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
          Funding Source:    General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:    Ongoing in response to development proposals
          Related Policies:  1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.6, 1.7
                         C-2 Require projects that propose an increase in currently approved density
  Projects with Increased    and intensity of land use to prepare a traffic analysis that evaluates the
       Density or Intensity  long-term impacts of the project, demonstrating that the planned road
                             system can support the proposed project, together with those land uses
                             already allowed in the area. The analysis would project average daily
                             traffic roadway links for the buildout situation of the entire area to
                             demonstrate conformance with the peak hour intersection Level of
                             Service "D" standard. In addition, any individual development proposal
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix C-1                                      May 2006
                                                                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                             may be required to provide a traffic analysis to assess peak hour impacts
                             at affected intersections, identifying needed mitigation measures to
                             achieve or maintain the peak hour Level of Service "D" standard. Such
                             impacts may be mitigated by construction of all improvements necessary
                             to achieve the target Level of Service, by payment of a fee or fees if an
                             appropriate funding mechanism is in place, or by any other appropriate
                             means. Project traffic mitigation may include, but is not limited to,
                             compliance with standard conditions of approval, or the construction of
                             improvements or payment of fees necessary to mitigate the incremental
                             impact for each development proposal.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
          Funding Source:    General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:    Ongoing in response to development proposals
          Related Policies:  1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.6, 1.7
                         C-3 Continue to update on an annual basis the Capital Improvement Plan to
    Capital Improvement      plan for and fund future improvements to the circulation system, as well
                 Plan (CIP)  as other public facilities, including improvements to the existing
                             pedestrian and bicycle system and landscaping of right-of-ways. As part
                             of future updates, include an arterial streetscape improvements plan to
                             ensure that substandard streestscapes are beautified.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Public Works
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Update on an annual basis
          Related Policies:  1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4
                         C-4 Continue to work with trucking industry representatives to create truck
         Trucking Industry   route designations to orient trucks to the Ramona Expressway and SR-79
                             to avoid traffic and noise impacts on local roadways. Designate other
                             local truck routes when necessary.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, City Engineer, Police Chief, Public Works,
                             California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), County of Riverside
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  1.5, 2.4
                         C-5 To reduce expenditure, improve design, and minimize traffic disruption,
               Coordinate    work with Riverside County Transportation Commission (RCTC),
            Transportation   Caltrans, South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), and
            Improvements     other regional agencies to coordinate local street improvements with
                             major transportation system improvement projects such as improvements
                             to SR-79. The City will also continue to participate in proposed roadway
                             modifications (including SR-79) and revise the General Plan circulation
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix C-2                                    May 2006
                                                                              CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                             system, if necessary, to reflect changes in these modifications. In
                             addition, the impacts of discretionary development projects and major
                             transportation projects will be monitored and mitigation may be
                             required.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, RCTC, Caltrans,
                             County of Riverside, WRCOG
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds, project proponent, TUMF
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.1, 2.2, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2
                         C-6 Continue to work with the County of Riverside and RCTC to support the
      SR-79 Realignment      alignment of SR-79 shown in Figure C-2. This shall be done as part of
                             an effort to maintain a highway system with adequate capacity and
                             acceptable levels of service to accommodate projected travel demands
                             associated with buildout of the Land Use Element. This can be
                             accomplished by maintaining LOS "D" or better during peak hours at
                             intersections along the designated street and highway system. Strategies
                             that result in improvements to the transportation system, coupled with
                             local job creation, will allow City residents to have access to a wide
                             range of job opportunities within reasonable commute times.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, City Engineer, Public Works, RCTC, Caltrans,
                             County of Riverside
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing; in response to selection of SR-79 alignment
          Related Policies:  1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2
                         C-7 Support construction of the Mid County Parkway (MCP) as a means of
     Mid County Parkway      reducing commute times for San Jacinto residents and providing
                             adequate transportation infrastructure for businesses and major
                             employers in the region. Monitor the decision-making and construction
                             process to ensure the ultimate alignment brings the most benefit to
                             San Jacinto and its residents and businesses. In particular, ensure the
                             MCP is consistent with and compatible with the City’s plans for the
                             Gateway area.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Public Works, RCTC, Caltrans, County of
                             Riverside
          Funding Source:    TUMF, Measure A, State and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  2.1, 2.4, 2.6
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix C-3                                  May 2006

                                                                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                         C-8 Identify available funding sources and establish a financing plan to
            Transportation   guide construction and funding of transportation system improvements.
                 Financing   Require new development projects to construct and/or fund in whole or
                             in part necessary traffic improvements associated with the proposed
                             project. Transportation improvements should include both automotive,
                             as well as alternative means of transportation.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Public Works, RCTC, Caltrans, County of
                             Riverside
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds, development fees
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  1.2, 1.3, 2.1
                         C-9 Encourage the integration of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS)
Intelligent Transportation   consistent with the principles and recommendations referenced in the
             Systems (ITS)   Inland Empire ITS Strategic Plan.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Public Works
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:    Update on an annual basis
          Related Policies:  1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4
                             Alternative Modes of Travel
                       C-10  Work with the Riverside Transit Agency (RTA) to improve transit service
 Improved Transit Service    and encourage ridership through the following actions:
                             ¾ Consider requiring transit facilities in major new development and
                                 rehabilitation projects;
                             ¾ Encourage RTA to modify the existing transit service (such as more
                                 stops and decreasing the interval between buses) to encourage
                                 increased ridership;
                             ¾ Coordinate with RTA to expand transit routes to employment,
                                 shopping, educational, recreational, and residential areas;
                             ¾ Work with RTA to provide special transit services to meet community
                                 needs; and
                             ¾ Work with RTA to identify and receive additional funding sources for
                                 additional transit services (e.g., Transportation Uniform Mitigation
                                 Fee).
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Public Works, RTA, WRCOG
          Funding Source:    General Fund, state and federal funds, development fees
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  2.1, 2.3, 4.1, 4.2
                       C-11  Support plans for the extension of the Metrolink Riverside Transit
                 Metrolink   Corridor to the City of Hemet.
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix C-4                                   May 2006

                                                                                 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, County of Riverside, RCTC
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.3
                       C-12 Provide, enhance, and maintain local bike, pedestrian, and equestrian
             Trails System  linkages in the community per the network identified in Figure C-3.
                            Work with project proponents to ensure that safe attractive sidewalks,
                            walkways, bike lanes, and cross walk are provided in accordance with
                            City standards. Work with developers to construct links to adjacent
                            communities, using open space easements and utility easements
                            wherever appropriate.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, private developers, homeowner
                            associations
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 4.1, 4.2, 5.1
                            Transportation Demand Management
                       C-13 Support the implementation of the Transportation Demand Management
 Transportation Demand      (TDM) measures contained in the SCAQMD and County of Riverside
             Management     TDM Guidelines to help reduce dependence on single occupant motor
                            vehicles, enhance mobility along congested corridors, and increase the
                            ability of the existing transportation system to carry more people.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, Caltrans, County of Riverside,
                            RTA, SCAQMD, RCTC, WRCOG
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds,
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2, 6.3
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix C-5                                     May 2006
                                                                                  NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                  Introduction
                                                Noise levels within the community can affect the
                                                quality of life experienced by people living and
                                                working in San Jacinto. High noise levels can
                                                create stress and irritation. The Noise Element
                                                addresses this issue by creating effective strategies
                                                to reduce excessive noise and limit the community’s
                                                exposure to loud noise sources.
          PURPOSE OF THE  The Noise Element addresses noise sources in the community and
           NOISE ELEMENT  identifies ways to reduce the impacts of these noise sources. The Noise
                          Element contains policies and programs to achieve and maintain noise
                          levels compatible with various types of land uses. The Element identifies
                          those land uses that are sensitive to noise and assures that noise-
                          generating land use are located so that they do not impact those
                          sensitive areas.
   SCOPE AND CONTENT      The Noise Element satisfies the requirements of State planning law and
            OF THE NOISE  is a mandated component of the General Plan. Government Code
                  ELEMENT Section 65302(f) establishes the required components of the Noise
                          Element. The Element also complies with California Health and Safety
                          Code Section 56050.1 guidelines for Noise Elements.
                          Future noise conditions from short- and long-term growth are quantified
                          as noise exposure contours. This noise information serves as the basis
                          for developing guidelines identifying compatible land uses.
San Jacinto General Plan                       N-1                                          May 2006

                                                                                     NOISE ELEMENT
                             The Noise Element comprises three sections: 1) this Introduction;
                             2) Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3) the Noise Plan.                   An
                             Implementation Program is provided as an appendix to this Element. In
                             the Issues, Goals and Policies section, major issues pertaining to noise
                             sources are identified and related goals and policies are established.
                             The goals are statements of the City’s desires and comprise broad
                             statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for
                             reducing or avoiding adverse noise effects on residents. The Plan
                             explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and implemented.
                             Specific implementation programs for the Noise Element are contained
                             in the Noise Element appendix.
            RELATED PLANS    There are a number of existing plans and programs that directly relate to
          AND PROGRAMS       the goals of the Noise Element. These plans and programs have been
                             enacted through state and local legislation and are administered by
                             agencies with powers to enforce state and local laws.
California Environmental     The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the
  Quality Act Guidelines     state legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
                             environmental analysis of projects that might affect the environment.
                             Excessive noise is considered an environmental impact under CEQA.
                             The provisions of the law and environmental review procedures are
                             described in the CEQA Statutes and the CEQA Guidelines.
                             Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the decision making stage
                             of development, City officials and the general public will be able to
                             assess the noise impacts associated with public and private development
                             projects.
          California Noise   The California Commission of Housing and Community Development
     Insulation Standards    officially adopted noise standards in 1974. In 1988, the Building
                  (Title 24) Standards Commission approved revisions to the standards (Title 24,
                             Part 2, California Code of Regulations). As revised, Title 24 establishes
                             an interior noise standard of 45 dB(A) for residential space (CNEL or
                             Ldn). Acoustical studies must be prepared for residential structures to be
                             located within noise contours of 60 dB(A) or greater (CNEL or Ldn) from
                             freeways, major streets, thoroughfares, rail lines, rapid transit lines, or
                             industrial noise sources. The studies must demonstrate that the building
                             is designed to reduce interior noise to 45 dB(A) or lower (CNEL or Ldn).
       City of San Jacinto   The City’s Noise Ordinance provides controls for excessive and
         Noise Ordinance     annoying noise from stationary sources such as air conditioning and
                             refrigeration units, industrial development and commercial activities.
                             The Ordinance also regulates construction activities within the City. The
                             Noise Ordinance establishes allowable interior and exterior noise levels
                             for residential and commercial areas. Specific standards for daytime
                             and nighttime hours are also provided. Certain noise sources are
                             prohibited and the ordinance establishes an enforcement process.
                             Noise Ordinance requirements are identified in this Element.
San Jacinto General Plan                          N-2                                          May 2006

                                                                                   NOISE ELEMENT
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER     According to state planning law, the Noise Element must be consistent
            GENERAL PLAN  with the other General Plan elements. Each element is independent and
                 ELEMENTS all the elements together comprise the General Plan. All elements of the
                          General Plan are interrelated to a degree, and certain goals and
                          policies of each element may also address issues that are primary
                          subjects of other elements. This integration of overlapping issues and
                          policies provides a strong basis for implementation of plans and
                          programs and achievement of community goals.
                          Policies and plans in the Noise Element are designed to protect existing
                          and planned land uses. Potential noise sources are identified in the
                          Noise Element and programs are established to avoid or mitigate noise
                          impacts from planned development. Concurrently, the Land Use
                          Element contains policies to ensure that environmental conditions,
                          including noise, are considered in all land use decisions.             The
                          distribution of residential and other sensitive land uses as identified on
                          the Land Use Policy map is designed to avoid areas where noisy
                          conditions have been identified.
                          The Noise Element is inextricably linked to the transportation policies in
                          the Circulation Element. Transportation noise is largely responsible for
                          excessive noise levels in certain locations in an urban environment. The
                          projected noise distribution identified in the Noise Element directly
                          corresponds to the Circulation Plan. Both the Noise and Circulation
                          Elements contain policies and plans to minimize the effects of
                          transportation noise on existing and planned land uses. Noise exposure
                          is a key consideration when locating and designing new arterials.
                          The Noise Element also relates to the Resource Management Element
                          and the parks component of the Community Services and Facilities
                          Element. Excessive noise can diminish enjoyment of parks and open
                          space. Because of this, noise levels should be considered in the
                          planning of new recreational and open space areas. Additionally, open
                          space areas can be used to buffer noise sensitive land uses from noise
                          producers.
San Jacinto General Plan                       N-3                                         May 2006
                                                                                     NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                Issues, Goals and Policies
                                                 The quality of life in San Jacinto can be reduced by
                                                 excessive noise levels. Three major issues related
                                                 to noise are addressed in the Noise Element.
                                                 These major issues are: 1) avoiding the negative
                                                 effects of noise through the use of land use
                                                 planning and noise reduction techniques;
                                                 2) minimizing the impact of transportation related
                                                 noise; and 3) minimizing the impact of
                                                 non-transportation related noise.
         NOISE AND LAND   Certain areas within San Jacinto are subject to high noise levels.
            USE PLANNING  Consideration of the sources and recipients of noise early in the land
                          use planning and development process can be an effective method of
                          minimizing the impact of noise on people in the community. Areas
                          already impacted by noise need to have noise reduced through
                          rehabilitative improvements.
                          Noise Goal 1: Minimize the effects of noise through proper land use
                          planning and development techniques.
                          Policy 1.1:      Use the City’s adopted noise/land use compatibility
                                           standards as a guide for future planning and
                                           development decisions.
                          Policy 1.2:      Require noise control measures, such as berms, walls,
                                           and sound attenuating construction in areas of new
                                           development or rehabilitation.
                          Policy 1.3       When necessary, require buffer areas between noise
                                           sources and sensitive receptors.
                          Policy 1.4:      Use creative techniques to mitigate potential noise
                                           incompatibilities, particularly in areas with a mixture of
                                           uses.
                          Policy 1.5:      Discourage development that will create unmitigated
                                           nuisances associated with noise.
                          Related Noise Element Implementation Programs: N-1, N-2, N-3, N-4
         TRANSPORTATION   The primary source of noise in San Jacinto results from transportation
            RELATED NOISE related noise. The Ramona Expressway, State Route 79, the railroad,
                          and other major roadways create high levels of noise that affect the
                          overall quality of life in the community. Trucks and tractors associated
                          with agricultural activities also create noise that may not be compatible
                          with surrounding land uses. Reduction in transportation related noise is
San Jacinto General Plan                        N-4                                          May 2006

                                                                                  NOISE ELEMENT
                          necessary to deal with the detrimental effects attributable to excessive
                          noise.
                          Noise Goal 2: Minimize the effects of transportation-related noise.
                          Policy 2.1:    Reduce transportation-related noise impacts to sensitive
                                         land uses through the use of noise control measures.
                          Policy 2.2:    Require sound-reduction design in development projects
                                         impacted by transportation-related noise, particularly
                                         along highways and major arterials.
                          Policy 2.3:    Control truck traffic routing to reduce transportation-
                                         related noise impacts to sensitive land uses.
                          Related Noise Element Implementation Programs: N-1
 NON-TRANSPORTATION       Noise sources that are not directly related to transportation include
            RELATED NOISE construction, manufacturing or business operations, agricultural
                          operations, and property maintenance activities. Such noise sources
                          should be controlled to minimize exposure to excessive noise levels.
                          Noise Goal 3: Minimize the effects of non-transportation-related noise.
                          Policy 3.1:    Reduce the impacts of noise-producing land uses and
                                         activities on noise-sensitive land uses.
                          Policy 3.2:    Require sound-reduction design techniques in new
                                         construction or rehabilitation projects impacted by
                                         non-transportation noise.
                          Policy 3.3:    Provide a means for the public                 to   report
                                         non-transportation related nuisance noises.
                          Related Noise Element Implementation Programs: N-1, N-2, N-3, N-4
San Jacinto General Plan                      N-5                                          May 2006
                                                                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                         Noise Plan
                                                  San Jacinto, like most urbanized areas, is
                                                  experiencing increased noise levels associated with
                                                  transportation and non-transportation related
                                                  noise. As the ambient noise level in the community
                                                  rises, the City must seek ways to safeguard the
                                                  community from excessive noise levels. The goals
                                                  and policies contained in the previous section
                                                  establish an agenda to reduce the overall noise
                                                  levels within the City. The Noise Plan defines the
                                                  City’s approach for achieving the agenda and
                           generally outlines action programs. The Noise Element Implementation
                           Program contained in Appendix A of this General Plan is an extension of
                           the Noise Plan and contains specific programs that the City enacts to
                           protect community well being.
               NOISE AND   Noise in the Planning Area is the cumulative effect of noise from
                 LAND USE  transportation activities and stationary sources. Transportation noise
                PLANNING   refers to noise from automobile use, trucking, airport operations, and
                           rail operations. Non-transportation noise typically refers to noise from
                           stationary sources such as commercial establishments, machinery, air
                           conditioning systems, compressors and landscape maintenance
                           equipment. Regardless of the type of noise, the noise levels are highest
                           near the source and decrease with distance.
           Noise Sensitive Noise is problematic when noise sensitive land uses are affected. Noise
                 Receptors sensitive land uses, (i.e., sensitive receptors) include residences, schools,
                           hospitals, religious meetings and recreation areas. Most noise impacts
                           can be avoided when noise sources, sensitive land uses and information
                           about the future noise environment are considered in land use planning
                           and development decisions.
San Jacinto General Plan                        N-6                                            May 2006

                                                                                                    NOISE ELEMENT
     Noise Standards and            To ensure that noise producers do not adversely affect sensitive
  Land Use Compatibility            receptors, the City uses land use compatibility standards when planning
                 Guidelines         and making development decisions. Table N-1 summarizes City noise
                                    standards for various types of land uses. The standards represent the
                                    maximum acceptable noise level and are used to determine noise
                                    impacts.
                                                         Table N-1
                                      Interior and Exterior Noise Standards
                                                                                          Noise Standards1
                                  Land Use
                                                                                 Exterior              Interior
  Residential – single-family, multi-family, duplex and mobile home             65 dB(A)              45 dB(A)
  Residential – transient lodging, hotels, motels, nursing homes,
  hospitals, assisted care facilities                                           65 dB(A)              45 dB(A)
  Private offices, churches, libraries, theaters, concert halls, meeting
  halls, schools                                                                65 dB(A)              45 dB(A)
  General commercial, office, retail, reception, restaurant                     65 dB(A)              45 dB(A)
                   2
  Light industrial                                                                  ---                   ---
  Parks and playgrounds                                                         65 dB(A)              50 dB(A)
  Golf courses, outdoor spectator sports                                        70 dB(A)                  ---
1    In Community Noise Level Equivalent (CNEL).
2    Noise standards do not apply to Light Industrial areas.
3    Outdoor environment limited to playground areas, picnic areas and other areas of frequent
     human use.
                                    These noise standards are the basis for the development of the land use
                                    compatibility guidelines presented in Table N-2. If the noise level of a
                                    project falls within Zone A or Zone B, the project is considered
                                    compatible with the noise environment. Zone A implies that no
                                    mitigation will be needed. Zone B implies that minor mitigation
                                    measures may be required to meet the City’s noise standards.
                                    If the noise level of a project falls within Zone C, substantial noise
                                    mitigation will be necessary to meet the noise standards. Mitigation may
                                    involve construction of noise barriers and substantial building sound
                                    insulation. Projects in Zone C can be successfully mitigated; however,
                                    project proponents must demonstrate that the noise standards will be
                                    met prior to issuance of building permits. If noise levels fall outside of
                                    Zones A, B, and C, projects are considered clearly incompatible with the
                                    noise environment and should generally not be approved.
San Jacinto General Plan                                     N-7                                              May 2006

                                                                                                         NOISE ELEMENT
                                                        Table N-2
                                      Noise/Land Use Compatibility Matrix
                                    Noise Contours and Noise Impact Areas
                       Land Use Category                              Community Noise Equivalent Level
                                                                                    CNEL, dB
                                                                   55           60     65       70     75      80
          Residential - Single Family, Multifamily,
          Duplex                                                A        A       B       B       C    ---      ---
          Residential - Mobile Homes                            A        A       B       C       C    ---      ---
          Transient Lodging - Motels, Hotels                    A        A       B       B       C      C      ---
          Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals,
          Nursing Homes                                         A        A       B       C       C    ---      ---
          Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters,
          Meeting Halls                                         B        B      C        C     ---    ---      ---
          Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports,
          Amusement Parks                                       A        A      A        B       B    ---      ---
          Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                       A        A      A        B       C    ---      ---
          Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Cemeteries              A        A      A        A       B     C        C
          Office and Professional Buildings                     A        A      A        B       B      C      ---
          Commercial Retail, Banks, Restaurants,
          Theaters                                              A        A      A        A       B      B       C
          Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities,
          Wholesale, Service Stations                           A        A      A        A       B      B       B
          Agriculture                                           A        A       A       A       A      A       A
          Source: Taken in part from Aircraft Noise Impact Planning Guidelines for Local Agencies, U.S.
          Department of Housing and Urban Development, TE/NA-472, November 1972.
          A=       Normally Acceptable - Specified land use is satisfactory based on the assumption that any
                             buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise
                             insulation requirements.
          B=       Conditionally Acceptable - New construction or development should be undertaken only after
                             a detailed analysis of the noise requirements is made and needed noise insulation
                             features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows
                             and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
          C=       Normally Unacceptable - New construction or development should generally be discouraged.
                             If it does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be
                             made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
          ---=     Clearly Unacceptable - New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
San Jacinto General Plan                                     N-8                                                   May 2006
                                                                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                           The Director of Planning acts as the noise control coordinator. This
                           delegation of responsibility allows consistent and continued enforcement
                           of the established noise standards.
                           The noise environment for the community can be described with noise
                           contours based on the major noise sources. Noise contours define
                           areas of equal noise exposures. Future noise contours have been
                           estimated with information about existing and projected land use
                           development and transportation activity.
                           Figure N-1 shows the projected noise contours for San Jacinto and the
                           noise impact areas. The noise contours are used as a guide for land
                           use and development decisions. Contours of 60 dB(A) or greater define
                           noise impacted areas. When noise sensitive land uses are proposed
                           within these contours, an acoustical analysis must be prepared. For the
                           project to be approved, the analysis must demonstrate that the project is
                           designed to attenuate noise to meet the City’s noise standards as
                           defined in Table N-1. If the project is not designed to meet the noise
                           standards, mitigation measures can be recommended in the analysis. If
                           the analysis demonstrates that the noise standards can be met with
                           implementation of the mitigation measures, the project can be approved
                           with the mitigation measures required as conditions of project approval.
              Construction The provisions of the state Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24) are
                 Standards enforced in San Jacinto. Title 24 specifies that combined indoor noise
                           for multi-family living spaces shall not exceed 45 db(A) CNEL. This
                           standard must be implemented when the outdoor noise level exceeds
                           60 dB(A) CNEL. The future noise contour map (Figure N-1) can be used
                           to determine when to implement this standard. Title 24 requires that the
                           standard be applied to all new hotels, motels, apartments and multi-
                           family projects. The City also applies the standard to new single-family
                           development.
                           The City also requires all construction activity to comply with the limits
                           (maximum noise levels, hours and days of allowed activity) established in
                           the City noise regulations (Title 24 California Code of Regulations,
                           Noise Ordinance)
         TRANSPORTATION    Noise from transportation activity is the primary component of the noise
            RELATED NOISE  environment in San Jacinto. Transportation noise is related to the
                           transportation corridors that traverse the community such as State Route
                           79, the Ramona Expressway, major arterials such as Sanderson, and the
                           railroad. The most efficient and effective means of controlling noise
                           from transportation systems is to reduce the noise at the source.
                           The City has little direct control over noise produced by transportation
                           sources because state noise regulations for motor vehicles preempt local
                           regulations. Because the City cannot control the noise at the source,
                           City noise programs focus on reducing the impact of transportation
San Jacinto General Plan                        N-9                                          May 2006

                                                                                     NOISE ELEMENT
                            noise on the community. Cost effective strategies to control noise
                            impacts are an essential component of this Element.
                            The most effective method for mitigating transportation noise impacts on
                            the community is by utilizing the site design review process and CEQA.
                            During the planning stages of the development process, potential
                            impacts from transportation noise shall be identified and mitigation
                            measures will be required as needed to meet the City’s noise standards.
                            Site planning, landscaping, topography and the design and construction
                            of noise barriers are the most common method of alleviating vehicular
                            traffic and train noise impacts. Setbacks and buffers can also be used to
                            achieve small noise reductions.
                            Noise attenuating barriers are commonly incorporated into projects and
                            can be extremely effective in reducing noise levels. The effectiveness of
                            the barrier depends on the relative height and materials of the barrier,
                            the noise source, the affected area, and the horizontal distance between
                            the barrier and the affected area. Although noise barriers can be
                            extremely effective, the aesthetic impact of barriers on neighborhoods
                            should be considered and minimized.
                            Noise barriers should be included in the design of roadway, freeway and
                            rail improvements. The City supports efforts by Caltrans, the County of
                            Riverside and other transportation providers to provide acoustical
                            protection for noise sensitive uses. In addition, the City will request that
                            barriers are constructed as part of highway, roadway and rail
                            improvement projects to mitigate significant noise impacts. State Route
                            79 and the Ramona Expressway are prime candidates for barriers to
                            protect the community from excessive transportation noise.
     Noise Control at the   The California Vehicle Code contains noise regulations pertaining to the
                     Source operation of all vehicles on public roads. These noise standards for
                            cars, trucks, and motorcycles are enforced through coordination with the
                            California Highway Patrol and the Riverside County Sheriff’s
                            Department. The City also regulates traffic flow and coordinates with
                            the California Highway Patrol to enforce speed limits to reduce traffic
                            noise.
San Jacinto General Plan                         N-10                                          May 2006

May 200

                                                                                     NOISE ELEMENT
 NON-TRANSPORTATION       Sensitive receptors must also be protected from excessive noise
            RELATED NOISE generated by non-transportation sources such as commercial and
                          industrial centers, agricultural activities, restaurants and bars, religious
                          institutions and civic centers. Application of the City Noise Ordinance is
                          the best means to control noise from existing noise sources. The
                          Community Development Department and Police Department cooperate
                          to identify development or activities that violate the noise regulations.
                          The City's Municipal Code gives the City the authority to enforce the
                          noise standards through penalties and other abatement tactics.
                          Noise generated by new development is effectively controlled through
                          the site design review process, compliance with CEQA and compliance
                          with the City noise standards contained in this Noise Element and the
                          City Noise Ordinance.          During these preliminary stages in the
                          development process, potential noise impacts shall be identified and
                          mitigation measures can be imposed.
                          When reviewing proposed non-residential projects, noise generation and
                          potential impacts to surrounding development are considered. An
                          acoustical analysis is required for projects that will generate noise
                          potentially affecting sensitive receptors. Where significant impacts are
                          identified, mitigation measures will be required. Mitigation measures
                          that could be applied when reviewing projects include acoustically
                          treated and/or quiet design: 1) furnaces; 2) fans; 3) motors;
                          4) compressors; and 5) valves and pumps. The City may also require
                          limited delivery hours and hours of operation in order to minimize
                          impacts to adjacent residential or other sensitive uses.
                          In addition, all City departments must comply with state and federal
                          OSHA standards. Any new equipment or vehicle purchased by the City
                          will comply with local, state and federal noise standards.
         Noise Ordinance  The City Noise Ordinance is designed to protect people from
                          non-transportation noise sources such as:              construction activity;
                          commercial, industrial, and agricultural operations; machinery and
                          pumps; and air conditioners. Enforcement of the ordinance ensures that
                          adjacent properties are not exposed to excessive noise from stationary
                          sources.      Enforcing the ordinance includes requiring proposed
                          development projects to show compliance with the ordinance, including
                          operating in accordance with noise levels and hours of operations limits
                          placed on the project site. The City also requires construction activity to
                          comply with established work schedule limits. The ordinance is reviewed
                          periodically for adequacy and amended as needed to address
                          community needs and development patterns.
San Jacinto General Plan                       N-13                                          May 2006

                                                                                        NOISE ELEMENT
                                                   Appendix: Implementation Program
                                                  This Implementation Program provides actions to
                                                  implement the adopted policies and plans identified
                                                  in the Noise Element.            The Noise Element
                                                  Implementation Program is a series of actions,
                                                  procedures and techniques that includes a
                                                  description of the responsible agency/department,
                                                  funding source, time frame and related policies in
                                                  the Noise Element.
                        N-1  Review discretionary development proposals for potential on- and
    Review Development       off-site stationary and vehicular noise impacts per the California
                    Projects Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Any proposed development located
                             within a 60 dB or higher noise contour (per Figures N-1 and N-2) shall
                             be reviewed for potential noise impacts and compliance with the noise
                             and land use compatibility standards. The thresholds established in the
                             Noise Element, Noise Ordinance, the Noise Contours Maps (Figure
                             N-2), and Tables N-2 and N-3 of the Noise Element will be used to
                             determine the significance of impacts. If potential impacts are identified,
                             mitigation in the form of noise reduction designs/structures
                             (e.g., landscaped berms, barriers, walls, enhanced parkways, increased
                             setbacks) will be required to reduce the impact to a level less than
                             significant, where feasible.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development
          Funding Source:    General Fund, project proponent
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2
                        N-2  Review the locations of proposed projects with the potential to generate
  Minimize Commercial/       stationary noise in relation to sensitive receptors through the
           Industrial Noise  discretionary project review process. Limit delivery or service hours for
                             stores and businesses with loading areas, docks, or trash bins that front,
                             side, border, or gain access on driveways next to residential and other
                             noise sensitive areas. Only approve exceptions if full compliance with
                             the nighttime limits of the noise regulations is achieved.
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix N-1                                     May 2006
                                                                                        NOISE ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Police
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1
                        N-3 Require all construction activity to comply with the limits (maximum noise
  Minimize Construction     levels, hours and days of allowed activity) established in the City noise
                      Noise regulations (Title 24 California Code of Regulations, Noise Ordinance)
                            in order to reduce impacts associated with temporary construction noise
                            to the extent feasible. Trucks associated with construction activities shall
                            follow the designated truck routes described in Implementation Program
                            C-3.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Police
          Funding Source:   General Fund, Development Fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 3.1
                       N-4: Actively enforce the standards identified within the City's Noise
         Noise Ordinance    Ordinance and Noise Plan in order to reduce impacts to the extent
                            feasible. Update and amend the Noise Ordinance and Plan as
                            appropriate. Provide a link on the City's website for those to file
                            complaints against activities and uses that may be violating the Noise
                            Ordinance.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Police
          Funding Source:   General Fund, Development Fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 3.1, 3.3
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix N-2                                      May 2006
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                   Introduction
                                                Natural events such as flooding, landslides and
                                                earthquakes can endanger human life and
                                                property, while the use, storage and transport of
                                                hazardous materials and other human activities can
                                                impact community safety.         Community safety
                                                regulations and programs can reduce the potential
                                                for loss of life, injuries and property damage
                                                associated with natural and man-made hazards.
                                                The Public Safety Element establishes goals,
                          policies and a plan to assure that there is an adequate coordinated and
                          expedient response to public safety concerns.
          PURPOSE OF THE  The purpose of the Public Safety Element is to identify and address those
            PUBLIC SAFETY features or characteristics existing in or near the City that represent a
                  ELEMENT potential hazard to the citizens, structures, and infrastructure in the
                          community. The Public Safety Element establishes policies to minimize
                          the danger to residents, workers and visitors while identifying actions
                          needed to manage crises such as earthquakes, fires and floods.
                          Additionally, the Public Safety Element contains specific policies and
                          programs to regulate existing and proposed development in hazard-
                          prone areas. Emergency preparedness and evacuation routes are also
                          addressed
   SCOPE AND CONTENT      The Public Safety Element satisfies the requirements of state planning law
   OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY   and is a mandated component of the General Plan. Government Code
                  ELEMENT section 65302(g) sets forth a list of hazards that the Element must cover
                          if they pertain to conditions in the City. These hazards are:
                          ¾ Seismically induced conditions including ground shaking, surface
                               rupture, ground failure, tsunami and seiche;
                          ¾ Slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides;
San Jacinto General Plan                       PS-1                                         May 2006

                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                          ¾ Subsidence and other geologic hazards
                          ¾ Flooding;
                          ¾ Wildland and urban fires; and
                          ¾ Evacuation routes, water supply requirements and design standards
                               for new development as they relate to identified fire seismic and
                               geologic hazards.
                          State law also permits communities to add safety issues to this list. Due
                          to potential safety concerns with the use, storage and transport of
                          hazardous materials in the City, hazardous materials are also discussed
                          in this Element.
                          The Public Safety Element contains three sections: 1) this Introduction;
                          2) Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3) the Public Safety Plan. In the
                          Issues, Goals and Policies section, major issues pertaining to hazardous
                          conditions and safety are identified and related goals and policies are
                          established.
                          The goals are statements of the City’s desires and consist of broad
                          statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as guidelines for
                          reducing risk associated with natural and human activity hazards. The
                          policies also serve to direct and maximize community emergency
                          preparedness. The Plan explains how the goals and policies will be
                          achieved and implemented. Specific action programs for the Public
                          Safety Element are contained in the Implementation Program contained
                          as an appendix to this Element.
            RELATED PLANS There are a number of existing plans and programs that directly relate to
          AND PROGRAMS    the goals of the Public Safety Element. These plans and programs have
                          been enacted through state and local legislation and are administered
                          by agencies with powers to enforce state and local laws.
San Jacinto General Plan                      PS-2                                         May 2006

                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
California Environmental     The California Environmental Quality Act was adopted by the state
 Quality Act (CEQA) and      legislature in response to a public mandate for a thorough
               Guidelines    environmental analysis of projects that might adversely affect the
                             environment. Public safety hazards are recognized as environmental
                             impacts under CEQA. The provisions of the law and environmental
                             review procedures are described in the CEQA Statutes and the CEQA
                             Guidelines. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the decision
                             making stage of development, City officials and the general public will
                             be able to assess the noise impacts associated with public and private
                             development projects.
          Seismic Hazards    Pursuant to the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, the state Geologist
              Mapping Act    compiles maps identifying seismic hazard zones. Development in
                             seismic hazard areas is subject to policies and criteria established by the
                             State Mining and Geology Board.                  Additionally, approval of
                             development on a site within a seismic hazard area requires the
                             preparation of a geotechnical report and local agency consideration of
                             the policies and criteria set forth by the State Mining and Geology Board
                             (Public Resources Code Section 2690 et. seq.).
             Alquist-Priolo  The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the State
Earthquake Fault Zoning      Geologist to identify earthquake fault zones along traces of both recently
                         Act and potentially active major faults. Cities and counties that contain such
                             zones, must inform the public regarding the location of these zones,
                             which are usually one-quarter mile or less in width.              Proposed
                             development plans within these earthquake fault zones must be
                             accompanied by a geotechnical report prepared by a qualified geologist
                             describing the likelihood of surface rupture.
San Jacinto General Plan                          PS-3                                          May 2006
                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
         Landslide Hazard  The Landslide Hazard Identification Program requires the State
   Identification Program  Geologist to prepare maps of landslide hazards within urbanizing areas.
                           According to Public Resources Code Section 2687 (a), public agencies
                           are encouraged to use these maps for land use planning and for
                           decisions regarding building, grading and development permits.
            National Flood San Jacinto participates in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP),
Insurance Administration   which is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
           Program (NFIP)  (FEMA). The NFIP provides federal flood insurance and federally
                           financed loans for property owners in flood prone areas. To qualify for
                           federal flood insurance, the City must identify flood hazard areas and
                           implement a system of protective controls. The Floodplain Management
                           Element and Safety Element fulfill these requirements.
       City of San Jacinto The City has adopted the most recent Uniform Building Code, Uniform
                     Codes Mechanical Code, Uniform Fire Code and the National Electric Code,
                           which contain structural requirements for existing and new buildings.
                           The codes are designed to ensure structural integrity during seismic and
                           other hazardous events, and prevent injury, loss of life and substantial
                           property damage. To protect public safety, planned development in
                           San Jacinto is subject to these structural codes.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER      The Public Safety Element must be consistent with the other General Plan
            GENERAL PLAN   elements. All elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a degree,
                 ELEMENTS  and certain goals and policies of each element may also address issues
                           that are the primary subjects of other elements. The integration of
                           overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements provides a
                           strong basis for implementation plans and programs, and achievement
                           of community goals.
                           Policies and plans in the Public Safety Element are designed to protect
                           existing and planned land uses identified in the Land Use Element from
                           public safety hazards. Potential hazards are identified in the Public
                           Safety Element, and action programs are established to avoid or
                           mitigate public safety impacts from planned development. Concurrently,
                           the Land Use Element contains policies to ensure that environmental
                           conditions, including hazards, are considered in all land use decisions.
                           The distribution of residential and other sensitive land uses on the Land
                           Use Policy Map is designed to avoid areas where hazardous conditions
                           have been identified.
                           Evacuation routes, which use the circulation system, are also described
                           in the Public Safety Element. The provision of viable evacuation routes
                           within the City is inextricably linked to the existing and planned
                           circulation system within the Circulation Element.
San Jacinto General Plan                        PS-4                                        May 2006
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                               Issues, Goals and Policies
                                                 Certain natural conditions and human activities in
                                                 San Jacinto create risks to individuals and
                                                 properties within the community. Excessive risk
                                                 from such hazards can be reduced or avoided
                                                 through implementation of the Public Safety
                                                 Element.
                                                 Three major issues are addressed within the Public
                                                 Safety Element. These issues include: 1) reducing
                         risk from natural hazardous conditions; 2) reducing risks from human-
                         related hazards; and 3) preparing for emergency situations. Each issue
                         and the related goals and policies are included in this section of the
                         Element.
       NATURAL HAZARDS   Due to its geographic location in a seismically active region and the
                         location of flood plains and hillsides within the City limits, San Jacinto is
                         subject to several types of natural hazards such as seismic activity,
                         liquefaction, flooding, wildfires, landslides, and erosion. This risk of
                         exposure can be reduced through appropriate planning, land use
                         designations, development engineering, and building construction
                         practices. Existing structures, especially older, un-reinforced buildings in
                         the older sections of the community or older mobile homes that are not
                         securely attached to their footings may require retrofitting to be able to
                         withstand seismic hazards.
                         Public Safety Goal 1: Minimize the risk of injury and the loss of life and
                         property related to geologic conditions, seismic activity, wildfires, and
                         flooding.
                         Policy 1.1:    Reduce the risk of impacts from geologic and seismic
                                        hazards by applying proper and up to date land use
                                        planning, development engineering, building construction,
                                        and retrofitting requirements.
                         Policy 1.2:    Encourage landscaped open space uses for areas within
                                        identified fault zones, and prohibit residential development
                                        in these areas.
                         Policy 1.3:    Reduce the risk of wildfire hazards by requiring fire
                                        retardant landscaping and other project design features for
                                        development located in areas of or adjacent to high
                                        wildfire risk.
                         Policy 1.4:    Reduce the risk of fire to the community by coordination
                                        for emergency preparedness with the Riverside County Fire
                                        Department.
San Jacinto General Plan                       PS-5                                          May 2006
                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         Policy 1.5:    Protect the community from flooding hazards by providing
                                        and maintaining flood control facilities and limiting
                                        development within the flood plain.
                         Policy 1.6:    Coordinate with the agencies responsible for dam
                                        operation and maintenance to reduce the risk of dam
                                        inundation from the San Jacinto Reservoir, Little Lake, and
                                        Hemet Lake dams.
                         Related Public Safety Element Implementation Programs: PS-1 through
                         PS-7
          HUMAN ACTIVITY San Jacinto is subject to many of the same human-related hazardous
                 HAZARDS conditions that are encountered in any community. Certain human
                         activities such as flying, use of cars and other gasoline driven vehicles,
                         water storage, use of hazardous or toxic materials, use of combustibles,
                         and criminal activities expose the population of San Jacinto to risk. The
                         risk of exposure to these hazards can be reduced to acceptable levels
                         through proper planning and regulations of human activity.
                         Public Safety Goal 2: Protect the community from hazards related to air
                         pollution, dam inundation, hazardous materials, structural fires, ground
                         transportation, and criminal activity.
                         Policy 2.1:    Work with responsible federal, state, and county agencies
                                        to decrease air pollution emissions occurring within the air
                                        basin to reduce the risk posed by air pollution.
                         Policy 2.2:    Cooperate with responsible federal, state and county
                                        agencies to minimize the risk to the community from the
                                        use and transportation of hazardous materials.
                         Policy 2.3:    Promote the routing of vehicles carrying potentially
                                        hazardous materials to transportation corridors posing the
                                        minimum risk to the public.
                         Policy 2.4:    Reduce the per capita production of household hazardous
                                        waste in San Jacinto in concert with the County of
                                        Riverside plans for reducing hazardous waste.
                         Policy 2.5:    Reduce the risk from ground transportation hazards, such
                                        as rail and roadway systems.
                         Policy 2.6:    Provide sufficient levels of police, fire, and emergency
                                        response service to reduce the risk of criminal activity.
                         Policy 2.7:    Ensure projects include design features that promote safety
                                        and reduce criminal activity.
San Jacinto General Plan                       PS-6                                          May 2006
                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         PS-8 through PS-16
              EMERGENCY  Major emergencies occur periodically in all communities. Proper
            PREPAREDNESS preparation for emergencies is an essential action to minimize the
                         disruption, personal injury, and property damage associated with such
                         events. Preventative measures and preparatory responses before an
                         emergency occurs will hasten recovery from these emergencies.
                         Public Safety Goal 3: Improve the ability of the City to respond
                         effectively to natural and human-caused emergencies.
                         Policy 3.1:     Support the development of local preparedness plans and
                                         multi-jurisdictional cooperation and communication
                                         agreements for emergency situations.
                         Policy 3.2:     Educate residents and businesses regarding appropriate
                                         actions to safeguard life and property during and
                                         immediately after emergencies.
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         PS-17, PS-18
San Jacinto General Plan                       PS-7                                      May 2006
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                      Safety Plan
                                               Like all communities, natural conditions and
                                               human activities occur in San Jacinto that effect the
                                               quality of life and safety of its residents. Reducing
                                               the risks associated with natural hazards and
                                               human activities, as well as being prepared for
                                               emergency situations, is essential for creating an
                                               attractive and healthy environment. Public health
                                               and private property is protected through proper
                                               prevention and emergency preparedness planning.
                         The goals and policies of the previous section establish a broad agenda
                         to safeguard community health from natural and human activity hazards
                         and prepare for emergency situations. This section of the Public Safety
                         Element identifies the City’s approach for reducing potential hazards
                         from natural conditions and human activities. Geologic conditions and
                         seismic activity as well as flooding and fires are natural hazards in
                         San Jacinto. Human activity hazards include: a) air pollution; b) the use,
                         storage and transport of hazardous materials; c) ground transportation;
                         and d) criminal activity.
       NATURAL HAZARDS   Natural hazards addressed in the Public Safety Plan include geologic
                         conditions, seismic activity, wildfires and flooding.
         Geologic Hazard The City of San Jacinto lies in the San Jacinto Valley between the
                         Lakeview Mountains on the west, the San Jacinto Mountains foothills on
                         the south and east, and the San Timoteo badlands on the northeast.
                         Physiography (landforms and topography) of the City is controlled by the
                         distribution and character of geologic units, by fault movements, and by
                         climate and erosion. The terrain of the City consists predominately of
                         the gently sloping, nearly flat valley floor that at one time was a closed
                         basin. The relief of the valley floor is minimal consisting of incised
                         drainages from the surrounding hills. The northeastern slopes of the
                         steep Lakeview Mountains shed sediment onto the valley floor forming
                         alluvial fans. The San Jacinto River cuts through the City from the
                         southeast, forming the eastern edge of the valley floor, crossing the
                         northern boundary of the City and exiting to the west north of the
                         Lakeview Mountains. Park Hill is located along the south edge of the
                         City between two active faults. Approximately 1,500 feet of vertical
                         relief is present within the Planning Area, most of it in the steep
                         San Jacinto Mountains foothills (Figure PS-1). Subsidence, expansive
                         soils,    landslides    and      debris    flows    are     the    dominant
                         geologic/geotechnical hazard risks within the City.
San Jacinto General Plan                      PS-8                                           May 2006

May 200

                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         There is a predominance of clay, silt, and fine-grained sand deposits
                         beneath the valley floor that are sometimes soft, expansive, and prone to
                         consolidation under building loads. Groundwater, which is pumped for
                         use by the local citizens, can range from very shallow (less than 30 feet
                         deep) in certain areas to deep (several hundred feet deep) in the vicinity
                         of pumping wells.
                         The Lakeview Mountains have a granitic bedrock character consisting of
                         moderately hard to hard, “layered” material that is generally stable and
                         suitable for foundations. Park Hill is composed on older uplifted
                         alluvium that consists of sand, silt, and clay generally stable, but
                         susceptible to debris slides. The San Jacinto Mountains foothills and the
                         San Timoteo badlands are geologically complex, being made up of
                         sedimentary, granitic, and metamorphic rock types, as well as landslides
                         and debris flows, particularly when saturated. Spring flow is found in
                         these foothill areas due to the upland runoff and fractured bedrock. A
                         significant portion of eastern mountainous area of the City is vulnerable
                         to landslides and debris flows.
                         The City will continue to implement its building and grading codes
                         through the County of Riverside Planning Department, Building and
                         Safety Division. The County sets technical guidelines for soil and
                         geology reports to reduce risk associated with construction in the valley
                         and on hillsides. The County Geologist is responsible for the review and
                         approval of engineering geology and geotechnical reports submitted by
                         applicants seeking grading permits. The City will develop a Hillside
                         Management Ordinance to provide guidelines for future development in
                         areas with a slope of greater than 15 percent.
                         Landslides and debris flows can occur rapidly and without warning
                         during periods of exceptionally high rainfall. Although rockfall hazards
                         are low in the City, mudflows are more likely to occur. Due to the
                         predominant underlying geologic formations and topography, the
                         eastern foothills are most susceptible to mud debris flows, and to a
                         lesser extent the western Lakeview Mountains. The risk of debris flow
                         hazard is considered moderate to high in these areas of San Jacinto.
                         The relatively significant amounts of clay present in the sediments
                         underlying the valley in the alluvial formations can pose an expansive
                         soils hazard. Soils overlying these formations are considered moderately
                         to highly expansive. When grading requires imported fill materials,
                         differences in the rate of settlement and expansion can result in damage
                         to structures. The City will continue to implement building and grading
                         codes and technical guidelines for soil and geology to reduce expansive
                         soils hazards.
San Jacinto General Plan                     PS-11                                         May 2006

                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                             Groundwater is a resource that has been extracted from the San Jacinto
                             basin for decades at ever increasing rates of withdrawal. Areas along
                             the edge of the mountains, along the active Casa Loma fault, and the
                             northern Sphere of Influence (SOI) have had surface fissuring due to
                             non-uniform subsidence as the internal porosity of the sediments
                             collapses during dewatering. The existing ground fissures provide
                             conduits for infiltration and may cause foundation damage if undetected
                             under heavy structures. The City recognizes this hazard and requires it
                             to be addressed in engineering geology and geotechnical reports
                             submitted by applicants seeking grading permits.
            Seismic Activity Figure PS-1 identifies the seismic faults in the Planning Area. The City of
                             San Jacinto is located in a region with many seismically active faults and
                             is crossed by two significant active faults zoned by the State Alquist-
                             Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning (APEFZ) Act. The Claremont fault (often
                             mapped as the main San Jacinto fault entering the San Jacinto Valley
                             from the north) has been mapped in young surficial alluvium and in
                             exploratory subsurface trenches. On the east side of the City the
                             subparallel Casa Loma fault has been similarly mapped as it extends
                             from the east side of the Lakeview Mountains to the northeast and
                             southwest sides of Park Hill. Therefore, the City is subject to risks from
                             the hazards associated with earthquakes. Seismic activity poses two
                             types of hazards: primary and secondary. Primary hazards include
                             ground rupture, ground shaking, ground displacement and subsidence
                             and uplift from earth movement. Primary hazards can induce secondary
                             hazards including ground failure (lurch cracking, lateral spreading, and
                             slope failure), liquefaction, water waves (seiches), movement on nearby
                             faults (sympathetic fault movement), dam failure, and fires.
                             Because known active seismic faults traverse San Jacinto, the potential
                             for ground rupture is high. The City and County require subsurface
                             trenching studies associated with permit applications within the APEFZs.
                             When active or potentially active faults are discovered, habitable
                             buildings must be set back from the fault. However, the City has existing
                             buildings constructed prior to 1972 that lie within the APEFZ and do not
                             require study. To further reduce hazards associated with fault rupture,
                             the City encourages linear trails and landscaped passive open space
                             uses along the extent of known active fault lines.
San Jacinto General Plan                           PS-12                                       May 2006
                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         In addition to the active faults discussed above, San Jacinto is located
                         within 100 kilometers (62 miles) of several known potential sources of
                         strong seismic shaking (up to about 60 percent the force of gravity, “g”),
                         including the San Andreas, Elsinore, and other segments of the
                         San Jacinto fault both northwest and southeast of the City. The
                         San Andreas fault zone southern segment near Indio is located
                         approximately 16 miles east of the City and the Elsinore fault zone is
                         located approximately 23 miles southwest of the City near Temecula.
                         The Claremont/Casa Loma faults are less than ½ mile away and
                         continuation segments are approximately 23 miles north and 4.5 miles
                         north. The San Jacinto Valley segments (Claremont/Casa Loma) are
                         considered active faults requiring special near-source factors to be
                         incorporated into buildings developed within 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) of
                         the fault. The Uniform Building Code requires that the entire City
                         incorporate near-source factors into the design of new buildings.
                         Other significant faults located within 100 kilometers of the City that
                         may generate ground accelerations over 10g include the Pinto Mountain
                         fault and two other segments of the Elsinore fault. A major earthquake
                         associated with any of these faults could result in moderate to severe
                         groundshaking in San Jacinto. Damage (more than cosmetic) to
                         buildings and infrastructure would be expected as a result of
                         groundshaking during a severe seismic event on the nearest segments of
                         the San Jacinto and San Andreas fault zones.
                         Damage from earthquakes is most often the result of liquefaction.
                         Liquefaction occurs primarily in areas of recently deposited sands and
                         silts and in areas of high groundwater levels. Poorly consolidated
                         sediment and high groundwater levels occur most frequently in
                         creekbeds and floodplains. A significant area of the City is vulnerable to
                         liquefaction in an earthquake.        The potential for liquefaction is
                         particularly high in the floodways located adjacent to and downstream
                         of the San Jacinto River and in the valley floor where water is less than
                         30 feet deep.
                         Large scale landslides, as well as rockfalls, are relatively common events
                         in major earthquakes. Unstable slopes are located throughout the
                         eastern foothill portions of the City and the SOI. Almost all hillside
                         regions over 20 percent slope are vulnerable to some degree.
                         The City is protected from sea waves (tsunamis) due to its inland
                         location. However, the City’s (and adjacent jurisdictions’) tanks,
                         reservoirs, lakes and swimming pools are enclosed bodies of water that
                         are subject to potentially damaging oscillation, or seiches during
                         earthquakes. The hazard is dependent upon specific earthquake
                         parameters, and the degree of damage due to seiches is likely to be
                         minor. A failure of Lake Hemet dam would cause some flooding along
                         the San Jacinto River as indicated on Figure PS-2 later in the Flooding
                         subsection.
San Jacinto General Plan                     PS-13                                         May 2006

                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         Most loss of life and injuries that occur during an earthquake are related
                         to the collapse of buildings and structures. A large percentage of the
                         structures in the downtown area are unreinforced masonry buildings,
                         and pre-1973 concrete tilt-up buildings that were built prior to improved
                         building codes; all of these buildings except pre 1973 tilt-up buildings
                         have not been upgraded to current building code standards. These
                         buildings could be subject to severe damage in an earthquake. The
                         geologic hazards noted above, combined with groundshaking can result
                         in substantial structural damage, personal injury and a related loss of life
                         and property.
                         The State Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology
                         published an earthquake scenario report for the San Jacinto fault zone.
                         This report did not concentrate on residential, commercial and industrial
                         properties, but on critical facilities that support the local population.
                         Local facilities affected by a 7.0 scenario earthquake are:
                         ¾ Communications – General Telephone’s two central switching
                             offices in Hemet will be subject to about MMI VII on the 1931
                             Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale. Seismic design should allow light
                             to moderate damage to be repaired within several hours after the
                             earthquake. Buried cables that cross a fault rupture zone will be
                             vulnerable to damage. Cellular service may be unreliable due to
                             overloading.
                         ¾ Electric Power – A major Southern California Edison transmission
                             line crosses the San Jacinto Valley at the north end of the planning
                             area. Romoland Substation at SR-74 and the I-215 should sustain
                             minor damage and be at full capacity after one day. The
                             transmission towers entering the valley from Beaumont will be
                             susceptible to landslides and may operate at limited capacity for 2 to
                             4 days.
                         ¾ Water Supply – The Colorado River Aqueduct enters the planning
                             area near San Jacinto Park and branches into the Casa Loma
                             siphons, the San Diego Aqueduct/Canal. Part of this system passes
                             through the San Jacinto Reservoir. In general water supplies will be
                             reduced 20 percent and services may be out for three days due to
                             fault rupture on the Casa Loma and Claremont segments, although
                             local wells may alleviate shortage conditions much sooner. The
                             Colorado River Aqueduct may be out of service for one to two
                             weeks.
San Jacinto General Plan                       PS-14                                       May 2006

May 200

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         ¾ Natural Gas – Southern California Gas Company has major
                              transmission lines (30 and 36-inch diameter) crossing the
                              San Jacinto Valley well north of the Planning Area which are subject
                              to damage from landslides and fault rupture. This will reduce
                              service for about 20 percent of residents for about one week. A
                              local major distribution trunk line (8 to 12-inch diameter) passes
                              through the City and crosses the fault zones several times.
                              Disruptions may cause fires and service may be interrupted for
                              several weeks.
                         ¾ Highways – SR-74 and SR-79, the major routes through the City,
                              should remain open following the scenario earthquake, however
                              local damage due to liquefaction, fault rupture, and settlement will
                              create lane restrictions and detours. Repairs will require months.
                         With regard to the residential, commercial and industrial properties, a
                         majority of the post-1971 structures in the City would remain with
                         primarily cosmetic damage. However, the City has a significant number
                         of mobile homes that are subject to severe damage as a result of
                         earthquakes. Severe damage to mobile homes often results from the
                         homes falling off their supports, usually severing utility lines with the
                         steep jackstands that penetrate through the floor. The close proximity of
                         these units within the City makes them especially vulnerable to
                         earthquake-induced fires. In a probable earthquake scenario, the
                         majority of the City’s pre-1980 mobile home stock will have substantial
                         damage.
                         Under a probable earthquake scenario, San Jacinto schools, and fire
                         and police stations are estimated to function at less than 20 percent of
                         normal capacity one day after the earthquake.
                         The City will continue to enact programs to reduce geologic, seismic
                         and structural hazards in order to protect public safety. To minimize
                         hazards from earthquakes and other geologic hazards, the City will
                         implement the most recent geologic, seismic, and structural guidelines
                         including the most recent Uniform Building Code, and the City’s Seismic
                         Hazard Mitigation Ordinance and the American Water Works
                         Association Standard for Design of Steel Water Tanks. The stability of
                         residential structures, critical structures and vital emergency facilities will
                         be given particular attention. During the review of development
                         proposals involving grading in areas with active faults, potential ground
                         fissures, liquefaction potential, unstable soils, and other hazardous
                         conditions, surveys of geotechnical and geologic conditions will be
                         required. These surveys and reports will be required to be performed
                         under the direct supervision of a state licensed engineering geologist,
                         geotechnical engineer, and/or civil engineer depending upon the hazard
                         condition.
San Jacinto General Plan                      PS-17                                          May 2006

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                           Based on the results of the survey, design measures are incorporated
                           into projects to minimize geologic hazards. Open space easements to
                           create buffers are also considered to avoid geologic hazards.
                           Earthquake preparedness is one of the best methods to minimize
                           personal injury and property damage and accelerate recovery. The City
                           will continue to promote earthquake preparedness in the community
                           through its Emergency Preparedness Plan and mock exercises. The
                           programs will be coordinated with emergency service providers and
                           school districts to maximize public participation and effectiveness.
              Fire Hazards San Jacinto is subject to both wildland fires and structural fires. The
                           natural vegetation in the Planning Area is highly prone to wildland fires.
                           The largely undeveloped hillsides located in both the westernmost and
                           easternmost portions of the Planning Area are High Fire Hazard Areas.
                           These areas could create public safety hazards for residents within the
                           Planning Area.
                           The City reduces the potential for dangerous fires by coordinating with
                           the Riverside County Fire Department (RCOFD) to implement fire hazard
                           education programs and requirements for fire protection and fuel
                           modification zones around existing and proposed development. The
                           current Uniform Fire Code is also used to reduce structural fire hazards
                           in these areas. In addition, the City and RCOFD review development
                           proposals to ensure that existing fire department staffing, water pressure
                           and emergency access is adequate for fire fighting purposes. In
                           particular, future development in the hillside areas shall be required to
                           provide dual access to the proposed development site.
                  Flooding The Casa Loma Canal, Colorado River Aqueduct and the San Jacinto
                           River traverse the Planning Area. Figure PS-2 depicts the flood prone
                           areas within the Planning Area as mapped by FEMA. This figure depicts
                           the inundation areas for a 100-year flood; a flood of this size has a one
                           percent chance of occurring in a given year. As depicted in Figure PS-2,
                           flooding is particularly expected along the San Jacinto River and the
                           Colorado River Aqueduct. Floods in residential areas and employment
                           centers are considered hazardous due to the potential for injury and
                           property damage. Business and commercial activities can also be
                           impeded by floods due to facility damage and access related problems.
                           Portions of the Planning Area are also subject to potential hazards
                           associated with failure of the Hemet Lake dam. As previously discussed,
                           a failure of Lake Hemet dam would cause some flooding along the
                           San Jacinto River.
San Jacinto General Plan                        PS-18                                         May 2006
                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                            A flood control system has been constructed to direct runoff from
                            developed areas and prevent flooding. Flood control deficiencies are
                            also identified and improvements are proposed in the County of
                            Riverside Flood Control District Master Drainage Plans and Area
                            Drainage Plans for San Jacinto Regional, San Jacinto River, Northwest
                            Hemet, West Hemet, and Little Lake. The Riverside County Flood
                            Control District is the agency responsible for the regional drainage
                            facilities while the City controls the local facilities. The City coordinates
                            with the Riverside County Flood Control District to ensure regularly
                            scheduled maintenance of flood control channels and completion of
                            necessary facilities and repairs.
                            The City of San Jacinto is required by Section 8589.5 of the California
                            Government Code to have in place emergency procedures for the
                            evacuation and control of populated areas within the limits of possible
                            dam inundation. In addition, real estate disclosure upon sale or transfer
                            of property in the inundation area is required under AB 1195 Chapter
                            65 passed on June 9, 1998.
                            San Jacinto participates in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP),
                            which is administered by FEMA. The NFIP provides federal flood
                            insurance and federally financed loans for properties within identified
                            flood hazard areas. To qualify for federal flood insurance, the City is
                            required to identify flood hazard areas and implement a system of
                            protective controls.
          HUMAN ACTIVITY    Human activity hazards addressed in the Public Safety Plan include:
                 HAZARDS    a) air pollution; b) the use, storage and transport of hazardous
                            materials; c) ground transportation; and d) criminal activity.
              Air Pollution The City of San Jacinto is located within the South Coast Air Basin, a
                            non-attainment area for federal and state air quality standards for ozone
                            and state standards for particulate matter less than ten microns in
                            diameter (PM10). The Planning Area lies within the South Coast Air
                            Quality Management District Source Receptor Area 28. Since 1997,
                            there has been no active monitoring station in Area 28 because
                            information gathered in Area 28 was consistently redundant with the
                            information gathered in Area 24 – Perris Valley, which is located just
                            west of Area 28. Therefore, since 1997, the City uses information
                            gathered from Area 24 to assess PM10 and ozone emissions affecting
                            the Planning Area. No other pollutant is monitored in Area 24 due to
                            the consistently low levels of other pollutant emissions (e.g., carbon
                            monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide) identified in the area in
                            the 1980s and 1990s.
                            Motor vehicles are the primary source of regional ozone and PM10
                            emissions throughout the air basin and within San Jacinto. Agricultural
                            uses and construction activities that cause soil disturbance and the
San Jacinto General Plan                         PS-19                                          May 2006

                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         release of dust are also contributors to PM10 emissions. The City works
                         with the South Coast Air Quality Management District and implements
                         the requirements of the most recent Air Quality Management Plan in
                         order to improve regional air quality. Energy conservation, discussed in
                         the Energy Conservation subsection of this Plan, also helps to reduce
                         localized and regional air quality impacts.
     Hazardous Materials Hazardous materials are used in San Jacinto for a variety of purposes
                         including manufacturing, service industries, small businesses,
                         agriculture, medical clinics, schools and households. Many chemicals
                         used in household cleaning, construction, dry cleaning, film processing,
                         landscaping and automotive maintenance and repair are considered
                         hazardous. Accidents can occur in the production, use, storage,
                         transport and disposal of hazardous materials.
                         As identified in County of Riverside Ordinance 615.3, the County of
                         Riverside Department of Environmental Health enforces the provisions of
                         the Hazardous Waste Control Law of the State of California as set forth
                         in the California Health and Safety Code and the California Code of
                         Regulations. In order to effectively manage hazardous materials and
                         waste, the City coordinates with the County of Riverside Environmental
                         Health Department to implement the following programs:
                         ¾ Household Hazardous Waste Program – Provides for the collection
                             of household wastes at scheduled events throughout the County;
                         ¾ Hazardous Waste Minimization – County personnel provides
                             technical assistance and education programs for businesses in order
                             to identify ways to significantly reduce the amount of hazardous
                             waste produced;
                         ¾ Emergency Response and Investigations – County Environmental
                             Health Depart staff in conjunction with County Fire responds to
                             hazardous materials incidents. Also, the County District Attorney
                             investigates environmental crimes and illegal hazardous waste
                             disposal complaints;
                         ¾ Local Oversight Underground Storage Tank (UST) Program –
                             Monitors the remediation of sites contaminated by petroleum
                             products as a result of a leaking UST;
                         ¾ Underground Storage Tank (UST) Program – Regulates all non-
                             exempt USTs in Riverside County that contain hazardous substances;
                         ¾ Waste Generator Permit – Regulates facilities in the community that
                             generate a hazardous waste. Regulatory requirements are fulfilled
                             through a program of annual permits, supported by routine
                             inspections;
San Jacinto General Plan                     PS-20                                       May 2006

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                          ¾ Hazardous Materials Handlers Program – Regulates facilities that
                              handle and store on-site specified types and quantities of hazardous
                              and acutely/extremely hazardous materials. Regulatory requirements
                              are fulfilled through permitting routine facility inspections and review
                              of detailed site plans indicating where hazardous materials are
                              stored. Facilities monitored under this program generally require a
                              Business Emergency Plan;
                          ¾ Environmental Crimes Task Force – Investigates environmental
                              crimes Countywide.
                          Hazardous materials also pass through the City en route to other
                          destinations via the freeway, rail and surface street system. However, the
                          City has no direct authority to regulate the transport of hazardous
                          materials on State highways or rail lines. Transportation of hazardous
                          materials by truck and rail is regulated by the U.S. Department of
                          Transportation (DOT). DOT regulations establish criteria for safe
                          handling procedures. These federal safety standards area also included
                          in the California Administrative Code. The California Health Services
                          Department also regulates the haulers of hazardous waste, but does not
                          regulate all hazardous materials.
  Ground Transportation   San Jacinto is traversed by a variety of transportation systems including
                          the Ramona Expressway, State Route 79, the Burlington Northern Santa
                          Fe (BNSF) Rail Road, and major arterials and roadways. The Riverside
                          Transit Agency (RTA) transit system provides bus service on two routes in
                          the Planning Area. The preponderance of ground transportation systems
                          is an asset to local economic development but poses several potential
                          hazards including automobile accidents, rail accidents, and pedestrian
                          and bicycling accidents.
                          The risk of accidents can be reduced by properly maintaining the
                          transportation system infrastructure and correcting deficiencies. The City
                          works with the Riverside County Sheriff’s Department, and the California
                          Highway Patrol to monitor the ground transportation system for
                          hazardous conditions. When safety problem are identified, the City
                          coordinates with the appropriate agency (e.g., Caltrans, RTA, BNSF, the
                          City Public Works Department) to take corrective measures.
            Crime Control Burglary, auto theft, and assault are the most frequent crimes in
                          San Jacinto. The frequency of violent crimes such as homicide, rape
                          and robbery is low. Protecting citizens and businesses from criminal
                          activity is a priority in San Jacinto. Crime prevention techniques include
                          substantive levels of police protection and education of the public about
                          methods to reduce criminal activity.
                          The City of San Jacinto began contracting for law enforcement services
                          with the Riverside County Sheriff Department effective June 1, 2004.
                          The City ensures that staffing levels correspond to the City’s population
San Jacinto General Plan                         PS-21                                        May 2006

                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                         and needs and has in the past used a mutual aid agreement between
                         the Riverside County Sheriff’s Department and the police departments of
                         surrounding jurisdictions when needed.
                         The following are components of the Police Department public safety
                         programs:
                            ¾ Police Patrol                           ¾ Bike Patrol
                            ¾ Traffic Enforcement                     ¾ Canine Team
                            ¾ Community Oriented Policing             ¾ Allied Riverside Cities
                               and Problem Solving (COPPS)               Narcotics Enforcement
                            ¾ Investigations                          ¾ Animal Control
                            ¾ Police Explorers                        ¾ Citizen Volunteers
                            ¾ Drug Abuse Resistance Education         ¾ Neighborhood Watch
                               (DARE)                                    Program
              EMERGENCY  Local emergency preparedness plans serve as extensions of the
            PREPAREDNESS California Emergency Plan and the Emergency Resource Management
                         Plan. The purpose of the City’s Emergency Preparedness Plan is to
                         respond to emergency situation with a coordinated system of emergency
                         service providers and facilities.
                         The Emergency Preparedness Plan identifies resources available for
                         emergency response and establishes coordinates action plans for
                         specific emergency situations and disasters including earthquakes, fires,
                         major rail and roadway accidents, flooding, hazardous materials
                         incidents and civil disturbance. This plan is maintained and updated as
                         necessary to reflect the current circulation system and current facilities.
                         To support the Emergency Preparedness Plan, the City supports a high
                         level of multi-jurisdictional cooperation and communication for
                         emergency planning and response management.                   In order for
                         emergency response and planning to be effective, vital facilities such as
                         hospitals, fire stations, police stations, and communication centers must
                         be functional during disasters.
                         Educating residents and businesses about potential disasters and the
                         Emergency Preparedness Plan increases the effectiveness of response
                         efforts. A public educated in emergency preparedness is more likely to
                         know how to prevent injury and property damage during and after
                         emergency episodes and also know how to find help. Through
                         brochures and presentations to civic groups and local schools, the City
                         works to educate residents and businesses about appropriate actions to
                         take during an emergency situation.
San Jacinto General Plan                       PS-22                                         May 2006

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                  Appendix: Implementation Program
                                                 This Implementation Program provides actions to
                                                 implement the adopted policies and plans identified
                                                 in this Element.       The Public Safety Element
                                                 Implementation Program is a series of actions,
                                                 procedures and techniques that includes a
                                                 description of the responsible agency/department,
                                                 funding source, time frame and related policies in
                                                 the Public Safety Element.
                            Natural Hazards
                       PS-1 Reduce the risk to the community from hazards related to geologic
    Natural Hazards Risk    conditions, seismic activity, flooding, and wildfires by requiring feasible
                 Reduction  mitigation of such impacts on development projects.                  Assess
                            development proposals for potential hazards pursuant to the California
                            Environmental Quality Act. Require measures to mitigate all identified
                            significant public safety hazards.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Fire Department, Public Works
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.3, 1.5
                       PS-2 Where the threat from natural hazards (such as fault rupture or flooding)
 Open Space Easements       cannot be mitigated, use open space easements and other regulatory
      for Natural Hazards   techniques to prohibit development and avoid public safety hazards.
                            Where feasible, permit the joint-use of preserve areas and easements
                            such as seismic faults and drainage basins for open space and
                            recreational uses.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.2, 1.5
                       PS-3 To minimize damage from earthquakes and other geologic activity,
         Structural Design  adopt and implement the most recent State seismic requirements for
                            structural design of new development and redevelopment.
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix PS-1                                    May 2006
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1
                       PS-4 During review of discretionary development and redevelopment
        Soil and Geologic   proposals, require surveys of soil and geologic conditions by State
                    Surveys licensed Engineering Geologists and Civil Engineers where appropriate.
                            When potential geologic impacts are identified, require project
                            applicants to mitigate the impacts per the recommendations contained
                            within the geologic survey.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
          Funding Source:   General Fund, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1
                       PS-5 Promote fire prevention in San Jacinto by:
 Promote Fire Prevention
                            ¾ Working closely with the San Jacinto Fire Department and County of
                                Riverside Sheriff’s Department to implement fire hazard education
                                and fire prevention programs;
                            ¾ Coordinating with the water districts and the San Jacinto Fire
                                Department to ensure that water pressure for existing developed
                                areas and sites to be developed is adequate for fire fighting
                                purposes;
                            ¾ Conforming to Fire Department requirements for individual projects;
                            ¾ Adopting and implementing the most recent Uniform Fire Code
                                provisions and appropriate amendments;
                            ¾ Requiring sprinklers in new non-residential buildings; and
                            ¾ Requiring future development in the hillside areas to provide dual
                                access to the proposed development site.
                            See also Community Services and Facilities Implementation Programs
                            CSF-8 and CSF-9.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Fire Department, water districts
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.3, 1.4
                       PS-6 Continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
 Flood Control Insurance    See also Community Services and Facilities Implementation Programs
                            CSF-18 and CSF-19.
San Jacinto General Plan                    Appendix PS-2                                  May 2006

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.5, 1.6
                       PS-7 Continue to implement the Flood Plain Management Ordinance, which
                Flood Plain establishes rules and regulations for flood plain management. Continue
             Management     to apply the rules and regulations to development in areas of special
                            flood hazards as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
                            Agency (FEMA) and as illustrated on the most recent Flood Insurance
                            Rate Map (FIRM).         See also Community Services and Facilities
                            Implementation Programs CSF-18 and CSF-19.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, FEMA
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing, as hydrologic conditions and flood control facilities change
                            over time, update the areas subject to the regulations per the most
                            recent FIRM
          Related Policies: 1.5, 1.6
                            Human Activity Hazards
                       PS-8 Protect the community from hazards related to air pollution, hazardous
Human Related Hazards       materials, and ground and air transportation by requiring feasible
                 Reduction  mitigation to be incorporated into new development and redevelopment
                            proposals to address safety impacts associated with those proposals.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Fire Department
          Funding Source:   General Fund, Airport Enterprise Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing in response to development proposals
          Related Policies: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.5
                       PS-9 Continue to work with the South Coast Air Quality Management District
  Air Pollution Reduction   (SCAQMD), RTA, the County of Riverside, and the most recent Air
                            Quality Management Plan (AQMP) to improve the regional
                            transportation system and regional air quality. See also Resource
                            Management Implementation Programs RM-25, RM-26, and RM-27.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, SCAQMD, RTA, County of Riverside
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.1
San Jacinto General Plan                    Appendix PS-3                                   May 2006
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                      PS-10 Continue to monitor regulations governing the use of pesticides and
             Pesticide Use  work with the County Agricultural Commissioner to promote the
                            responsible use of pesticides.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, County Agriculture Commissioner
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.2
                      PS-11 Minimize public health risks and environmental risks from the use,
     Hazardous Materials    transport, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials by:
                            ¾ Cooperating with federal, state, and county agencies to effectively
                                regulate the management of hazardous materials and hazardous
                                waste;
                            ¾ Cooperating with the County of Riverside Environmental Health
                                Department to advertise and implement the following programs
                                described in the Public Safety Element:
                                ♦ Hazardous Waste Minimization
                                ♦ Emergency Response and Investigations
                                ♦ Local Oversight Underground Storage Tank (UST)
                                ♦ Underground Storage Tank (UST)
                                ♦ Waste Generator Permit
                                ♦ Hazardous Materials Handlers
                                ♦ Environmental Crimes Task Force
                            ¾ Identifying roadway transportation routes for conveyance of
                                hazardous materials (the City does not exercise jurisdiction over
                                transportation of freight along railroad right-of-way or state
                                highways);
                            ¾ Discouraging the location of facilities that may produce hazardous
                                emissions or handle hazardous or acutely hazardous materials,
                                substances, or waste within one quarter-mile of sensitive receptors
                                such as parks, recreational facilities, schools, and other sensitive
                                facilities;
                            ¾ Implementing the Emergency Preparedness Plan for accidents
                                involving hazardous materials; and
                            ¾ Cooperating with the County of Riverside and the San Jacinto Fire
                                Department to administer Risk Management Plans for businesses
                                within the City.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, County of Riverside, Fire Department,
                            California Department of Transportation, California Highway Patrol
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
San Jacinto General Plan                    Appendix PS-4                                  May 2006

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                      PS-12  Continue to work with the County of Riverside Environmental Health
  Household Hazardous        Department to implement and advertise the Household Hazardous
         Waste Collection    Waste Collection Program to protect residents from dangers resulting
                  Program    from the use, transport, and disposal of hazardous materials used in the
                             home. Provide informational materials at public locations and links on
                             the City’s website about the County’s Household Hazardous Waste
                             Collection program, the County’s Antifreeze, Batteries, Oil, and Paint
                             (ABOP) program, collection facilities, drop-off centers, and the 24-hour
                             Household Hazardous Waste hotline.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       County of Riverside Environmental Health Department, City of
                             San Jacinto
          Funding Source:    General Fund
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  2.2, 2.4
                      PS-13  Continue to work with the County of Riverside’s Environmental Health
    Conditionally Exempt     Department to implement the Conditionally Exempt Small Quantity
            Small Quantity   Generators (CESQG) program, which is a hazardous waste pick-up
     Generators Program      disposal service for eligible, businesses/non-profit organizations in the
                             County of Riverside. This program provides an affordable way to legally
                             dispose of this waste. Provide informational materials at public locations
                             and links on the City’s website about the County’s CESQG program.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       County of Riverside Environmental Health Department, City of
                             San Jacinto
          Funding Source:    General Fund
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  2.2
                      PS-14  Minimize the potential for accidents involving railways, automobiles,
  Ground Transportation      pedestrians and cyclists by working closely with the Police Department,
                      Safety California Highway Patrol, Riverside County Sheriff’s Department,
                             Caltrans, Riverside Transportation Agency (RTA), and Burlington
                             Northern Santa Fe Rail Road (BNSF) to identify safety problems and
                             implement corrective measures, including re-routing vehicles carrying
                             hazardous materials.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Public Works, Police Department, Riverside County Sheriff’s Department,
                             California Highway Patrol, RTA, BNSF
          Funding Source:    General Fund
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  2.5
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix PS-5                                     May 2006

                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                      PS-15   Adopt a level of service standard for police protection. Protect residents
        Minimize Criminal     and businesses from criminal activity by providing the adopted level of
                     Activity service and educating the public about methods to reduce criminal
                              activity. During the annual budget and CIP process, review the level of
                              service standard and revise as appropriate. See also Community
                              Services and Facilities Implementation Program CSF-1.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:        Police Department
          Funding Source:     General Fund
              Time Frame:     Adopt standard by the end of 2004; ongoing review of standard with
                              budget and CIP process
          Related Policies:   2.6
                      PS-16   In pre-application meetings, encourage developers to incorporate
         Crime Prevention     CPTED design features in their residential and non-residential projects to
  Through Environmental       increase the safety of the projects.        Cooperate with the Police
          Design (CPTED)      Department to review development proposals to ensure that design
                              features promote a safe environment, as described in the Public Safety
                              Element. See also Community Services and Facilities Implementation
                              Program CSF-5.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:        Community Development, Police Department, private developers
          Funding Source:     General Fund, developer fees
              Time Frame:     Ongoing
          Related Policies:   2.7
                              Emergency Preparedness
                      PS-17   Annually review and update the Emergency Preparedness Plan under the
                Emergency     provision of the State Emergency Management System format to
       Preparedness Plan      maximize the efforts of emergency service providers (e.g., fire, medical,
                              and law enforcement) and minimize human suffering and property
                              damage during disasters. Provide annual practice sessions to City staff.
                              Support high-level multi-jurisdictional cooperation and communication
                              for emergency planning and management. Solicit private individuals
                              and organizations to enhance service provider communications and
                              response with cellular telephones, ham radios, AM/FM radio, and cable
                              television.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:        Community Development, Police Department, Fire Department, public
                              and private medical facilities, Federal Emergency Management Agency
                              (FEMA), American Red Cross, Riverside County Sheriff’s Department
          Funding Source:     General Fund, state and federal funds, private funds
              Time Frame:     Ongoing
          Related Policies:   3.1
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix PS-6                                    May 2006

                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                      PS-18 Coordinate with local agencies and organizations to develop and
                Emergency   distribute informational brochures and give presentations to civic groups
 Preparedness Education     and local schools to educate residents and businesses about appropriate
                            actions to take during an emergency situation.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Fire Department, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
                            American Red Cross, Police Department,
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds, private funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 3.2
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix PS-7                                   May 2006
                                                                 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                   Introduction
                                                 Some of San Jacinto’s most valuable assets include
                                                 its open space areas, the San Jacinto River,
                                                 agricultural resources, and its hillsides and
                                                 ridgelines. The Resource Management Element
                                                 describes the relationship between humans and the
                                                 natural environment. The focus of this Element is
                                                 the protection and enhancement of natural
                                                 resources to ensure a high quality living
                                                 environment for years to come.
          PURPOSE OF THE The San Jacinto Resource Management Element meets the State
                RESOURCE requirements for the Conservation ands Open Space Elements as
 MANAGEMENT ELEMENT      defined in Sections 65302(d) and 65301(e) of the Government Code,
                         respectively. According to these requirements, the Conservation Element
                         must contain goals and policies to protect and maintain natural
                         resources such as water, soils, wildlife and minerals, and prevent
                         wasteful resource exploitation, degradation and destruction. The Open
                         Space Element must contain goals and policies to manage open space
                         areas including undeveloped lands and environmentally constrained
                         areas. Specifically, the Open Space Element must address several open
                         space categories such as those used for the preservation of natural
                         resources and managed production of resources, as well as open space
                         maintained for public health and safety reasons. This last category of
                         open space is addressed in more detail in the Public Safety Element.
                         Although briefly mentioned in this Element, the Community Services and
                         Facilities Element provides a detailed description of the parks, trails and
                         recreational facilities in San Jacinto.
San Jacinto General Plan                       RM-1                                        May 2006

                                                                   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                           While air quality is not a State-mandated element, the South Coast Air
                           Quality Management Plan (AQMP) requires air quality to be addressed
                           in General Plans. Air quality is included as a component of the
                           Resource Management Element in order to fulfill AQMP requirements.
                           The purposes of the air quality component is to identify ways to reduce
                           stationary source, mobile source and energy consumption related
                           pollutant levels.
   SCOPE AND CONTENT       The Resource Management Element expresses community goals to
        OF THE RESOURCE    protect and enhance environmental resources and open space.
            MANAGEMENT     Resources addressed in this Element include: 1) open space;
                  ELEMENT  2) agricultural lands; 3) natural resources such as mineral resources,
                           water resources and biological resources; 4) scenic resources;
                           5) hillsides; 6) cultural resources; 7) air quality; and 8) energy use.
                           The Resource Management Element comprises three sections: 1) this
                           Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3) the Resource
                           Management Plan. An Implementation Program is provided as an
                           appendix to this Element. In the Issues, Goals and Policies section,
                           preservation of open space and resource management issues are
                           identified and corresponding goals and policies are established. The
                           goals, which are statements of the City’s desires, are comprised of broad
                           statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as guidelines for
                           enhancing the natural amenities of San Jacinto and minimizing the
                           effects of planned development. The Plan explains how the goals and
                           policies will be achieved and implemented. Specific implementation
                           programs for the Resource Management Element are contained in the
                           appendix of this Element.
            RELATED PLANS  There are a number of existing plans and programs that directly relate to
          AND PROGRAMS     the Resource Management Element. These plans and programs have
                           been enacted through federal, state and local action, and are
                           administered by agencies and special districts. Federal laws pertaining
                           to the protection of significant resources include the Endangered Species
                           Act of 1973 and the National Environmental Policy Act. Other related
                           plans and programs are described below.
                California The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the
            Environmental  state legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
               Quality Act environmental analysis of projects impacting the environment. The
                           provisions of the law and environmental review procedures are
                           described in the CEQA statutes and CEQA Guidelines. CEQA will
                           continue to be instrumental in ensuring that the environmental impacts
                           associated with local development projects are appropriately assessed
                           and mitigated.
San Jacinto General Plan                         RM-2                                           May 2006

                                                                    RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
  California Endangered    The California Endangered Species Act (CESA) (Fish & Game Code
               Species Act §§2050, et. seq.) generally parallels the main provisions of the Federal
                           Endangered Species Act and is administered by the California
                           Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). CESA prohibits the “taking” of
                           listed species except as otherwise provided in State law. Any future
                           development or redevelopment in San Jacinto that has the potential to
                           affect wildlife will be subject to the restrictions contained in the CESA.
     Federal Endangered    The Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA), administered by the
               Species Act U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, applies to federally listed species and
                           habitat occupied by federally listed species. Federally listed species are
                           most likely to occur within riparian habitat areas in the City’s floodplains.
                           ESA Section 9 forbids specified acts that directly or indirectly harm listed
                           species. Section 9 also prohibits “taking” any species of wildlife or fish
                           listed as endangered. These restrictions apply to all federal agencies
                           and all persons subject to United States jurisdiction.
   U.S. Fish and Wildlife  Both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of
  Service and California   Fish and Game have regulations to protect wildlife resources. Special
 Department of Fish and    permits are required for the alteration, dredging, or any activity in a lake
       Game Regulations    or stream, as well as other activities that may affect fish and game
                           habitat. Both agencies also regulate impacts to sensitive plant and
                           animal species as described above. Future development in San Jacinto
                           that has the potential to affect wildlife habitat will be subject to the
                           regulations of both of these federal and State agencies.
        Western Riverside  The 7,300 square mile Riverside County contains a range of habitat
           County Multiple patches and rare and narrow endemic species that require preservation
           Species Habitat under the federal Endangered Species Act (ESA) and the California
       Conservation Plan   Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The Western Riverside County
                 (MSHCP)   Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) is one component
                           of an integrated plan that also includes an updated Riverside County
                           General Plan and a Transportation Corridor Plan. The MSHCP provides
                           for the conservation of approximately 160 species on 1.25 million acres
                           of land in a rapidly urbanizing area of Riverside County. The Western
                           Riverside County MSHCP is intended to comply with the guidelines of
                           habitat conservation planning required under Section 10(a) of the ESA.
                           The ultimate goal of the plan is the development and management of
                           preserve areas within the urban landscape. The preserve areas and
                           management techniques contained in the final MSHCP will affect land
                           use planning and development opportunities within the San Jacinto
                           Planning Area.
San Jacinto General Plan                         RM-3                                            May 2006

                                                             RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
  County of Riverside    The County of Riverside General Plan Environmental Hazards and
         General Plan    Resources Element includes an inventory of both natural hazard
        Environmental    areas (e.g., seismic hazards, flooding hazards, slope instability) and
          Hazards and    County-wide natural resources such as open space, vegetation,
                         mineral resources, water quality and air quality. The Element also
  Resources Element
                         includes goals, policies and programs for development,
                         management, preservation and conservation of the County’s
                         resources. This County of Riverside Element provides sources of
                         regional information affecting San Jacinto and identifies policies
                         and programs that apply to the San Jacinto Planning Area.
    National Pollutant   Under the NPDES storm water permit issued to the County of
             Discharge   Riverside and the City of San Jacinto as a co-permitee, all
   Elimination System    development and significant redevelopment must be implemented
               (NPDES)   with runoff pollution control measures known as Best Management
                         Practices (BMPs). Proposed development projects (both public and
                         private) within San Jacinto must incorporate structural and non-
                         structural BMPs to preclude significant water quality impact from
                         non-point source pollutants.
  California Regional    Order No. 00-65 identifies watershed-wide waste discharge
         Water Quality   requirements for discharges of storm water runoff associated with
      Control Board –    new development in the San Jacinto Watershed. Order No 00-65
            Santa Ana    requires developers to complete a Storm Water Pollution Prevention
                         Plan (SWPPP) to address the specific circumstances of each project
       Region – Order
                         site. These SWPPPs must: 1) identify all pollutant sources; 2) identify
             No. 00-65   all non-storm water discharges; 3) implement Best Management
                         Practices (BMPs) to reduce or eliminate pollutants in storm water
                         discharges; and 4) develop a maintenance schedule for BMPs
                         installed during construction. The SWPPP must be submitted and
                         approved by the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board
                         concurrently with the Notice of Intent to comply with the terms of
                         Order No. 00-65 prior to construction activities of one acre or more.
       South Coast Air   The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) mandates a
                Quality  variety of measures to reduce traffic congestion and improve air
   Management Plan       quality.     These measures include the requirement that each
                         jurisdiction develop an air quality component within its General Plan.
       Williamson Act    The Williamson Act, passed by the State Legislature in 1965 seeks to
                         preserve agricultural uses by offering tax relief to large landowners if
                         the owners agree not to change the use of their open space or
                         agricultural lands for a contract period of ten years. The contracts
                         automatically renew each year, thus extending the term, unless the
                         owner files a notice of non-renewal to cancel the contract. Thus,
                         contract expiration is always nine years from the date of filing the
                         notice of non-renewal. Several properties within the Planning Area
                         are under Williamson Act contracts. However, many of these
                         contracts have recently ended or will end in the near future.
San Jacinto General Plan                    RM-4                                        May 2006

                                                               RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER     The Resource Management Element must be consistent with the other
            GENERAL PLAN  General Plan elements and all elements of the General Plan are
                 ELEMENTS interrelated to a degree. Certain goals and policies of each element
                          may also address issues that are the primary subjects of other elements.
                          The integration of overlapping issues throughout the General Plan
                          elements provides a strong basis for the implementation of plans and
                          programs and achievement of community goals.              The Resource
                          Management Element most closely relates to the Land Use, Public Safety
                          and Community Services and Facilities Elements.
                          The Land Use Element provides a planned land use pattern with the
                          following general land use designation categories: Residential,
                          Commercial, Industrial, Public/Institutional, and Open Space. The
                          Open Space and Open Space – Recreation designations are applied to
                          public and private land that is intended for conservation, open space
                          and recreational uses. These designations are typically applied to areas
                          that have an abundance of natural resources, visual resources and/or
                          public safety concerns.
                          The Public Safety Element relates to the Resource Management Element
                          in that it identifies hazard-prone areas such as floodplains, potentially
                          unstable hillside areas and seismic hazard areas that should be
                          conserved as open space.
                          The Community Services and Facilities Element relates to the Resource
                          Management Element in that it plans for the conservation and
                          management of parks and open space areas as well as water resources.
San Jacinto General Plan                        RM-5                                      May 2006

                                                                RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                               Issues, Goals and Policies
                                                San Jacinto possess valuable assets in the form of
                                                its natural resources, agricultural resources, and
                                                open space. The preservation and enhancement of
                                                these resources can be accomplished by
                                                addressing certain issues affecting the City.
                                                Six major issues are addressed by the goals,
                                                policies and Resource Management Plan in this
                                                Element. These major issues include: 1) preserving
                         and protecting natural resources; 2) managing and preserving water
                         resources; 3) preventing incompatible development; 4) improving air
                         quality; 5) protecting agricultural resources; and 6) conserving energy.
     NATURAL RESOURCES   San Jacinto contains important natural resources such as the San Jacinto
                         River, mountain views, natural plant and wildlife habitats, and the
                         wildlife that inhabit them. In a region that is subject to substantial
                         growth and urbanization, these resources are constantly under threat of
                         encroachment by new development. To preserve these important
                         resources for future generations and preserve the quality of life in the
                         community, these important resources need to be protected.
                         Resource Management Goal 1:               Conserve and protect natural
                         resources.
                         Policy 1.1:    Conserve important natural resources such as mature
                                        trees, rock outcroppings, hills, ridges, and other prominent
                                        land forms, as open space.
                         Policy 1.2:    Work closely with the County of Riverside to implement the
                                        Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan that meets the
                                        goal of preservation, but allows for economic development
                                        of the community.
                         Policy 1.3:    Conserve and protect important plant communities and
                                        wildlife habitats, such as riparian areas, wetlands, vernal
                                        pools, oak woodlands and other significant tree stands,
                                        and rare and endangered species.
                         Policy 1.4:    Create a system of hiking, biking and equestrian trails
                                        through and adjacent to open space and recreational
                                        areas within the City.
                         Policy 1.5:    Require proper soil management and erosion control
                                        techniques in new development to reduce erosion,
                                        sedimentation, and other soil related problems.
San Jacinto General Plan                       RM-6                                           May 2006
                                                               RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                         Policy 1.6:   Discourage grading of hillside areas and on slopes greater
                                       than 25 percent.
                         Policy 1.7:   Encourage the planting of native trees and drought
                                       tolerant vegetation.
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         RM-1 through RM-7
       WATER RESOURCES   The San Jacinto River flows through San Jacinto. The City also depends
                         on ground water resources for agricultural and urban activities. To
                         protect the public safety, as well as these natural resources, the supply
                         and quality of the City’s surface and ground water resources need to be
                         properly managed and protected.
                         Resource Management Goal 2: Conserve and protect surface water,
                         ground water and imported water resources.
                         Policy 2.1:   Coordinate water quality and supply programs with
                                       responsible water agencies.
                         Policy 2.2:   Ensure the placement of infrastructure for water supply and
                                       treatment to support development in areas designated for
                                       urban growth.
                         Policy 2.3:   Ensure sufficient water capacity is available for new
                                       development.
                         Policy 2.4:   Protect the aquifer and encourage ground water recharge.
                         Policy 2.5:   Cooperate with federal, State, and county governments,
                                       and other agencies on the maintenance and improvement
                                       of the quality and quantity of local and regional
                                       groundwater resources.
                         Policy 2.6:   Promote water conservation by encouraging the use of
                                       reclaimed water, promoting the use of water efficient
                                       landscaping and requiring development to utilize water
                                       conservation measures such as water efficient plumbing
                                       and xeriscape landscaping.
                         Policy 2.7:   Conserve and protect watershed areas, natural drainage
                                       channels and creeks by retaining these resources in their
                                       natural condition whenever feasible.
                         Policy 2.8:   Conserve and protect wetlands.
                         Policy 2.9:   Encourage the creation of a San Jacinto River Park that
                                       includes trails and passive open space areas.
San Jacinto General Plan                     RM-7                                         May 2006

                                                                RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                         Policy 2.10: Expand the use of reclaimed water, whenever feasible.
                         Policy 2.11: Assist responsible public agencies in eliminating the
                                        discharge of toxic materials and untreated sewage into the
                                        Valley drainage and groundwater system.
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         RM-4, RM-8 through RM-13
              COMPATIBLE Certain areas in San Jacinto are subject to floods, liquefaction, erosion,
            DEVELOPMENT  and landslides, as well as other hazards. Designating these areas for
                         open space or limiting development in these areas can reduce the risk to
                         public health and safety. Areas that contain important historical, visual
                         and ecological resources should also be protected to preserve the
                         heritage and character of the community. Protecting mineral resources
                         for future development also provides economic development
                         opportunities for the community.
                         Resource Management Goal 3: Prevent incompatible development in
                         areas that should be preserved for scenic, historic, conservation, mineral
                         extraction, or public safety purposes.
                         Policy 3.1:    Ensure incompatible development is avoided in those
                                        areas that are designated for scenic, historic, conservation,
                                        mineral extraction, or public safety purposes.
                         Policy 3.2:    Conserve hillsides by limiting development on slopes
                                        greater than 25 percent and allowing unique planning
                                        techniques such as Specific Plans, Planned Unit
                                        Developments, and clustered development to reduce
                                        grading.
                         Policy 3.3:    Seek dedication, funding, and maintenance of contiguous
                                        open space lands for passive and quasi-passive use.
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         RM-5, RM-14, RM-15
San Jacinto General Plan                      RM-8                                          May 2006
                                                                 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
   CULTURAL RESOURCES    San Jacinto's rich history has left the City with a great number of
                         significant prehistoric and historic archaeological resources. These
                         resources help define the community and offer opportunities for cultural,
                         educational, and community enrichment. The City encourages the
                         protection and enhancement of these resources for generations to come.
                         Resource Management Goal 4: Promote cultural awareness through
                         the preservation of the City's historical, archaeological, and
                         paleontological resources.
                         Policy 4.1:    Wherever possible, identify, protect and preserve the
                                        historical resources of the City.
                         Policy 4.2:    Encourage historic preservation in the downtown core.
                         Policy 4.3:    Increase public awareness of and accessibility to the City's
                                        cultural heritage and resources through educational
                                        visitor-oriented programs.
                         Policy 4.4:    Ensure new development is compatible             with   and
                                        complementary to adjacent historic resources.
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         RM-16 through RM-22
            AGRICULTURAL Agriculture continues to dominate the landscape of San Jacinto. Large
               RESOURCES tracts of land in the western portion of the City are used for agricultural
                         activities, which provide revenue sources for the City and its residents.
                         While many of these farms will continue to produce agricultural
                         products, increasing pressures from surrounding new development,
                         incompatibility with new development, and changes in the economy may
                         result in the eventual development of these areas for urban uses.
                         Planning for the eventual conversion of these areas to urban uses, with
                         agriculture providing a revenue producing interim use, will provide short
                         and long-term benefits to the City.
                         Resource Management Goal 5: Where appropriate, conserve
                         agricultural lands and avoid the premature conversion of agricultural
                         land to urban uses.
                         Policy 5.1:    Encourage continuous agricultural operations.
                         Policy 5.2:    Foster development techniques and agricultural practices
                                        that minimize the incompatibility of agricultural activities
                                        with urban development while maximizing agricultural
                                        production.
                         Policy 5.3:    Protect agricultural lands from premature conversion to
                                        urban uses.
San Jacinto General Plan                       RM-9                                        May 2006
                                                                RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                          Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                          RM-23, RM-24
              AIR QUALITY San Jacinto is located in the South Coast Air Basin. Air quality in this
                          basin does not presently meet state and federal standards. Cooperation
                          among all agencies in the basin is necessary to achieve desired
                          improvements to air quality. San Jacinto can participate and contribute
                          its share in those efforts by proper planning for land use, transportation,
                          and energy use.
                          Resource Management Goal 6: Improve air quality.
                          Policy 6.1:    Cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality Management
                                         District, Southern California Association of Governments,
                                         and the Western Riverside Council of Governments in their
                                         efforts to implement the regional Air Quality Management
                                         Plan.
                          Policy 6.2:    Cooperate and participate in regional air quality
                                         management planning, programs, and enforcement
                                         measures.
                          Policy 6.3:    Achieve a greater balance between jobs and housing in
                                         San Jacinto.
                          Policy 6.4:    Promote the growth of clean industry as a method of
                                         managing and improving air quality.
                          Policy 6.5:    Promote energy conservation and recycling by the public
                                         and private sectors.
                          Policy 6.6:    Encourage alternative modes of transportation to reduce
                                         vehicular emissions and improve air quality.
                          Policy 6.7:    Encourage pedestrian scale development and pedestrian
                                         friendly access to reduce vehicle emissions.
                          Policy 6.8:    In appropriate areas, allow mixed use development that
                                         combines housing, employment, and retail activities on
                                         one site.
                          Policy 6.9:    Concentrate higher density development at transportation
                                         nodes and areas served by a well-developed vehicular
                                         network.
                          Policy 6.10: Support sustainable development patterns and green
                                         building standards that reduce energy use.
San Jacinto General Plan                       RM-10                                        May 2006
                                                             RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         RM-25 through RM-29
 ENERGY CONSERVATION     Future development within the City will result in an increase in the
                         amount of energy used for the operation of businesses, homes, and
                         automobiles. To reduce pollution and ensure that there are energy
                         sources for future generations, conservation methods need to be
                         implemented.
                         Resource Management Goal 7: Promote the conservation of energy.
                         Policy 7.1:  Encourage the efficient use of energy resources.
                         Policy 7.2:  Promote the use of alternative energy sources.
                         Policy 7.3:  Support the use of energy-efficient building materials,
                                      equipment, and design in City facilities and infrastructure.
                         Policy 7.4:  Encourage recycling programs that reduce emissions
                                      associated with manufacturing and waste disposal.
                         Related Resource Management Element Implementation Programs:
                         RM-30 through RM-33
San Jacinto General Plan                   RM-11                                           May 2006
                                                                RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                           Resource Management Plan
                                                San Jacinto’s location in a valley bordered by
                                                mountains to the east and west, and its array of
                                                water resources, open space, and agricultural uses
                                                create a distinct identity for the City. The Resource
                                                Management Plan establishes an approach for the
                                                balanced use, management, and conservation of
                                                these unique resources.            The six resource
                                                management issue areas identified in the Issues,
                                                Goals and Policies section are the focus of this
                                                Plan. The related goals and policies are the basis
                         of the Plan and are supported by approaches to protect and enhance
                         natural resources. The Resource Management Implementation Program
                         contained in Appendix A of this General Plan is an extension of this plan
                         and contains specific programs to achieve the City’s goals related to
                         natural resources and open space.
    NATURAL RESOURCES
                         Urbanization of the City places an increased importance on the
                         management and conservation of its vast natural resources, including
                         open space resources, natural landforms, biological resources, and
                         mineral resources. Water resources, agricultural resources, air quality,
                         and historic resources are each addressed following the Natural
                         Resources subsection of this Plan.
 Open Space Resources    Open space is an important community amenity. Open space provides
                         passive and active recreational opportunities, preserves scenic views,
                         provides for the protection of sensitive biological resources, and acts as
                         a buffer between potentially incompatible land uses. Open space
                         resources in San Jacinto include: 1) privately owned open space and
                         recreational facilities; 2) public parks; 3) publicly owned open space;
San Jacinto General Plan                     RM-12                                           May 2006

                                                               RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                         4) privately owned golf courses; 5) easements to the City; 6) Valley Wide
                         Regional Park, 7) equestrian facilities; 8) the City’s water resources; and
                         9) agricultural lands. This section of the Resource Management Plan
                         describes the strategy to maintain and enhance open space resources
                         within the Planning Area.
Designated Open Space    Land intended for the preservation of open space and provision of
                         recreational opportunities is included in two Open Space land use
                         designations: General Open Space (OS) and Open Space – Recreation
                         (OS-R). The location of lands designated for open space is depicted in
                         Figure RM-1.
                         The OS designation provides for a variety of open space and
                         recreational uses. The OS-R category allows for the preservation of
                         open space resources and the provision of outdoor recreational facilities
                         such as golf courses and equestrian facilities. Much of the City’s natural
                         landforms and open space features, such as fault zones, ridgelines and
                         hillsides are protected under these two open space categories.
                         In order to preserve and enhance open space resources in the Planning
                         Area, the City implements a program that supports the joint venture use
                         of open space areas to reduce maintenance costs and increase City
                         revenue for maintaining historic resources, open space, and parks and
                         recreational facilities. San Jacinto also coordinates with public and
                         private organizations to provide revenue generating open space uses
                         such as golf courses and environmental banking sites to generate
                         revenue to protect important open space and natural resources.
    Designated Parkland  Figure RM-1 identifies the lands within the Planning Area that are
                         designated as Park (P). The Parks designation allows for a variety of
                         passive and active recreation sites operated by private organizations, the
                         City and regional agencies. The Community Services and Facilities
                         Element of this General Plan provides a complete inventory and
                         description of existing and planned parks, equestrian facilities,
                         recreational facilities, and trails within the City. The City’s plan to
                         maintain and expand these recreational areas is also described in the
                         Community Services and Facilities Element.
                         In addition to specifically designated parkland within the community,
                         developers of residential projects will be required to provide adequate
                         parkland equal to five acres per 1,000 residents (0.005 acre per
                         resident), or pay an in-lieu fee prior to occupancy of the project.
                         Developers of non-residential projects will be required to provide
                         parkland equal to 2.5 acres per 1,000 employees (0.0025 acre per
                         employee), or pay an in lieu fee prior to occupancy of the project.
                         These requirements will ensure adequate new parkland is provided per
                         the Quimby Act.
San Jacinto General Plan                      RM-13                                         May 2006

                                                                   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
   Valley-Wide Regional     Located in San Jacinto, Valley-Wide Regional Park is a 36-acre park that
                       Park features a 22,000 square foot Sports Center, six lighted tennis courts,
                            seven baseball diamonds, six soccer fields, and picnic areas with
                            barbecues and play equipment. The park also has batting cages,
                            Valley-Wide Recreation and Parks District (VWRPD) administration
                            offices, outside basketball and volleyball courts and six horseshoe pits.
                            The regional park is maintained and operated by the VWRPD. The
                            City monitors the maintenance of the park site and works with the district
                            in providing community services and recreation opportunities at the site.
       Mount San Jacinto    The weathered summit of Mount San Jacinto stands 10,804 feet above
                State Park  sea level, the highest point in the San Jacinto Range and the second
                            highest in southern California. The mountain’s granite peaks and
                            subalpine forests provide a majestic scenic vista for the residents of
                            San Jacinto. The nearby 12,000-acre Mount San Jacinto State Park
                            offers rock climbing, nature and hiking trails, camping and picnicking.
                            The Mount San Jacinto State Park General Plan is currently being
                            developed. This document becomes the primary management plan for
                            the California State Parks system, establishing its purpose and
                            management direction for the future. The City of San Jacinto continues
                            to work with the State Park system to ensure that the abundant natural
                            and scenic resources of Mount San Jacinto State Park are maintained.
       Natural Landforms    San Jacinto’s eastern and western borders are largely defined by steep
                            sloping hillsides and ridgelines associated with the San Jacinto Mountain
                            Range. In order to preserve the scenic and natural resources of these
                            hillsides, a majority of the land in these hillside areas is designated as
                            Open Space (OS), which allows a maximum of 1 dwelling unit per 40
                            acres or non residential development with a maximum 0.10:1 floor area
                            ratio (FAR). This low level of development discourages incompatible
                            development in these areas and maintains the scenic vistas of these
                                                              hillsides and ridgelines, while providing
                                                              opportunities for habitat and species
                                                              preserve areas. In order to provide
                                                              additional development opportunities in
                                                              the vicinity of these hillsides, areas of
                                                              Estate Residential, Rural Residential (RR)
                                                              and Open Space – Recreation (OS-R)
                                                              are planned in the more gently sloped
                                                              areas at the base of both the eastern
                                                              and western hillsides.
San Jacinto General Plan                        RM-14                                          May 2006

May 200

                                                                RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                          Before development is approved in these hillside areas, the City assesses
                          development proposals for potential impacts associated with important
                          geologic and scenic landform features pursuant to the California
                          Environmental Quality Act. Important topographical features, ridgelines,
                          scenic vistas, soils and potential erosion problems are considered in
                          these assessments.
     Biological Resources San Jacinto lies within the Western Riverside County Multiple Species
                          Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) as depicted in Figure RM-2.
                          Due to the extensive amount of open space in both the western and
                          easternmost portions of the Planning Areas, the variety of elevations and
                          topography within the Planning Area, and the habitat associated with the
                          San Jacinto River, a variety of biological resources exists in the Planning
                          Area. Figure RM-3 identifies the vegetation communities located within
                          San Jacinto. Important vegetation communities located within the
                          Planning Area include:
                          ¾ Riversidean sage scrub in the eastern and western portions of the
                              Planning Area.
                          ¾ Riversidean alluvial fan sage scrub, disturbed alluvial and riparian
                              forest along the San Jacinto River.
                          ¾ Riversidean sage scrub and chaparral on the hillsides in the western
                              and eastern portions of the Planning Area.
                          Although agricultural uses such as fields and croplands are not
                          considered sensitive vegetation, these areas can provide important
                          foraging opportunities for sensitive raptor species. Additionally, the
                          open ponds associated with some agricultural uses may provide habitat
                          for species associated with fresh water, riparian scrub and freshwater
                          marsh.
                          Sensitive wildlife species identified or likely to occur in San Jacinto
                          include, but are not limited to: the western spadefoot toad; orange
                          throated whiptail; California gnatcatcher; burrowing owl; loggerhead
                          shrike; white tailed kite; northern harrier; and several species of raptors,
                          such as the golden eagle, ferruginous hawk, and the bald eagle.
                          The MSHCP provides for the conservation of these sensitive wildlife and
                          vegetation communities. The City is a permittee under the MSHCP and
                          a signatory to the implementing agreement, which allows the City to
                          continue to work with the County of Riverside to enforce the Multiple
                          Species Habitat Conservation Plan.
San Jacinto General Plan                      RM-17                                          May 2006

May 200
May 200

                                                               RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
       Mineral Resources  No portion of the Planning Area is located in a significant mineral
                          resource area (MRZ-2) as identified on maps prepared by the
                          Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology. However,
                          the Riverside County General Plan identifies sand and gravel and
                          limestone resources in the eastern portion of the Planning Area, east of
                          the San Jacinto River. Rock and granite products are also located in the
                          eastern hillsides. The most significant mineral extraction operation in the
                          Planning Area was the Quandt Borrow Pit located on a 160-acre site in
                          the northern portion of the Planning Area along the San Jacinto River;
                          however, the Quandt Borrow Pit is no longer in operation.
       WATER RESOURCES    Urban growth and agricultural production within the region places
                          continued demand on the City’s groundwater supply. Continued
                          development and agricultural production also contribute to increased
                          erosion and runoff that pollute the City’s surface waters. Management
                          of the water supply and enhancement of water quality is essential to the
                          future of San Jacinto.
             Water Supply Both local and regional water resources are important to the City.
                          Urban and agricultural activities in San Jacinto affect regional water
                          resources as well as local sources. San Jacinto is located within the
                          San Jacinto Groundwater Subbasin. The City’s potable water is supplied
                          primarily through water pumped from San Jacinto and Hemet wells
                          operated and managed by the Eastern Municipal Water District
                          (EMWD); however the City also purchases blends of imported water and
                          groundwater for distribution. The supply of both groundwater and
                          imported water is limited and conservation efforts are needed to ensure
                          adequate emergency storage and future supply. Water conservation is
                          encouraged by the City in the following ways:
                          ¾ Implementing aquifer and groundwater recharge programs;
                          ¾ Participating in water conservation programs operated by the EMWD
                              and the Metropolitan Water District (MWD);
                          ¾ Establishing water conservation education programs;
                          ¾ Requiring the use of drought resistant plant species in landscaping
                              for private and public areas, including parks and recreational
                              facilities;
                          ¾ Expanding the production and use of reclaimed water; and
                          ¾ Requiring the incorporation of water conservation devices, including
                              low-flush toilets, flow restriction devices and water conserving
                              appliances in both new public and private development projects and
                              rehabilitation projects.
            Water Quality The City’s water resources, including the San Jacinto River, the Casa
                          Loma Canal, the Colorado River Aqueduct and the City’s many wells are
                          subject to pollutants and sediment carried in runoff. The pollutants
                          common in San Jacinto’s runoff include landscape and agricultural
                          pesticides and fertilizers, automobile products and degreasers. Urban
San Jacinto General Plan                      RM-21                                         May 2006

                                                                 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                           and agricultural pollutants degrade water quality and impact wildlife and
                           plants dependent on aquatic habitat.
                           The City is a co-permittee with the County of Riverside in the National
                           Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, which is
                           designed to reduce pollutants in runoff. According to the NPDES permit
                           requirements, all new development projects and substantial
                           rehabilitation efforts are required to incorporate Best Management
                           Practices (BMPs). Implementation of BMPs in accordance with Riverside
                           County’s Flood Control and Water Conservation District’s NPDES
                           Municipal Stormwater Management Program helps to protect surface
                           water quality in San Jacinto.
                           The City of San Jacinto also cooperates with the EMWD in the operation
                           and management of the Hemet/San Jacinto Multipurpose Constructed
                           Wetlands Research Facility, which provides additional treatment of
                           secondary wastewater. This facility is an integral component of the
                           Hemet/San Jacinto Regional Water Reclamation Facility, with proven
                           improvement in water quality in the region. The wetlands facility is also
                           a haven for approximately 120 species of migratory and resident
                           waterfowl, shorebirds, songbirds and raptors.
                           The City also continues to monitor water quality and plans to construct
                           needed infrastructure improvements as identified in the City’s Water
                           Master Plan.
              COMPATIBLE   Certain areas and resources in the City need to be protected from
            DEVELOPMENT    incompatible development in order to ensure public safety and the
                           protection of natural resources and historic resources. Protecting and
                           enhancing these resources also provides both public and private
                           economic development opportunities.
             Public Safety Certain areas within the Planning Area are subject to hazards associated
                           with seismic events, flooding, fire and geology (e.g., erosion, mudslides
                           and rockslides). Ensuring compatible development in these areas to
                           protect public safety is important. These hazard areas and the
                           Management of these areas is addressed in the Public Safety Element of
                           the General Plan.
San Jacinto General Plan                       RM-22                                        May 2006

                                                                 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
            Archaeological  San Jacinto includes a great number of prehistoric and historic
                Resources   archaeological resources. Archaeological and historic resources are
                            illustrated in Figure RM-4.
                Prehistoric The City jurisdiction includes many important prehistoric sites in the
    Archaeological Areas    Lakeview Mountains and one in Massacre Canyon. Rock art, including
                            the locally famous “Ramona Maze Stone”, is located in the Lakeview
                            Mountain area. Other types of prehistoric sites in the Lakeview area
                            include rock shelters, open camps, and acorn and seed milling areas.
                            According to legend, Massacre Canyon was once the site of the ancient
                            Indian village of Ivah. This area may thus have prehistoric and historic
                            significance.
       Historic Resources   The San Jacinto Valley was first settled by the native Cahuilla peoples,
                            many of whose descendants still live in the valley. The San Jacinto valley
                            area was first seen by Europeans when Juan Bautista explored the valley
                            in 1774. In the early 1800s it became a cattle ranch for Mission
                            San Luis Rey and was named for Saint Hyacinth, or San Jacinto. At this
                            time, Rancho San Jacinto extended from the San Jacinto mountains to
                            present day Corona. When the mission system was broken up,
                            approximately 35,500 acres of land in the valley was granted to the
                            Estudillo family in 1842. As families began to move into the area, Don
                            Jose Antonio Estudillo sold off portions of his holdings and decided to
                            begin a town.
San Jacinto General Plan                         RM-23                                       May 2006

                                                                          RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                               The City was founded in 1870 and incorporated in 1888, making
                               San Jacinto the oldest incorporated city in Riverside County. For more
                               than 100 years the fertile valley of the Planning Area has supported
                               businesses and ranches with jobs, good resources and bumper crops
                               such as grains apricots, peaches walnuts and citrus. In the early 1900s,
                               the local hot springs and mild climate attracted many visitors and new
                               residents to the area.
                               Being the oldest incorporated city in Riverside County, San Jacinto
                               contains many late 19th and early 20th century homes, including a
                               number of Victorian houses and California bungalows. In addition, the
                               City contains several late 19th and early 20th century commercial
                               structures in the downtown area. Some of these historic buildings and
                               properties include the:
               ¾   Estudillo Mansion          ¾  Scherman Home
               ¾   Hotel Vosberg              ¾  Dunham House
               ¾   Pioneer Hotel              ¾  Geiser Home
               ¾   The Hogan                  ¾  Hyacinth Inn
                                          Photo: Estudillo Mansion circa 1890.
                               The 1885 Estudillo Mansion, located at Main and Seventh streets is the
                               oldest and most significant historical building in the San Jacinto Valley.
                               The history of the mansion links San Jacinto Valley’s present to the
                               Mission Era of Spanish rule in California through the Mexican California
                               era through the settlement of the valley by American and European
                               settlers. Tours of the mansion promote tourism and the learning of local
                               history. The site can also be used for business opportunities such as,
                               weddings, private parties, and other receptions. Preservation of the site
                               and protection of the site from incompatible development enhances the
                               historic and economic value of the site to the community.
San Jacinto General Plan                             RM-24                                      May 2006

May 200

                                                                 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                          Other notable historic resources in the community include:
                          ¾ Brick blocks in “Old San Jacinto” located on the two blocks between
                              Hewitt Avenue and Evans Street;
                          ¾ Lime kilns and quarry at Massacre Canyon;
                          ¾ Historic trash dumps located along the western bank of the
                              San Jacinto River, just east of the existing City boundary;
                          ¾ A portion of the historic 1,600 mile route of the 1777 De Anza
                              Expedition;
                          ¾ The 1934 landing site of the Soviet Trans-polar Airship, which is now
                              identified by a marker on Cottonwood Avenue, between Sanderson
                              Avenue and Warren Road; and
                          ¾ The San Jacinto High School Bell Tower.
                          San Jacinto reviews all discretionary development proposals for potential
                          impacts related to incompatible development.              Additionally, any
                          development that could impact a historic or archaeological resource is
                          subject to environmental review under the California Environmental
                          Quality Act (CEQA).
              AIR QUALITY The City of San Jacinto is located within the South Coast Air Basin, a
                          non-attainment area for federal and state air quality standards for ozone
                          and state standards for particulate matter less than ten microns in
                          diameter (PM10). The Planning Area lies within the South Coast Air
                          Quality Management District Source Receptor Area 28. Since 1997,
                          there has been no active monitoring station in Area 28 because
                          information gathered in Area 28 was consistently redundant with
                          information gathered in Area 24 – Perris Valley, which is located just
                          west of Area 28. Therefore, since 1997, the City uses information
                          gathered from Area 24 to assess PM10 and ozone emissions affecting
                          the Planning Area. No other pollutant is monitored in Area 24 due to
                          the consistently low levels of other pollutant emissions (e.g., carbon
                          monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide) identified in the area in
                          the 1980s and 1990s.
                          Motor vehicles are the primary source of regional ozone and particulate
                          matter emissions throughout the air basin and within San Jacinto.
                          Agricultural uses and construction activities that cause soil disturbance
                          and the release of dust are also contributors to particulate matter
                          emissions.      The City works with the South Coast Air Quality
                          Management District and implements the requirements of the most
                          recent Air Quality Management Plan in order to improve regional air
                          quality. Energy conservation, discussed in the Energy Conservation
                          subsection of this Plan, also helps to reduce localized and regional air
                          quality impacts.
            AGRICULTURAL  San Jacinto has historically been an agricultural community, with its rich
               RESOURCES  valley soils providing a wide variety of agricultural crops. As depicted in
                          Figure RM-5, agricultural uses in the Planning Area include groves and
San Jacinto General Plan                       RM-27                                         May 2006

                                                              RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                         orchards, field and truck crops, and dairy and livestock feedyards.
                         These agricultural uses provide revenue for the City while preserving
                         rural character and maintaining open space and scenic views. While
                         many of the agricultural uses will continue to operate in the future,
                         increasing pressures from surrounding urban development and changes
                         in the economy will likely result in the development of many of these
                         areas for urban uses. Planning for the eventual conversion of these
                         areas into urban uses, while allowing agricultural areas to remain as an
                         interim use, provides short- and long-term benefits to the City.
                         Figure RM-5 also depicts the agricultural preserve (Williamson Act
                         contract) areas within San Jacinto. Many of the Williamson Act contracts
                         on these lands will expire in the upcoming years, allowing for
                         development of the areas for non-agricultural uses.
                         Figure RM-6 depicts the Important Farmlands in San Jacinto as identified
                         by the Department of Conservation. As indicated, a substantial amount
                         of land in the Planning Area is identified as Important Farmland. Any
                         discretionary development proposal that would convert agricultural uses
                         to non-agricultural uses or that has the potential to disturb Prime
                         Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmland or
                         Farmland of Local Importance is subject to review under CEQA.
San Jacinto General Plan                    RM-28                                         May 2006
May 200

May 200

                                                               RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                   ENERGY A tight energy market and sometimes insufficient power supply highlights
           CONSERVATION   the continued need for both private and public energy conservation.
                          Additionally, pollutants are generated by the combustion of fossil fuels to
                          produce electricity and by the combustion of natural gas. Reducing
                          energy usage decreases the amount of pollutants generated. The City
                          supports reducing energy demand through innovative architectural
                          design, energy efficient building materials and construction, structural
                          orientation and landscaping.
                          The City promotes energy conservation by implementing State Title 24
                          energy performance requirements through building codes. In addition,
                          the relationship between project design and future energy requirements
                          is considered when reviewing proposals for new development.
                          Promotion of utility company incentive programs to retrofit existing
                          development with energy efficient lighting, air conditioning and heating
                          systems is also supported by the City.
San Jacinto General Plan                      RM-33                                        May 2006
                                                                  RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                 Appendix: Implementation Program
                                                 This Implementation Program provides actions to
                                                 implement the adopted policies and plans identified
                                                 in the Resource Management Element.              The
                                                 Resource Management Element Implementation
                                                 Program is a series of actions, procedures and
                                                 techniques that includes a description of the
                                                 responsible agency/department, funding source,
                                                 time frame and related policies in the Resource
                            Management Element.
                            Natural Resources
                       RM-1 To reduce maintenance costs and increase City revenue for maintaining
      Joint Venture Open    historic resources, open space, and parks and recreational facilities,
     Space Management       support the joint venture use and management of open space areas with
                            other public and private agencies.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, private entities, school districts, Valley-Wide
                            Recreation and Parks District, State Park System
          Funding Source:   General Fund, private fees, state and federal funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.9
                       RM-2 Coordinate with public and private organizations to provide revenue-
     Revenue-Generating     generating open space uses such as golf courses and environmental
        Open Space Uses     banking sites as a way to produce revenue to protect open space and
                            natural resources. Work with the Chamber of Commerce and Valley
                            Economic Development Corporation (VEDC) to advertise potential
                            revenue-generating open space opportunities in San Jacinto. Identify
                            potential sites for revenue-generating open space uses on the City’s
                            website.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, private entities, Chamber of Commerce,
                            VEDC
          Funding Source:   General Fund, private entities
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
                       RM-3 Work closely with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE), U.S. Fish
   Coordination with the    and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the California Department of Fish and
                 Agencies   Game (CDFG) during the discretionary project permitting and CEQA
                            review of any project that may result in the alteration of a stream bed,
San Jacinto General Plan                    Appendix RM-1                                    May 2006

                                                                   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                             involve the removal of vegetation in wetland and riparian habitats,
                             disturb Waters of the United States or otherwise impact sensitive
                             biological resources.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, ACOE, FWS, CDFG
          Funding Source:    General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  1.2, 1.3, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9
                       RM-4  Cooperate with the County of Riverside to develop and manage
        Western Riverside    preserve areas within the urban landscape. During the review of
 County Multiple Species     development proposals, use the Western Riverside County MSHCP
    Habitat Conservation     Habitat Conservation Plan (particularly Section 3.2.13 San Jacinto Valley
            Plan (MSHCP)     Area Plan) to help assess potential project impacts and mitigation
                             requirements. Development in the City shall be required to comply with
                             the applicable terms of the MSHCP including, but not limited to, the
                             payment of mitigation fees, narrow endemic surveys, riparian/riverine
                             policy, and other applicable surveys. Anyone applying for a
                             discretionary permit for property located in a MSHCP designated Criteria
                             Area/Criteria Cell(s) shall submit a HANS Application to the Riverside
                             County EPD and subsequently to the Western Riverside RCP for JPR.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, County of Riverside
          Funding Source:    General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  1.2, 1.3, 2.7, 2.8
                       RM-5  Through the City's Hillside Development Guidelines, retain the significant
    Hillside Development     hillsides and ridgelines on San Jacinto’s eastern and western borders as
                Guidelines   Open Space, allowing areas of non-intensive development such as Rural
                             Residential, Estate Residential, and Open Space – Recreation on the
                             more gently sloped areas at the base of the eastern and western
                             hillsides.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development
          Funding Source:    General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  1.6, 3.2
                       RM-6  During the processing of new development projects, require the use of
        Site Development     Planned Unit Developments, Specific Plans, and clustering as a means
                 Flexibility of preserving significant natural resources and reducing risks associated
                             with hazards related to seismic activities, unstable soils, and landslides.
San Jacinto General Plan                      Appendix RM-2                              May 2006May 2006

                                                                 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.1, 1.3
                       RM-7 During the development review process, ensure proper geotechnical and
   Geotechnical Stability   soil management techniques are implemented. To enforce this, the City
                            Engineer or Planning Director may request the completion of a survey of
                            soil and geologic conditions by a State licensed Engineering Geologist
                            and Civil Engineer, where appropriate. When potential geologic
                            impacts are identified, require project applicants to mitigate the impacts
                            per the recommendations contained within the survey.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
          Funding Source:   General Fund, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.5, 1.6
                            Water Resources
                       RM-8 To reduce soil erosion and pollutants in urban runoff, require new
 Water Quality Programs     development projects, substantial rehabilitation projects, and ongoing
                            agricultural operations to incorporate Best Management Practices
                            (BMPs) pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
                            (NPDES) permit to ensure that the City complies with applicable State
                            and federal regulations.        As specific development projects are
                            implemented, project proponents will be required to consult with
                            relevant agencies such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE),
                            Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB), and the California
                            Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). Also, ensure that projects of
                            one acre or more complete a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
                            (SWPPP) pursuant to California Regional Water Quality Control Board
                            (RWQCB) Santa Ana Region – Order No. 00-65 and the City’s MS4
                            permit (order no. R8-2002-0011 (NPDES No. CAS 618033).
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, RWQCB
          Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funding sources, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.5, 1.7, 2.1, 2.11
                       RM-9 Cooperate with the Regional Water Quality Control Board to develop a
      Reduce Nitrate and    plan to assist agricultural operations to reduce nitrate and sediment
        Sediment Input to   input to surface waters. Such a plan will enhance water quality and
           Surface Waters   benefit aquatic plants and wildlife within the planning area as well as
                            downstream.
San Jacinto General Plan                    Appendix RM-3                            May 2006May 2006

                                                                 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Regional Water Quality Control Board
          Funding Source:   General Fund, private funds, state funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.1, 2.11
                     RM-10  In cooperation with the state, regional, and local water agencies and
           Recycled Water   suppliers, participate in programs that seek to expand the availability
                            and use of recycled water for irrigation where feasible and legally
                            permitted. Specifically, support the expansion of the use of recycled
                            water for urban and agricultural irrigation. Cooperate with these
                            agencies to establish standards and regulations for the use of recycled
                            water in development projects.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, local and regional water districts
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.3, 2.6, 2.10
                     RM-11  Work with the water districts and private developers to encourage water
     Water Conservation     conservation in the following ways:
                            ¾ Implementing aquifer and groundwater recharge programs
                            ¾ Participating in water conservation programs operated by the local
                                and regional water districts
                            ¾ Establishing water conservation education programs
                            ¾ Requiring the use of drought resistant plant species in landscaping
                                for public and private areas, including parks and recreational
                                facilities
                            ¾ Expanding the production and use of reclaimed water
                            ¾ Requiring the incorporation of water conservation devices, including
                                low flush toilets, flow restriction devices, and water conserving
                                appliances in both new public and private development projects and
                                rehabilitation projects.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, local and regional water districts
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 1.7, 2.3, 2.6
                     RM-12  Through the development review process, require that sufficient water
  Ensure Sufficient Water   supply and water infrastructure capacity is available to serve the
                  Capacity  development prior to approval of the project, pursuant to Water Code
                            Section 10910 and Government Code Section 66473.7.
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix RM-4                          May 2006May 2006

                                                                   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, local and regional water districts
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5
                     RM-13  Whenever feasible, incorporate improved open space and preservation
 Joint-Use Opportunities    areas and quasi-active recreation facilities in areas used for ground
                            water recharge and/or drainage detention.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, City Engineer, Public Works
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.9
                            Compatible Development
                     RM-14  Where feasible, incorporate open space and passive recreational uses
         Open Space and     into areas identified to have significant hazards related to flooding,
     Passive Recreational   geologic conditions, and seismic events.
                      Areas
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, City Engineer, Public Works
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 3.1, 3.3
                     RM-15  Designate local scenic routes and vistas and develop guidelines for
      Local Scenic Routes   development visible from these scenic routes to minimize impacts to
                            scenic vistas. This is the same as Implementation Program LU-21.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
              Time Frame:   Identify scenic routes and develop guidelines by the end of 2007
          Related Policies: 1.1, 3.1, 3.2
                            Cultural Resources
                     RM-16  Continue to assess development proposals for potential impacts to
California Environmental    sensitive historic, archaeological, and paleontological resources
                Quality Act pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
                            a.     For structures that potentially have historic significance, the City
                                   shall require that a study be conducted by a professional
                                   archaeologist or historian to determine the actual significance of
                                   the structure and potential impacts of the proposed development
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix RM-5                            May 2006May 2006
                                                            RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                            in accordance with CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.5. The City
                            may require modification of the project and/or mitigation
                            measures to avoid any impact to a historic structure, when
                            feasible, such as retaining or rehabilitating historic buildings
                            pursuant to City of San Jacinto guidelines. If a historic building
                            cannot be avoided by a project associated with the proposed
                            General Plan, the significant historic building may be relocated to
                            avoid impacting the structure. (See Implementation Program
                            RM-19 below).
                         b. For all development proposals within areas with the potential to
                            contain prehistoric/historic resources, the City shall require a study
                            to be conducted by a professional archaeologist. The objective of
                            the study will be to determine if significant archaeological
                            resources are potentially present and if the project will significantly
                            impact these resources. If significant impacts are identified, the
                            City may require the project to be modified to avoid the impacts,
                            or require mitigation measures to mitigate the impacts. Mitigation
                            may involve archaeological investigation and resources recovery.
                         c. The City shall require an assessment of the potential for
                            development proposals to significantly impact paleontological
                            resources pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act
                            Guidelines. If the project involves earthworks, the City may require
                            a study conducted by a professional paleontologist to determine if
                            paleontological assets are present, and if the project will
                            significantly impact the resources. If significant impacts are
                            identified, the City may require the project to be modified to avoid
                            impacting the paleontological materials, require monitoring of
                            rock units with high potential to contain significant nonrenewable
                            paleontologic resources, or require mitigation measures to
                            mitigate the impacts, such as recovering the paleontological
                            resources for preservation.
                         d. The City shall make provisions for archeological resources
                            accidentally discovered during construction, or when the City does
                            not have approval authority over the project, encourage the lead
                            agency to make such provisions. These provisions shall include an
                            immediate evaluation of the find and contingency funding and
                            time allotment sufficient to allow for the recovery of the
                            archeological resource or implement measures to avoid disturbing
                            the resource if the archeological resource is determined to be
                            unique.
                         e. In the event of discovery or recognition of any human remains in
                            any location other than a dedicated cemetery, the City shall halt
                            excavation or disturbance of the site or any nearby area
                            reasonably suspected to overlie adjacent human remains until the
                            County Coroner has been informed and has determined that no
San Jacinto General Plan              Appendix RM-6                             May 2006May 2006
                                                                    RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                   investigation of the cause of death is required. If the remains are
                                   of Native American origin, there shall be no further excavation or
                                   disturbance of the site or any nearby area reasonably suspected to
                                   overlie adjacent human remains until the descendants from the
                                   deceased Native Americans have made a recommendation to the
                                   landowner or the persons responsible for the excavation work, for
                                   means of treating or disposing of, with appropriate dignity, the
                                   human remains and any associated grave goods as provided in
                                   Public Resources Code section 5097.98, or the Native American
                                   Heritage Commission was unable to identify a descendant or the
                                   descendant failed to make a recommendation within 24 hours
                                   after being notified by the Commission.
                            f.     Prior to adopting any general plan, specific plan, or any
                                   amendment thereto, the City shall notify appropriate tribes of the
                                   opportunity for consultation for the purpose of preserving, or
                                   mitigating impacts to, cultural places located on land within the
                                   City’s jurisdiction that may be affected by the proposed plan or
                                   amendment.
                            g.     Prior to the adoption or substantial amendment of a general plan
                                   or specific plan, the City shall refer the proposed action to those
                                   tribes that are on the NAHC contact list and have traditional lands
                                   located within the City’s jurisdiction for a 45 day comment period.
                                   In addition, at least 10 days prior to a public hearing, the City
                                   shall send notice to tribes that have filed a written request for such
                                   notice.
                            h.     Prior to designating open space, the City shall consult with tribes if
                                   the affected land contains a cultural place and if the affected tribe
                                   has requested public notice under Government Code section
                                   65092.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 4.1, 4.4
                     RM-17  Promote public awareness and encourage tourism in the City by actively
Promote Historic Sites      identifying and enhancing the community’s many historic resources
                            through the location of historic landmark plaques and a Historic Tour
                            Guide.       Promote tours of these sites on the City’s and other
                            organization’s websites.
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix RM-7                              May 2006May 2006

                                                                  RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Redevelopment Agency, Estudillo Mansion
                            Committee
          Funding Source:   General Fund, redevelopment funds, private organization funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 4.3
                     RM-18  Continue to support the improvement and enhancement of the Estudillo
        Estudillo Mansion   Mansion and expand opportunities for public access and use of the
                            historic treasure.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Redevelopment Agency, Estudillo Mansion
                            Committee
          Funding Source:   General Fund, redevelopment funds, private organization funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4
                     RM-19  Develop and implement architectural standards and historical
       Downtown Historic    preservation guidelines for development and redevelopment in the
              Preservation  downtown core of the community.               Use housing and façade
                            rehabilitation programs to support development and redevelopment
                            activities that preserve and complement historic structures and resources
                            in the downtown.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Redevelopment Agency
          Funding Source:   General Fund, redevelopment funds, private organization funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 4.2
                     RM-20  Develop and implement programs and/or incentives to private property
        Historic Protection owners to help preserve, restore, or reuse historic structures while
      Incentive Programs    enhancing their historical significance and integrity.
                            Community Development, Redevelopment Agency
               Responsible  General Fund, redevelopment funds, private organization funds
    Agency/Department:      Develop and begin implementing programs by the end of 2008
          Funding Source:   4.1, 4.2, 4.4
              Time Frame:
          Related Policies:
                     RM-21  Conduct a historic properties inventory that takes into consideration
        Historic Properties buildings, neighborhoods, and other features of historic, architectural, or
                  Inventory cultural significance.
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix RM-8                           May 2006May 2006

                                                                    RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development, Redevelopment Agency
          Funding Source:    General Fund, redevelopment funds, private organization funds
              Time Frame:    Complete survey by the end of 2007
          Related Policies:  4.1
                             Agricultural Resources
                     RM-22   During both redevelopment and the development of new projects,
                Agricultural encourage the provision and maintenance of setbacks and buffers, such
             Compatibility   as roadways, topographic features, and open space, to prevent
                             incompatibilities between agricultural and non-agricultural land uses. A
                             number of factors shall be used to determine the appropriate buffer,
                             including type of agricultural use, topography, and pesticide and
                             machinery use, among others.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development
          Funding Source:    General Fund, project proponent
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  5.2
                     RM-23   Work with property owners and agricultural operations interested in
                Agricultural retaining agricultural land to identify feasible ways to maintain the land
             Conservation    in agricultural production. Encourage property owners to enroll in and
                             maintain their property in Williamson Act contracts. Apply agricultural
                             conservation easements to land desired by the City and the property
                             owner to remain as agricultural land.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:       Community Development
          Funding Source:    General Fund, project proponent
              Time Frame:    Ongoing
          Related Policies:  5.1, 5.2, 5.3
                             Air Quality
                     RM-24   The City, in cooperation with developers and SCAQMD, shall ensure
    Control Fugitive Dust    dust and particulate matter levels are reduced during construction
   and Particulate Matter    activities. Prior to the issuance of any grading permits, all project
                             applicants shall submit construction plans to the City denoting the
                             proposed schedule and projected equipment use.               Construction
                             contractors shall provide evidence that the low emission mobile
                             construction equipment that conforms to the requirements of SCAQMD
                             will be utilized or that their use was investigated and found to be
                             infeasible for the project. All construction shall comply with SCAQMD
                             Rules 402 and 403. Dust and particulate matter can be reduced by
                             implementing fugitive dust control measures such as:
San Jacinto General Plan                     Appendix RM-9                            May 2006May 2006
                                                                   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                            ¾ Reestablish groundcover on the construction site through seeding
                                and watering;
                            ¾ Schedule activities to minimize the amounts of exposed excavated
                                soil during and after the end of work periods;
                            ¾ Sweeping streets as necessary if silt is carried over to adjacent public
                                thoroughfares or occurs as a result of hauling;
                            ¾ Suspending grading operations during high winds;
                            ¾ Maintaining a minimum 24 inch freeboard on soils, haul trucks, or
                                cover payloads;
                            ¾ Restricting outdoor storage of fine particulate matter;
                            ¾ Providing tree buffers between residential and agricultural uses;
                            ¾ Monitoring construction and agricultural activities and emissions;
                            ¾ Paving areas used for vehicular maneuvering; and
                            ¾ Prohibiting parking or vehicle storage in unpaved areas
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2
                     RM-25  Continue to cooperate with the SCAQMD to implement the most recent
 South Coast Air Quality    Air Quality Management Plan to address regional motor vehicle
       Management Plan      emissions. In particular, coordinate with the SCAQMD and the
                            Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG), providing
                            technical assistance and demographic data when available, during the
                            development of future population projections by SCAG and the District.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, South Coast Air Quality Management District
                            (SCAQMD), SCAG
          Funding Source:   General Fund, federal and state funds
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.1
                     RM-26  Review development proposals for potential regional and local air
          CEQA Review of    quality impacts per the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). If
                   Projects potential impacts are identified, mitigation will be required to reduce the
                            impact to a level less than significant, where feasible.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, SCAQMD, SCAG
          Funding Source:   General Fund, federal and state funds, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.2
                     RM-27  Provide and maintain a network of bicycle and pedestrian trails that link
  Bicycle and Pedestrian    housing, schools, parks, and retail and employment centers to each
             Trail Network  other.
San Jacinto General Plan                   Appendix RM-10                             May 2006May 2006

                                                                  RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.6
                     RM-28  Reduce vehicular emissions by:
         Reduce Vehicular
                 Emissions  ¾ Improving traffic flow through synchronized traffic signals;
                            ¾ Increasing non-vehicular modes of transportation by working with
                                 the Riverside Transit Agency to develop a local transit system that
                                 provide efficient service and is connected to the regional transit
                                 system;
                            ¾ Improving parking design and management in public and private
                                 projects.
               Responsible  Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, Riverside Transit
    Agency/Department:      Agency, Caltrans
          Funding Source:   General Fund, State and federal funds, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.6
                     RM-29  Require development and redevelopment activities to comply with
   Best Available Control   applicable SCAQMD rules and to implement BACT for all new,
      Technology (BACT)     modified, or relocated stationary sources of air pollution.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, SCAQMD
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2, 6.4
                            Energy Conservation
                     RM-30  Implement energy conservation measures in public buildings through the
   Energy Efficient Public  following actions:
                  Buildings
                            ¾ Promote energy efficient buildings and site design for all new public
                                 buildings during the site development permit process; and
                            ¾ Install energy saving devices in new public buildings and retrofit
                                 existing public buildings.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, energy providers
          Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.5, 6.10, 7.1, 7.3
San Jacinto General Plan                    Appendix RM-11                            May 2006May 2006

                                                                   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                     RM-31  During the development review process, encourage innovative building
 Energy Efficient Building  design, layout, and orientation techniques to minimize energy use by
           and Site Design  taking advantage of sun/shade patterns, prevailing winds, landscaping
                  Features  and building materials that control energy usage, and solar design.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Development and Permit Services, energy providers
          Funding Source:   General Fund, utility companies
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.5, 6.10, 7.1, 7.2
                     RM-32  Promote retrofit programs by the City to reduce energy usage and
 Promote Energy Retrofit    consequently reduce emissions from energy consumption. Encourage
                 Programs   utility companies to provide informational literature about available
                            retrofit programs at City offices, the Permit Center, and libraries.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Development and Permit Services, energy providers
          Funding Source:   General Fund, utility companies
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 6.5, 6.10, 7.1
                     RM-33  Establish, update and implement City energy performance requirements
     Energy Performance     consistent with the requirements established under the California
             Requirements   Administrative Code Title 24 Energy Conservation and Insulation
                            Regulations.
               Responsible
    Agency/Department:      Development and Permit Services
          Funding Source:   General Fund
              Time Frame:   Ongoing
          Related Policies: 7.1
San Jacinto General Plan                   Appendix RM-12                             May 2006May 2006
                                                                         ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                                                                            Introduction
                                                    Arts and cultural activities are an essential part of a
                                                    healthy community life and they make significant
                                                    contributions to the quality of life in San Jacinto.
                                                    Community-based arts and culture help to create a
                                                    more livable city, enhance the urban environment,
                                                    celebrate the City’s history and natural environment,
                                                    engage a wide spectrum of citizens, provide significant
                                                    value both to communities and artists, and help define
                                                    who we are as a community. The Arts and Culture
                                                    Element represents a significant step forward to
                          demonstrate community pride and to create a desirable image for the City to
                          attract economic development. There is great potential to expand public art in
                          San Jacinto to the point where it becomes an identifying force for the
                          community and economic vitality of the City.
          PURPOSE OF THE  The purpose of the Arts and Culture Element is to describe the City’s existing
      ARTS AND CULTURE    arts and cultural resources, identify opportunities for arts enrichment, and define
                          goals, policies and implementation strategies to further integrate arts and
                  ELEMENT culture into the City’s future. Although it is not a State-required element, the City
                          is committed to supporting and expanding the local arts community and its
                          contributions to the quality of life in San Jacinto. The Arts and Culture Element
                          is consistent with the State of California Code (Section 65303) which grants
                          authority to local jurisdictions to adopt additional elements to those mandated
                          by State law when they relate to the physical development of the jurisdiction.
                          The Arts and Culture Element is included in this General Plan with the goal of
                          fostering a civic environment where artistic expression and cultural diversity can
                          flourish, where the influence of arts on the local economy is recognized, and
                          where local government and City leaders legitimize the arts as an essential
                          component of civic support, funding and decision-making.
   SCOPE AND CONTENT      The Arts and Culture Element is comprised of three sections: 1) Introduction; 2)
        OF THE ARTS AND   Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3) the Arts and Culture Plan. An appendix to the
                          element contains the Implementation Program. In the Issues, Goals and Policies
       CULTURE ELEMENT    section, major issues related to the increased role of arts and culture in
                          community life and economy of the City are identified, and related goals and
                          policies are established to address these issues. The goals, which are overall
                          statements of the community’s desires, are comprised of broad statements of
                          purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for maximizing the role the
                          City can play in encouraging and supporting the cultural development of the
                          community. The Plan explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and
                          implemented, while specific implementation programs for arts and culture are
                          contained in the appendix of this element.
       RELATED FACILITIES Incorporated in 1888, San Jacinto is one of the oldest cities in Riverside
              AND EVENTS  County. Built by the Estudillo family from the receipt of a Mexican land grant in
                          the 1860’s, San Jacinto has had a long history of involvement in the arts and
                          hosting of cultural events. This section identifies the locations of arts and
                          cultural facilities that are operated in the area. Figure AC-1 illustrates the
                          location of these facilities. This section also recognizes the local organizations
San Jacinto General Plan                          AC-1                                          December 2013

                                                                         ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                             involved in promoting the arts and artists, how long they have been in service,
                             the types of activities they engage in, their mission statements, and specific
                             programs and events that they sponsor.
     Estudillo Mansion and   The Francisco Estudillo Heritage Park is a 6-acre park located within the block
         Francisco Estudillo bounded by Main Street, Dillon Avenue, Ash Street and Seventh Street. It is the
              Heritage Park  site of the Estudillo Mansion, a two-story brick mansion located in its center,
                             which was constructed in 1885 by Francisco Estudillo. Francisco’s father, Jose
                             A. Estudillo, acquired all the land in San Jacinto Valley when he was deeded a
                             35,000 acre Mexican Land Grant in 1842. The park, mansion and a twin
                             mansion built by his brother Antonio Estudillo, near Soboba Hot Springs are all
                             that remain of the Mexican land grant.
                             The Estudillo Mansion remained in private ownership through 1992 when it was
                             seriously damaged in the Landers earthquake. Riverside County purchased the
                             property in 1994 and the ownership was transferred to the City in 1998. A
                             seismic retrofit of the Mansion was completed in 2000. In 2002, the Mansion
                             was placed on the National Register of Historic Places and on the California
                             Register of Historic Resources. The Francisco Estudillo Mansion Interior
                             Restoration Project was completed in 2008 and supported in part by a federal
                             Save America’s Treasures grant and a California Heritage Fund grant. Tours of
                             the restored interior are available on Saturdays.
                             The Mansion’s exterior restoration project included the addition of a pervious
                             concrete parking lot, a water conservation education garden and other
                             landscape improvements. The Water Conservation Education Garden is
                             intended to educate the community about the beauty and water saving benefits
                             of planting drought tolerant and native California plants. While the garden is
                             designed primarily with California native plants, there are also plants from
                             regions around the world that thrive in the Southern California climate.
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-2                                        December 2013

                                                                                      RA
                                                                                        M
                                                                                            ON
                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                     EX
                                                                                                          PY
                                                       M
                                                           IK
                                                             E
                                                                 R
                                                                     EE
                                                                          D
                                                                              R
                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                 RAMONA EXPY
                                              CH
                                                           RD
                                                       ITY                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                  AS T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TT                                                                                                                                                                                 SO
                                  PU
                                     L                                                                                                                                                                                 PO                                                                                                                                                                                                BO
                                    SA                   DUN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RECORD RD                                                                                                                BA
                                         R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                         VI                 CAN
                                             EW
                                                                 DR
                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QUANDT RANCH RD
                                                                                                                                BYRD ST                                                                                                                                                     SH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -7  9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mt. San Jacinto College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                             ODELL AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BL                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N                                                                                                                                             E                                                             AU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST              TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EE                                                                                                                                                                                                      BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AS                                                           RAMONA EXPY                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E                           LN                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Jacinto                                                                                               ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SAN JACINTO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Reservoir                                                     Mt. San Jacinto                                                       ID
                                                                                                                                                                                               SANDERSON AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                   l                                                                                                                                                                                    YL
                                                                                                                                                                               ana                                                                                                               Library                                                                    LW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BA RD
                                                                                                                                                                             aC                                                                                                                                                                                               IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                 Lom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SO BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAMINO LOS BANOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                         Cas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STATE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              into PY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RA
                                                                                                                                                                                  VERNAL ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Veterans Memorial at                                                                        KA                                                                                                                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LYON AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AT                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               COTTONWOOD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Druding Park                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             K   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FIRST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Virginia Lee                                                                                                                     Soboba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ALESSANDRO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Estudillo Mansion and
                                                                                                                                                                   CAWSTON AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ESTUDILLO AVE
                                                                                                                   WARREN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D                                                                                                                          Hotel                                                                                                                            Events
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Francisco Estudillo                                                         LO                                                                                                                          MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Heritage Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E                City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SIXTH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KIRBY ST
                                                                                                                               SEVENT H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Soboba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SEVENTH ST                                                                                                                                                                                             7TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cultural
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SANTA FE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto City                                                                                                          San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                    Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Museum                                                                                                                    Community Center
                                                                                                                                                                                 Esplanade                                                                  Valley-Wide                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NTH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                 Arts Center                                                                Regional Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STATE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VIL LIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESPLANADE AVE                                                                                                                                    ESPLANADE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E S AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VILLINES AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HEWITT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAN JACINTO AVE
    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WASHINGTON AVE
             River/Canal/Reservoirs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R            KA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VE
            San Jacinto City Boundary
            Central City Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Western
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Science
             Key Cultural, Historic and Art                                                                                                                                                                                                               Center                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ramona Bowl                                                    Idyllwild Arts
             Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Amphitheatre and Museum                                        Academy
Sources: County of Riverside GIS, City of San Jacinto, USGS
                                                                                                                   Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure AC-1
0                 3,150                       6,300                                                            12,600              North                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             San Jacinto Arts and Culture Element
San Jacinto General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AC-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        December 2013

                                                                         ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                             The Francisco Estudillo Heritage Park is the site of many city sponsored events;
                             most notable is the annual Agricultural Festival. Started in 2011, the Festival is
                             held every fall and includes concerts, entertainment, equestrian demos, small
                             animal auction, tractor display, vendors and food.
 San Jacinto City Museum     One of the only two municipal museums in Riverside County, the San Jacinto
                             City Museum is now housed in a City-owned building on the grounds of the
                             Francisco Estudillo Heritage Park. The Museum was founded in 1939 by the
                             San Jacinto’s Women’s Club and the Chamber of Commerce to display early
                             California and Indian artifacts. Local Indians’ relics, artifacts from pioneer
                             families, and material on the community, its businesses and institutions are
                             featured. The Museum also maintains a large collection of historic photographs
                             and memorabilia, which is available to researchers. A highlight of the exhibit is
                             a model of a Russian ANT-25 airplane that landed in San Jacinto in 1937 after
                             completing a non-stop transpolar 62 hour flight from Moscow, Russia. The
                             actual landing site, commemorated by a marker, is near the corner of
                             Cottonwood and Sanderson Avenues.
      San Jacinto Museum     Founded in 1978, the San Jacinto Museum Association is a non-profit
               Association   organization that manages volunteer and fundraising efforts at both the San
                             Jacinto Museum and the Estudillo Mansion. The Association also publishes a bi-
                             monthly newsletter. In 2005, the Association used their funds to purchase the
                             current building for the San Jacinto City Museum, which is located on the
                             grounds of Francisco Estudillo Heritage Park.
         Hispanic Heritage   Starting in September 2013, the City is organizing an annual Hispanic
                    Festival Heritage Festival on Main Street in downtown San Jacinto. The Festival will
                             feature dancing, music, food and fun for the entire family.
San Jacinto General Plan                           AC-5                                         December 2013

                                                                         ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
         Downtown Murals   Downtown San Jacinto boasts of several iconic murals that illustrate the San
                           Jacinto Mountains and several historic events and periods in the valley.
   Veteran’s Monument at   The Veteran's Monument at Druding Park is contained in a triangular-shaped
              Druding Park park that has many memorial plaques along with several pieces of military
                           equipment; the centerpiece being an Army tank. The various plaques honor the
                           service of the men and women who served in various wars including the World
                           War II, Vietnam War, and the Iraq War as well as those missing in action.
                           Other plaques honor local servicemen who served and sacrificed for their
                           country.
             Ramona Bowl,  The Ramona Bowl Amphitheatre, located on 160 acres in the south hills of
  Amphitheatre, Pageant,   Hemet, California, is a 5,400 seat natural amphitheater that aims to be the
              and Museum   regional center for arts and entertainment in the San Jacinto Valley. It is the
                           home of the Ramona Outdoor Play, formerly known as (and still commonly
                           called) the Ramona Pageant, an outdoor play staged annually since 1923. The
                           script is adapted from the 1884 novel Ramona by Helen Hunt Jackson. This
                           play runs over three consecutive weekends in April and May. The production
                           features cast of more than 300, made up largely of local residents and amateur
                           actors. The Ramona Pageant is the longest running outdoor play in the United
                           States and it is the official state play of the State of California. The Bowl also
                           hosts a variety of concerts and productions over the year.
San Jacinto General Plan                         AC-6                                           December 2013

                                                                          ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                             The Ramona Bowl has an Education Department that works with fourth grade
                             teachers and students to fulfill the California State Standards in history. The
                             Ramona Bowl offers a Summer Youth Theatre Program where children ages
                             5-18 have the opportunity to learn the basics of Musical Theatre.
                             The Ramona Bowl Museum has been operated since 1953 by the Ramona
                             Pageant Association, which has produced the annual Ramona Pageant since
                             1923. The Museum gives the history of the local tribes, the Bowl itself, the
                             Pageant and the story of Ramona.
                             The annual Ramona Pageant Parade starts at Druding Park on Ramona
                             Boulevard and ends at the Estudillo Mansion at 150 S. Dillon Avenue. It is a
                             kick-off to the three-week run of the Ramona Pageant at the Ramona Bowl. The
                             parade is sponsored by the city of San Jacinto, and was a staple along Florida
                             Avenue in Hemet for years before moving to San Jacinto in 2012.
      Ramona Bowl Music      The Ramona Bowl Music Association is a non-profit group that has hosted a
                 Association variety of musical performances at the Ramona Bowl including a summer
                             concert series. The music association is a separate group from the nonprofit
                             Ramona Bowl Amphitheatre Association that operates the facility and presents
                             the play Ramona.
  Ramona Hillside Players    Ramona Hillside Players is a local nonprofit live theater group in Hemet,
                             California that has entertained the San Jacinto Valley through comedy, drama
                             and the classics for over 70 years. The mission of the Ramona Hillside Players is
                             to promote quality entertainment offering creative live theatre productions;
                             providing a cradle for community theatre in the San Jacinto Valley; offering
                             opportunities for growth to actors and directors and providing mutually
                             satisfying theatre experiences for members and audiences.
          First Peoples Day  The Ramona Pageant Parade also serves as a prelude to a full day of activities
                             designated as First Peoples Day at Francisco Estudillo Heritage Park.
                             Sponsored by the City of San Jacinto, San Jacinto Chamber of Commerce, and
                             the Human Relations Council of the Greater Hemet, San Jacinto and Menifee
                             Region, the annual First Peoples Day is a celebration and awareness of the
                             diversity of the San Jacinto Valley during the time of Ramona — the late 1800's.
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-7                                       December 2013

                                                                       ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
 Human Relations Council   The Human Relations Council of the Greater Hemet, San Jacinto and
    of the Greater Hemet,  Menifee Regions was founded in 1998 and is a private nonprofit California
           San Jacinto and corporation dedicated to promoting interracial respect and positive human
            Menifee Region relations in our communities. The Council is one of the sponsors of the Ramona
                           Pageant Parade and First Peoples Day held annually in San Jacinto. It also
                           holds an Annual Black History Month Essay contest, essay contests for Middle
                           School and High School students, and an Undergraduate College Essay
                           Contest.
  Western Science Center   The Western Science Center (WSC) is a museum located near Diamond Valley
                           Lake in Hemet, California and is home to a large collection of Native American
                           artifacts and Ice Age fossils that were unearthed during the construction of the
                           Diamond Valley Lake in 1995. Opened in 2006, the museum has been
                           designed to provide world-class facilities for the research, curation, and
                           presentation of the nearly one million specimens discovered during the
                           development of Diamond Valley Lake. Among the archaeological finds was
                           "Max", the largest mastodon found in the western United States, and "Xena", a
                           Columbian mammoth, both of which are featured in the exhibits. Also featured
                           at the museum is "Li'l Stevie", one of the most complete mastodons known from
                           the western United States, who is displayed unreconstructed and still partially
                           buried as found when it was first uncovered.
                           The museum's public displays are housed in the permanent gallery, with another
                           gallery housing temporary and traveling exhibits. The permanent gallery
                           contains interactive exhibits on the natural history of Domenigoni and Diamond
                           Valleys, as well as displays on European and Native American culture and
                           history from the area. Among the artifacts on display are pieces donated by the
                           Domenigoni family, the original settlers of the valley, and the Soboba band of
                           Luiseño Indians that inhabited the area before them.
San Jacinto General Plan                         AC-8                                        December 2013

                                                                           ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                            The museum also features a full-scale simulated archaeology and paleontology
                            dig site, which opened for its first student excavations in the spring of 2009. It is
                            currently being used by WSC staff, in association with the local Hemet Unified
                            School District K-12 schools and Mt. San Jacinto Community College, to teach
                            proper excavation methodology to students. Other collaborators include the
                            California Cultural and Historical Endowment (CCHE), the Institute of Museum
                            and Library Services (IMLS), and the Western Center Community Foundation. It
                            is also open for museum visitors to view an active dig site in process.
                            The WSC also offers extensive educational opportunities for students, groups
                            and visitors including a popular school field trip program, hands-on workshops
                            and Discovery Lab experience, and a Saturday series that offers engaging and
                            informative talks on a wide variety of fascinating subjects. In 2008, the 33,000
                            square foot museum building was awarded LEED Platinum Status by the US
                            Green Building Council, their highest rating. It was also the first museum in the
                            United States to receive the recognition and was designed to be among the
                            most eco-friendly museums in the United States. Its special environmental
                            features include solar panels on the roof, cold-water pipelines that run below
                            the floor to reduce air conditioning, landscaping with low-irrigation native
                            foliage, and extensive water reclamation.
      Diamond Valley Arts   The Diamond Valley Arts Council (DVAC) is an umbrella organization
                    Council supporting the diversity of artistic and creative expression available in the San
                            Jacinto Valley community. Founded in 2004, DVAC’s primary purpose is
                            advancing the creative arts and cultural endeavors through strong community
                            relationships. Through partnerships with individuals, arts-related groups and
                            businesses as well as civic and governmental agencies, the DVAC develops
                            programs and creates opportunities that stimulate and enrich the cultural,
                            economic, and intellectual life of the community.
                            The DVAC is housed in the Esplanade Arts Center (EAC) in a 10,000 square
                            foot building and included an Art Gallery, Black Box Theater and Classroom
                            space. The EAC's Art Gallery rotates exhibits from local, regional, national and
                            international artists every two to three months. The DVAC, its affiliated
                            organizations and various other groups use the Black Box Theater for plays, live
                            music performances and special events. The Classroom space is utilized by
                            groups such as MUSICA!, which provides students of all ages free music
                            instruction, as well as by various touring groups for a wide variety of
                            educational programs for adults and children. Examples include art and music
                            summer camps for children and summer theater workshops and a dance
                            program for teens. In addition, The DVAC hosts the annual Festival of The Arts,
                            held at the Esplanade Arts Center on the third weekend in October. The DVAC
                            is striving to expand this festival and attract a greater audience.
San Jacinto General Plan                           AC-9                                          December 2013

                                                                          ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
           Soboba Band of    The Soboba Band of Luiseño Indians, one of seven bands of Luiseño Indians, is
            Luiseño Indians  located in the foothills of the San Jacinto Mountains. The southwest border of
                             the reservation lies along the San Jacinto River. The Soboba Indian Reservation
                             was established on June 19, 1883 by an Executive Order that set aside 3,172
                             acres of land for the Soboba Band of Luiseno Indians for their permanent
                             occupation and use.
  Soboba Cultural Center     The Soboba Cultural Center and Research Library is a growing repository for
     and Research Library    the tribe's cultural heritage through the preservation of oral histories, cultural
                             traditions, archival materials and objects of cultural, historical and artistic
                             significance to the people of Soboba. Established in 2003, the Soboba Culture
                             Center’s growing collections consist of over 900 books and resource materials
                             such as photos, maps, Southern California Cahuilla and Luiseño baskets, items
                             of natural resources and pamphlets as well as small educational replicas of
                             traditional objects. The Center also offers Soboba Indian language classes.
 Payomkawichum Soboba        The Pow Wow is held annually at the Soboba Event Center, which is located
           Inter-Traditional next to the Soboba casino. The Pow Wow hosts drum and dance contests as
                  Pow Wow    well as bird singing and dancing games.
   Ken Kreigh, Rock Artist   Ken Kreigh (pronounced Cree) was a well-known artist whose rock art was
                             quite in demand during his heyday of the 1940s and 1950s. He had an innate
                             love for rocks — he could find beauty in many of them, and constantly collected
                             various specimens, not necessarily with a geologist’s eye but with an artist’s eye.
                             What he could transform a pile of rocks into was much more important than
                             their chemical composition, formation or structure.
San Jacinto General Plan                           AC-10                                       December 2013

                                                                         ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                           Early in his career he worked as a gardener for various resorts in the Inland
                           Empire including Glenn Ranch in Lytle Creek, Call of the Canyon and the
                           Soboba Hot Springs resort. He also designed and built stonework for various
                           private residences. Kreigh also designed the entryway and façade from native
                           stone for a building on Main Street that later became the San Jacinto Museum.
                           Now demolished, the entryway and façade was a seminal example of his work.
                           An example of his work that still exists is at the Ramona Bowl in Hemet. It is the
                           grotto area just north of the entrance to the main seating area. Luckily, much of
                           that is still intact for people to enjoy during the annual Ramona Pageant every
                           spring in Hemet.
        Hemet Community    Hemet Community Concert Association is a non-profit, volunteer
       Concert Association organization dedicated to presenting the best live music to the residents of the
                           San Jacinto Valley and surrounding areas. The Association believes that live
                           concerts are an essential part of any community’s cultural landscape, even
                           more so when economic conditions are difficult. Hemet Community Concert
                           Association was founded in 1972; and over the ensuing decades, Hemet has
                           heard concerts by some of the world’s finest musicians, enriching the cultural
                           climate of our Valley. Since 2003, the Hemet Community Concert Association
                           has been an independent presenter, and has expanded its series to five concerts
                           each season - three classical, one jazz/pop and one folk/world – to reach its
                           diverse audience, which ranges from children to retirees.
    Valley Vocal Ensemble  The Valley Vocal Ensemble (formerly the Inland Chorale) is an independent
                           choral group which presents outstanding choral music at venues in the San
                           Jacinto Valley and surrounding areas. The Ensemble’s performances are held in
                           the spring and during the Christmas Holiday season. The concerts are
                           generally a mixture of serious classical works and contemporary music,
                           performed a capella and with instrumental accompaniment.
         Sand Drag Racing  The San Jacinto community is well known for its off-road culture and has a long
                           history of off-road motor sports. Sand drag races have been held in and
                           around San Jacinto since the early 1960's, at which time the organization
                           hosting off-road events was the Inland Dune Buggy Association. Several Baja
                           race teams have called the community home and base their operations out of
                           San Jacinto. In addition, the Hemet Jeep Club dates back to 1948 and had the
                           notoriety of being the test bed and marketing photo models for Ford's effort to
                           compete with Jeep when they introduced the Bronco. The Southern California
                           Sand Drag Association (SCDSA) holds annual events at the Soboba Casino’s
                           Outdoor Event Arena in San Jacinto. The Soboba Grand Prix has also been
                           held on and off for several decades. This race draws international racers and is
                           well known for the unique loomy soil conditions. The Soboba Invitational Trail
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-11                                    December 2013

                                                                           ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                             Ride is also a yearly event that dates back to the grass roots of modern dirt
                             bikes. Many motorcycle greats have participated in Soboba’s challenge. It
                             began in the early 70’s when Benny Helm, then Chief of the Tribe, started the
                             first Soboba Grand Prix.
   Valley-Wide Recreation    The Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District provides recreation and park
           and Park District services to residents within an 800-square-mile area. These boundaries
                             encompass Hemet, San Jacinto, Valle Vista, Sage, Aguanga, Winchester,
                             Menifee, and French Valley.
                             Valley-Wide offers a large selection of recreation programs for members of the
                             community. Classes include music and dance classes for children and adults,
                             theater and drama classes, arts and crafts activities, fitness and exercise classes,
                             pre-school classes for infants and toddlers, as well as martial arts classes
                             among others. In addition, the District hosts the weekly classes and annual
                             woodcarving show of the Ramona-Country Carvers, a woodcarving club now in
                             its thirtieth year. The District also hosts numerous special events such as 4th of
                             July festivities, Easter Egg Hunt, Halloween Carnival, crafts shows, winter
                             holiday celebrations and family fun nights.
                             The headquarters for Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District is located at the
                             36-acre Valley-Wide Regional Park in San Jacinto. The park also is the home to
                             a 22,000 square foot sports center, lighted sports fields and picnic areas.
  Mt. San Jacinto College    Mt. San Jacinto College (MSJC) is a comprehensive community college that is
                             part of California’s 112-community college system. A single college District,
                             MSJC serves a 1,700-square mile area from the San Gorgonio Pass to
                             Temecula. MSJC consists of two large campuses: one located in San Jacinto
                             (San Jacinto Campus) and one in Menifee (Menifee Valley Campus). In
                             addition, classes are offered at a campus in Banning (San Gorgonio Pass
                             Campus) and a smaller facility located in Temecula (Temecula Education
                             Complex). Classes are also held at numerous satellite locations, such as local
                             high schools. Many courses are also offered online. Since enrolling its first
                             students in the fall of 1963, MSJC now enrolls over 7,000 students each
                             semester. Salient class offerings include art, sculpture, music, drama, and
                             dance. Other ways to benefit from arts and culture include the MSJC Symphony
                             Orchestra, Golden Eagles Band, and the Jazz Ensemble, among others.
                             MSJC's art gallery, located on the San Jacinto Campus, holds art exhibitions
                             and shows films about art. It showcases work by students and local artists, as
                             well as work by internationally recognized artists. The art gallery is a popular
                             spot on campus, receiving several hundred visitors every month. Film screenings
                             are usually free and open to the general public.
                             There are many musical, theatrical, and dance performances on both the
                             Menifee Valley Campus and the San Jacinto Campus each semester. The
                             performing arts departments publish brochures each academic year to inform
                             students of upcoming productions. World cinema screenings are held regularly
                             at the Menifee Valley Campus. Films from around the world are shown at the
                             Learning Resource Center. Films are selected with emphasis on the languages
                             that are taught at MSJC, such as French and Spanish.
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-12                                        December 2013

                                                                          ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
       San Jacinto Unified   The San Jacinto Unified School District area is served by seven elementary,
             School District two middle and two high schools. It also has San Jacinto Leadership Academy,
                             a magnet middle school and Mt. Heights Academy that serves students in
                             grades 6th through 12th. San Jacinto Valley Academy is a charter school
                             located in the City of San Jacinto with over 600 students enrolled. Both the
                             District and the charter school offer active programs in music, band, choir,
                             vocals, theatre, art, dance and other artistic professions. Cooperative programs
                             and projects with the schools can help capitalize on cultural opportunities and
                             create relationships within the arts community. An iconic image for the
                             community is the lighting of the “S” on North Mountain during San Jacinto High
                             graduation and homecoming games.
   Idyllwild Arts Academy    Located 25 miles from the heart of San Jacinto, the Idyllwild Arts Academy is a
                             premier and internationally-acclaimed residential arts high school that provides
                             pre-professional training in the arts and a comprehensive college preparatory
                             curriculum to a diverse student body. Idyllwild Arts Academy's 300 students hail
                             from more than 25 countries and pursue artistic excellence in music, theatre,
                             dance, visual art, creative writing, moving pictures, and fashion design. An
                             associated program, the Idyllwild Arts Summer Program, provides arts
                             instruction and arts immersion workshops to a diverse student population of all
                             ages and abilities. Nearly 2,000 children, youth, adults and families from the
                             San Jacinto Valley area participate in the diverse summer program featuring
                             workshops in all the arts and specifically tailored to all proficiency levels and
                             ages. The Summer Program provides intensive practical instruction in all the
                             visual arts and performing arts including sculpture, painting, photography,
                             ceramics, jewelry, Native American arts, moving pictures, fashion design,
                             dance, music, theatre and creative writing.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER        The Arts and Culture Element must be consistent with the other General Plan
                             elements. While all of the elements are interdependent, they are also
GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
                             interrelated to a degree. Certain goals and policies of each element may also
                             address issues that are the primary subjects of other elements. The integration
                             of overlapping issues throughout the General Plan provides a strong basis for
                             the implementation of plans, programs and achievement of community goals.
                             The Arts and Culture Element most closely relates to the Land Use, Community
                             Services and Facilities, and Resource Management Elements.
                             The Land Use Element provides a planned land use pattern with the following
                             general land use designation categories: Public/Institutional, Commercial,
                             Industrial, Residential, and Open Space. The Open Space and Open Space –
                             Recreation designations are applied to public and private land that is intended
                             for conservation, open space and recreational uses. These designations are
                             typically applied to areas that have an abundance of natural, visual and historic
                             resources. The Land Use Element and the Arts and Culture Element also both
                             focus on the rejuvenation of the City’s downtown area by the enhancement of
                             the area’s cultural resources and historical environment. Both Elements also
                             discuss the role arts and culture can play in the economic vitality of the City.
                             The Community Services and Facilities Element relates to the Arts and Culture
                             Element in that both Elements work with the local School Districts and Mt. San
                             Jacinto College to provide satisfactory public education and an appropriate
                             exposure to the visual and performing arts. Both Elements also incorporate the
                             need for a close working relationship with the Valley-Wide Recreation and Park
                             District and San Jacinto Library to provide recreational opportunities and classes
                             related to the arts.
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-13                                        December 2013

                                                                      ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                          The Arts and Culture Element is interrelated with the Resource Management
                          Element; they both call for the promotion of cultural awareness through the
                          preservation of the City’s pre-historical and historical resources including the
                          Estudillo Mansion and Heritage Park. The Resource Management Element also
                          addresses the existing and future recreational facilities at the Valley-Wide
                          Regional Park. In addition, the Resource Management Element Implementation
                          Program includes the need for compliance with CEQA and sensitivity with
                          regard to the potential presence of cultural, historic and pre-historic artifacts
                          and structures in the City.
             COMMUNITY    The Arts and Culture Element is interrelated with the Resource Management
                          Element; they both call for the promotion of cultural awareness through the
            PARTICIPATION preservation of the City’s pre-historical and historical resources including the
                          Estudillo Mansion and Heritage Park. The Resource Management Element also
                          addresses the existing and future recreational facilities at the Valley-Wide
                          Regional Park. In addition, the Resource Management Element Implementation
                          Program includes the need for compliance with CEQA and sensitivity with
                          regard to the potential presence of cultural, historic and pre-historic artifacts
                          and structures in the City. The Arts and Culture Element of the General Plan
                          was prepared with significant community outreach and participation. Input was
                          obtained at a Community Workshop held on June 25, 2013, where residents,
                          property owners, businesses, and interested parties provided input through
                          group discussion and feedback on the topics and direction of the Element. The
                          public was invited to express their thoughts and ideas regarding issues and
                          opportunities for arts and culture in San Jacinto.
                          In addition, a Focus Group Meeting was held with key leaders and stakeholders
                          in the arts community. Participants included representatives from the Diamond
                          Valley Arts Council, San Jacinto Museum Association, City Council, several arts
                          organizations in Hemet, as well as several local artists. The focus group meeting
                          generated significant dialogue and provided valuable direction during the
                          preparation of the Arts and Culture Element.
                          Objectives obtained from the Community Workshop and Focus Group Meeting
                          included:
                                  Gaining an understanding of the community’s goals, visions, and plans
                                   for public art in San Jacinto;
                                  Identifying resources, events, and facilities that collectively form the arts
                                   and cultural community within San Jacinto;
                                  Identifying issues and opportunities from community leaders and the
                                   public;
                                  Brainstorming the role of public art in catalytic revitalization projects in
                                   San Jacinto; and
                                  Establishing a foundation of understanding to incorporate the values,
                                   knowledge and ideas of the community into the Arts and Culture
                                   Element.
                          Two public hearings were held on the Arts and Culture Element by the Planning
                          Commission and City Council. Notification was published in the local
                          newspaper in advance of the public workshop and each hearing, and direct
                          notices were mailed to interested individuals.
San Jacinto General Plan                        AC-14                                           December 2013

                                                                         ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                                                    Issues, Goals, and Policies
                                                     The Arts and Culture Element is intended to optimize the
                                                     role for arts and culture in San Jacinto by addressing
                                                     issues and opportunities that may affect how the arts
                                                     and cultural programs are integrated into the community
                                                     fabric and economy of the City. The goals and policies
                                                     herein maximize the role the City can play in
                                                     encouraging and supporting the artistic and cultural
                                                     development of the community. In addition, the goals
                                                     and policies for arts and culture serve to fulfill the
                                                     provisions of the City’s Vision Statement.
                           Four major issues are addressed by the goals, policies, and implementation
                           actions of the Arts and Culture Element. These key issues include: 1) the
                           increasing role of arts and culture in the City and the opportunities associated
                           with City leadership, coordination, and funding sources; 2) identifying
                           opportunities for revitalization of Downtown through the arts; 3) using arts and
                           culture to promote economic development, including increased tourism to the
                           City; and 4) promoting and supporting the arts and cultural opportunities
                           offered by the educational institutions and increasing the role of arts in
                           education.
    ARTS AND CULTURE IN    The arts are a part of San Jacinto’s social fabric, helping to define who we are
                  OUR CITY
                           as a community and creating situations not only for enjoyment, but also for
                           dialogue, thought and growth. As described previously in this Element, San
                           Jacinto has had a long history of involvement in the arts and is home to
                           significant historic, cultural and art resources. This Element intends to build
                           upon these assets by further encouraging the arts as a community asset,
                           identifying the arts as an economic resource, and ensuring display of art in
                           public places.
                           Arts and Culture Goal 1: Create an improved sense of community through
                           the integration of the arts into our civic identity through cultural programs,
                           facilities and events, and all aspects of the arts.
                           Policy 1.1:        Officially recognize on a regular basis the contributions arts
                                              make to the quality of life in San Jacinto as a powerful and
                                              effective means of both giving the arts their due and
                                              demonstrating City leadership in supporting the arts.
                           Policy 1.2:        Provide access to the arts and cultural resources for all
                                              neighborhoods, cultural and ethnic communities, and
                                              segments of the city and its populations so that all people may
                                              create and enjoy the arts.
                           Policy 1.3:        Support community-based arts organizations, which make
                                              significant contributions to the San Jacinto community; and
                                              expand partnerships and support for arts organizations where
                                              feasible to ensure their long-term vitality and continued
                                              benefits to the community.
San Jacinto General Plan                          AC-15                                         December 2013

                                                                         ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         Policy 1.4:        Develop, maintain, nurture and promote cultural and artistic
                                            awareness, expression and diversity as a way to enhance the
                                            quality of life for residents and visitors.
                         Policy 1.5:        Preserve and promote an understanding of San Jacinto’s rich
                                            heritage of cultural diversity. Continue to collaborate with the
                                            Soboba Band of Luiseño Indians and other local groups to
                                            highlight the city’s living history.
                         Policy 1.6:        Explore opportunities to accommodate current or emerging
                                            cultural arts programs within existing and new facilities by
                                            working with community groups for sharing of performance
                                            and exhibit space and considering the potential for new
                                            facilities.
                         Policy 1.7:        Encourage the incorporation of public art into major public
                                            and commercial projects that enhance the City’s community
                                            character as well as its built environment.
                         Policy 1.8:        Strive for the highest standards in the design of public
                                            buildings and spaces, as well as of amenities placed in the
                                            public right of way.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-1 through
                         AC-4, AC-6 through AC-9, AC-12 through AC-14
                         Arts and Culture Goal 2: Provide City leadership in support of the arts and
                         cultural institutions/facilities and promote the inclusion of artistic/aesthetic
                         considerations in local decision-making.
                         Policy 2.1:        Consider establishing a diverse Arts Commission that advises
                                            the City Council on matters pertaining to the City's arts and
                                            cultural programs including the planning, development, and
                                            provision of arts and cultural programs, facilities, and services.
                         Policy 2.2:        Involve and engage community members and neighborhood
                                            groups in the arts to promote arts and culture throughout the
                                            community.
                         Policy 2.3:        Promote the use of City-owned facilities for arts programming.
                         Policy 2.4:        Support the provision of staff resources for arts programming,
                                            coordination and funding.
                         Policy 2.5:        Assist artists and arts organizations in attaining ownership or
                                            long-term control of arts spaces, through incentives or other
                                            means.
                         Policy 2.6:        Identify opportunities for small event/performance space and
                                            exhibit/gallery space (artist incubator space) for local artists.
                         Policy 2.7:        Promote the establishment of a Valley-wide transportation
                                            network of cultural facilities and events, such as an "Arts
                                            Shuttle" that links the major arts facilities in San Jacinto and
                                            surrounding communities.
San Jacinto General Plan                        AC-16                                          December 2013

                                                                     ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         Policy 2.8:      Develop an ongoing arts-related communication strategy that
                                          provides regular media coverage of the arts and culture in the
                                          City of San Jacinto, including events, facilities, programs, and
                                          educational activities.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-3, AC-4,
                         AC-7, AC-8, AC-10, AC-12 through AC-14, AC-16
                         Arts and Culture Goal 3: Increase funding support for the arts in San
                         Jacinto.
                         Policy 3.1:      Assist in the development of new funding sources for arts and
                                          other organizations with arts programs that have traditionally
                                          not received City funding.
                         Policy 3.2:      Explore opportunities for long-term funding the arts (e.g.,
                                          consider various types of City fees as a way to fund arts) and
                                          maintaining long-term viability of arts programs.
                         Policy 3.3:      Determine the means to provide in-kind resources and services
                                          to the arts, including equipment, materials, security, space and
                                          the reduction of City-imposed fees.
                         Policy 3.4:      Through mutual programs and public-private partnerships,
                                          expand existing and forge new opportunities for corporate and
                                          business support of artistic and cultural activities.
                         Policy 3.5:      Support the efforts of non-profit, private and community
                                          organizations to apply for public and private grants and
                                          promote donations to support art, cultural, and literary
                                          activities.
                         Policy 3.6:      Promote and support volunteer opportunities for public
                                          involvement in arts, cultural, and literary programs and events.
                         Policy 3.7:      Provide clear review criteria and public input for all allocations
                                          of public money supporting the arts.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-3 through
                         AC-7, AC-16
                         Arts and Culture Goal 4: Establish a stand-alone Art in Public Places
                         (Percent for Arts) Program in San Jacinto to enhance the City’s image and
                         emphasize its distinctive character.
                         Policy 4.1:      Encourage the development of a coordinated, flexible citywide
                                          "Percent of Arts" program for new development to provide
                                          public art or spaces for art as part of development projects.
                         Policy 4.2:      Encourage the development of arts program objectives, and
                                          provide standards and guidelines for the installation of public
                                          art. Address issues of artist selection, project siting, funding,
                                          etc.
San Jacinto General Plan                      AC-17                                           December 2013

                                                                        ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         Policy 4.3:       Through the Percent for Arts program, create opportunities for
                                           public art donations, and for working with local artists,
                                           students, and community groups to create public art projects.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-6
   ARTS AND CULTURE IN   Although in need of revitalization, Downtown San Jacinto is the historic,
                         pedestrian-friendly center of our City. Many cities across the nation use arts and
        OUR DOWNTOWN
                         culture as a catalyst to boost their economies and renew their downtowns. Since
                         the 1960s, many cities have approached revitalization of urban areas with the
                         rehabilitation and new construction of historic, cultural, and arts facilities.
                         Cultural and art facilities tend to attract more residents, tourists and employees
                         to the area, provide employment opportunities through support services to the
                         arts, expand the tax base, increase property values, enhance the image of the
                         community, and beautify the area. With the existing arts resources, historic
                         buildings, and attractive infrastructure, San Jacinto can use the arts to help
                         revitalize Downtown.
                         Arts and Culture Goal 5: Create a cultural and artistic center of interest in
                         Downtown San Jacinto.
                         Policy 5.1:       Develop Downtown San Jacinto as the art and cultural heart
                                           of the City. Encourage the preservation, renovation and reuse
                                           of the downtown area’s historic structures and cultural facilities
                                           such as the Virginia Lee Hotel.
                         Policy 5.2:       Promote arts and culture as a key component of downtown
                                           revitalization. Incorporate compatible uses in the upcoming
                                           Downtown Specific Plan.
                         Policy 5.3:       Consider the establishment of an Arts and Cultural District
                                           either as a stand-alone ordinance or as a part of the
                                           upcoming Specific Plan. This district could incorporate access
                                           to art facilities, locations for permanent and temporary public
                                           art, banner programs, future facilities and associated parking,
                                           and/or support for arts and cultural activities into its
                                           programming.
                         Policy 5.4:       Consider preparing a long-term plan for the Estudillo Mansion
                                           and Heritage Park and its surrounding area to fully leverage
                                           this important historic and cultural resource within the City.
                         Policy 5.5:       Find a new permanent location for the San Jacinto Museum
                                           either in the Downtown or another suitable location in the
                                           City.
                         Policy 5.6:       For large-scale arts and cultural events in Downtown, consider
                                           an off-site shuttle system to transport visitors to and from
                                           Downtown.
                         Policy 5.7:       Build on previous improvements, such as upgraded
                                           streetscapes and lighting, to further enhance the Downtown
                                           environment.
San Jacinto General Plan                        AC-18                                          December 2013

                                                                       ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-11 through
                         AC-14, AC-17, AC-18
                         Arts and Culture Goal 6: Create a cultural and performing arts facility in
                         Downtown San Jacinto.
                         Policy 6.1:        Study the long term feasibility of a performing arts center in
                                            San Jacinto. Identify potential locations, programming and
                                            parking needs, potential joint use partners, and funding
                                            options.
                         Policy 6.2:        Support Mt. San Jacinto College’s efforts to build a new
                                            performing arts center.
                         Policy 6.3:        Coordinate with the Mt. San Jacinto College to study the
                                            potential of locating their center Downtown to allow for joint
                                            use by the College, Diamond Valley Arts Council and the
                                            community.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-8, AC-15
            ARTS AND THE With San Jacinto’s historic and cultural foundation as one of the oldest cities in
                ECONOMY
                         Riverside County, and its strong potential for the future, the arts can be a major
                         industry with a significant impact on the City’s economy. There is opportunity to
                         expand art and culture as one of the City’s economic development strategies.
                         This requires creating the environment necessary for arts and culture to further
                         develop as an economic engine.
                         Arts and Culture Goal 7: Build on the arts and cultural assets of San Jacinto
                         to establish a positive image and business environment.
                         Policy 7.1:        Increase awareness of the public benefits of the arts by
                                            recognizing and promoting the arts, artists, performing arts,
                                            and cultural organizations as valuable resources of our
                                            community for economic vitality and tourism.
                         Policy 7.2:        Continue to sponsor festivals and events to provide
                                            opportunities to draw the community together and welcome
                                            visitors to share in the City’s unique celebrations and enhance
                                            the City’s economic health.
                         Policy 7.3:        Promote arts and culture as a tool to enhance economic well-
                                            being. The local economy can benefit from employment
                                            opportunities, an expanded tax base and increased property
                                            values.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-12, AC-19,
                         AC-20
                         Arts and Culture Goal 8: Encourage and promote opportunities for the arts
                         and artists to contribute to the economic development of San Jacinto.
                         Policy 8.1:        Include the arts as a part of the City’s economic development
                                            strategic planning.
San Jacinto General Plan                         AC-19                                        December 2013

                                                                       ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         Policy 8.2:        Encourage culturally-based retail establishments and eateries
                                            that reflect our community’s diversity.
                         Policy 8.3:        Consider developing an incentive program to grow the
                                            capacity of local artists and arts organizations.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-11, AC-16,
                         AC-19
                         Arts and Culture Goal 9: Leverage San Jacinto’s cultural diversity and
                         historical legacy to establish a unique, marketable identity for the city and
                         promote cultural tourism.
                         Policy 9.1:        Recognize and promote the arts, artists, performing arts, and
                                            cultural organizations as valuable resources of our community
                                            for economic vitality and tourism.
                         Policy 9.2:        Continue to support and increase the promotion of the arts
                                            and arts activities throughout the City for the benefit of visitors,
                                            tourists, and residents.
                         Policy 9.3:        Feature arts and culture as a major element in the City’s
                                            tourism strategy, especially through efforts that promote and
                                            market San Jacinto’s unique cultural and historic resources.
                         Policy 9.4:        Capitalize on the newly established Visit San Jacinto Valley
                                            tourism program and associated website to attract new
                                            visitors, both national and international.
                         Policy 9.5:        Collaborate with the other Visit San Jacinto Valley tourism
                                            program partners to create a valley wide comprehensive
                                            wayfinding and signage program for the arts and cultural
                                            facilities in the Valley.
                         Policy 9.6:        Establish the City of San Jacinto as an arts and cultural
                                            community in the San Jacinto Valley through destination
                                            marketing techniques and through the use of locally
                                            recognizable arts landmarks and information centers.
                         Policy 9.7:        Consider the establishment of a Sister City Association and
                                            other cultural exchange programs to broaden the City’s
                                            appeal and reach and encourage tourism.
                         Policy 9.8:        Collaborate with organizations including the Southern
                                            California Sand Drag Association (SCSDA) to promote events
                                            through the Visit San Jacinto Valley tourism program.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-12 through
                         AC-14, AC-19 through AC-23
 THE ARTS IN EDUCATION   As a community, the citizens of San Jacinto understand the value of
                         incorporating the arts and cultural activities into education. Numerous studies
                         provide evidence of enhanced learning and achievement when the arts are a
                         vital part of students’ educational experience. Art also helps students connect to
San Jacinto General Plan                         AC-20                                        December 2013

                                                                       ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         their school and community, promoting civic engagement. There are many
                         opportunities for the City to partner with local educational institutions to
                         facilitate and promote the arts and cultural curricula and activities within the
                         schools, as well as integrate those activities into the community.
                         Arts and Culture Goal 10: Increase public awareness of the arts in San
                         Jacinto by greater promotion of existing art programs and services in the
                         community and schools.
                         Policy 10.1:      Advocate for multi-cultural arts education opportunities for all
                                           residents including children, youth, adults and seniors of San
                                           Jacinto.
                         Policy10.2:       Focus on arts education for elementary school children as a
                                           way to integrate the tradition of arts involvement into the very
                                           young.
                         Policy 10.3:      Strengthen collaborations among artists, arts organizations,
                                           and teachers, school administrators, and others responsible
                                           for arts curricula, especially in context of the newly adopted
                                           statewide academic Common Core Standards.
                         Policy 10.4:      Support and increase the participation of artists in San
                                           Jacinto’s arts education programs as well as mentorship
                                           programs.
                         Policy 10.5:      Support the efforts and dedication of arts teachers who have
                                           developed and maintained outstanding programs in the
                                           schools.
                         Policy 10.6:      Coordinate with the School Districts, Mt. San Jacinto College,
                                           Valley Wide Recreation and Park District among other
                                           interested organizations to increase the utilization of cultural
                                           and recreational opportunities available in the community by
                                           children and youth.
                         Policy 10.7:      Explore funding from new sources in the community in order to
                                           maintain K-12 arts education programs when the state faces
                                           budget cuts in education.
                         Policy 10.8:      Promote the creation of greater partnerships between
                                           government, business and education that help underwrite and
                                           develop additional arts programs for K-12 students.
                         Related Arts and Culture Element Implementation Programs: AC-2, AC-8,
                          AC-24
San Jacinto General Plan                       AC-21                                        December 2013

                                                                          ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                                                              Arts and Culture Plan
                                                     The arts are a part of San Jacinto’s social fabric, helping
                                                     to define who we are as a community and creating
                                                     situations not only for enjoyment, but also for dialogue,
                                                     thought and growth. As described previously, San
                                                     Jacinto has had a long history of involvement in the arts
                                                     and is home to significant historic, cultural and art
                                                     resources. This Element builds upon these assets by
                                                     further supporting the arts as a community asset,
                                                     identifying the arts as an economic resource, and
                                                     encouraging display of art in public places.
                          Nonetheless, becoming a recognized center for the arts requires a concerted
                          effort to create conducive environment for the arts. This is accomplished
                          through the presentation of works by artists, artisans, and performers. It is also
                          achieved by creating local support for the arts. In addition, local businesses
                          have a tremendous opportunity to tie into the arts and culture economic engine
                          by continuing to display historical depictions, murals, sculpture, paintings, or
                          other works of arts, as well as engage in cultural activities and events.
                          Architecture, landscaping, open space and trails also reflect various aspects of
                          the City’s artistic history, culture, and creativity.
   ARTS AND CULTURE IN    There are several citywide issues and opportunities related to arts and culture
                 OUR CITY that were identified by stakeholders involved in the community outreach
                          process:
                                  There is limited funding available for arts and cultural organizations.
                                   New funding sources and means to leverage arts facilities and events
                                   need to be identified.
                                  The community has considerable underutilized spaces and facilities that
                                   can be used for art and cultural events. The initial focus of
                                   implementation should be to utilize available resources and facilities to
                                   expand arts and culture in our community, particularly for uses such as
                                   galleries and artist incubator space. The vacant City-owned Virginia
                                   Lee Hotel structure on Main Street is one such example. At the same
                                   time, however, to become a forerunner in the arts, the City needs to
                                   also maintain a long-term perspective regarding facilities and
                                   programs in order to capitalize on future demand and future funding
                                   opportunities.
                                  There is a valley-wide need for better linkages between community
                                   facilities, including art and cultural facilities. There is currently limited
                                   signage, and the paths of travel to current facilities, such as the
                                   Ramona Bowl and the Soboba Event Center, need improvements. The
                                   City should work with the City of Hemet and the County to create a
                                   unified way finding system to the various art and cultural facilities the
                                   Valley has to offer. In addition, the City should work with the County on
                                   improvements to roads and streetscapes to improve the paths of travel
                                   between facilities.
San Jacinto General Plan                          AC-22                                         December 2013

                                                                       ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                 There is a need for a performing arts center in the San Jacinto Valley,
                                  both to serve the local community and to help make the San Jacinto
                                  Valley a destination. A small to medium-sized, well-managed facility,
                                  similar to those in Temecula, Riverside and Palm Springs, would be
                                  ideal for attracting visitors to the San Jacinto Valley. One idea for a
                                  future performing arts center would be to locate a new facility in
                                  Downtown San Jacinto. Other potentials include working with Mt. San
                                  Jacinto College to create a joint-use facility, or coordinating at a
                                  valley-wide level to expand the facilities at the Ramona Bowl, which is
                                  unique to the San Jacinto Valley and has significant community
                                  identification.
                                 There is a strong commitment in the community to continue providing
                                  an educational aspect to the arts by using arts and cultural events and
                                  festivals to convey, reflect and showcase the history and diversity of San
                                  Jacinto and the Valley. Collaborating with the Soboba Band of Luiseño
                                  Indians in this regard will be particularly important.
                                 There is also a strong commitment to support local working artists. As
                                  awareness and recognition grows of the significant role the creative
                                  and cultural industries play in contributing to economic wellbeing,
                                  vehicles for fostering and developing these sectors by supporting local
                                  artists also grow. Successful programs used in other cities include: Arts
                                  Incubators – the provision of arts incubator space, where the City
                                  acquires the space first to make it available to artists before rents begin
                                  to increase as an area revitalizes; and Artist-in-Residence programs,
                                  wherein the City provides an artist low cost or rent-free space to
                                  demonstrate his/her work. In some cases, artists are invited from other
                                  locations on a temporary basis to foster cultural exchange.
                                 In order to create a community that will be dedicated to fostering arts
                                  and culture in the future, there is a need increase interactive arts
                                  education programs aimed at children so that the arts are integral to
                                  their growth and development and part of their community experience.
                                  There needs to be more artistic participation by children throughout the
                                  San Jacinto Valley.
                                 San Jacinto has significant resources in its parks and open space.
                                  There is opportunity to better integrate arts programs into the City’s
                                  parks and further coordinate with Valley-Wide Recreation and Park
                                  District (VWRPD) on future arts programming. In addition, San Jacinto
                                  has significant natural open space and trails. Art should be
                                  incorporated into the natural landscape, particularly along designated
                                  trails such as the Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail that runs
                                  through the city.
                         City Leadership
                         An initial step in increasing arts and culture in the City is to provide the
                         necessary leadership to maintain and expand the role of City government in the
                         arts. The adoption and implementation of strategies of this Arts and Culture
                         Element in the General Plan is a first step in this commitment.
                         The City should facilitate, in partnership with artists, businesses and
                         organizations, such as the Diamond Valley Arts Council (DVAC) and the
San Jacinto General Plan                        AC-23                                        December 2013

                                                                     ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         Soboba tribe, the integration of arts and culture into the City’s overall economy.
                         This creates a climate in which the arts are a part of the City’s character and its
                         growing economy. It is crucial to have City leadership and support, economic
                         commitment to arts and on-going City Council recognition of arts policy.
                         Increasing coordination among arts organizations to promote citywide
                         understanding and commitment to the arts and raise the potential for new,
                         creative funding options is also a priority. Increased coordination will help
                         create linkages, both programmatically and physically, between local arts
                         facilities, venues, and open spaces and encourage complementary activities
                         and programs.
                         Arts Commission
                         To help facilitate City leadership and involvement in the arts, the City should
                         consider the establishment of an Arts Commission. An Arts Commission is an
                         advisory body to the City Council that aims to develop, promote, and
                         coordinate the arts at the community level. Arts Commissions provide
                         leadership in cultural services, including information and resources for the
                         community, artists, educators, developers and arts organizations. They also help
                         foster public and private partnerships for providing arts and cultural programs
                         and oversee Art in Public Places (Percent for Arts) programs.
                         In addition, there is a need for a City-staff person, whose role would be to
                         manage the Arts Commission, coordinate all of the arts programs, and provide
                         grant writing to support all of the local arts and cultural organizations. This
                         position could also be a shared position with DVAC. Additional duties for this
                         position could include exploring new funding potentials for the arts, project
                         management experience with artwork installation and fabrication, providing
                         media advice, creating arts educational materials, and overseeing dedications
                         and ceremonies of art installations and artist recognition programs.
                         Funding for the Arts
                         The lack of financial resources and financial stability is a constant and
                         debilitating concern for the arts. It has long been acknowledged that the non-
                         profit arts cannot be entirely self-supporting. The challenge is to develop new
                         sources of funding and to strengthen existing sources of support for the arts. The
                         potential for expanded local government support is being examined throughout
                         the country, as municipalities look for ways of securing funds for the arts in new,
                         non-traditional ways. Fees, levies, and fees for services are being re-examined,
                         and, at the same time, public-private partnerships are being explored with a
                         new understanding of the mutual benefits the arts and commerce/business
                         bring each other.
                         Several ways the City can explore increased funding for the arts are to:
                                   Identify means to increase the provision of in-kind resources and
                                    services to the arts, including equipment, materials, security, and
                                    space.
                                   Explore and secure new sources of revenue for the arts and cultural
                                    organizations through grants, development impact fees, and public-
                                    private partnerships.
San Jacinto General Plan                         AC-24                                      December 2013

                                                                       ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                  Reduce or eliminate, whenever possible, City-imposed costs associated
                                   with producing the arts by non-profit organizations and educational
                                   institutions. These could include costs associated with business licenses
                                   and permits, insurance requirements, and rents paid for usage of City
                                   facilities, among others.
                                  Develop and expand ongoing partnerships with the private sector in
                                   support of the arts.
                         Art in Public Places (Percent for Arts) Programs
                         Public art includes any work displayed in a public context, either temporarily or
                         permanently, with the goal of being accessible to everyone. Public art is not just
                         one type of art - both the form and role of public art varies from community to
                         community depending on demographics, culture, social climate, and natural
                         and built environment. It reflects the local environment, cultural values and
                         artistic vitality of the community in which it is placed. Public art can tell a
                         community's story, reminding residents and visitors of what makes the place
                         unique and special, as well as recognizing the values and contributions of the
                         various cultures in the community. Public art enhances the quality of life for
                         citizens by encouraging a heightened sense of place and enhancing a
                         community's visual quality.
                         Current examples of public art in San Jacinto include the Veteran’s Memorial at
                         Druding Park, which is a multi-war memorial dedicated to all veterans serving in
                         those wars; the various murals in Downtown San Jacinto that illustrate the City’s
                         striking backdrop of the San Jacinto Mountains and several historical events
                         and periods in the San Jacinto Valley; the rock garden on Main Street between
                         Sheriff Boulevard and Jordan Avenue by the late local artist Ken Kreigh, which is
                         unique to the San Jacinto Valley; and the painted elephant-shaped rock in
                         Lamb Canyon, which is a familiar Highway 79 landmark.
                         Art in Public Places programs, sometimes called Percent for Arts programs,
                         provide an on-going funding source through developer fees or project
                         entitlement requirements for public art projects that are visible and accessible to
                         the entire community. This can include art in new developments, architecturally
                         integrated public artworks, art in public spaces through contribution to a central
                         fund, art at the City’s gateways and focal points, and spaces for the creation
                         and presentation of art. With Art in Public Places (Percent for Arts) programs
                         cities can:
                                  Use public art as a tool to enhance private developments and
                                   contribute to establishing a sense of place;
                                  Commission artworks varying in style, scale, medium, form and content
                                   representative of arts on a local, regional and international level;
                                  Integrate artworks into infrastructure and architecture;
                                  Geographically distribute artworks throughout the City;
                                  Include artists at the inception of development projects to ensure that
                                   the work and thinking of artists is incorporated into buildings, public
                                   places and infrastructure;
                                  Encourage local artistic endeavors and support of local artists; and
                                  Encourage public dialogue and interaction with art in public places.
                         The City of San Jacinto currently collects an overall fee for community
                         amenities, some of which may be used towards creating public art. One goal of
                         the City is to expand this ordinance, or create a new ordinance, that specifically
San Jacinto General Plan                         AC-25                                       December 2013

                                                                        ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         dedicates funds for public art. In developing a Percent for Arts program, the City
                         should consider several trends and successes among jurisdictions which have
                         already implemented their programs:
                                  Successful programs are flexible and offer a choice for the developer to
                                   select a public art project or pay an in-lieu fee to a public art fund. For
                                   smaller communities with few municipal projects and limited resources,
                                   developers may be the only funding opportunity, therefore it is
                                   important to provide a flexible program to open up opportunities for
                                   revenue.
                                  Generally, mandated programs require a developer to pay the percent
                                   for arts fee at the time of the building permit process and demonstrate
                                   that the project is completed prior to the occupancy permit.
                                  Some programs outline a core area for the program to apply, such as
                                   a downtown area or Arts and Culture District.
                                  Many programs alleviate private sector costs with other incentives such
                                   as height or density bonuses.
                                  Many jurisdictions use established local arts agencies, or establish an
                                   Arts Commission, to properly administrate, manage and help
                                   streamline the commissioning process.
                                  Successful jurisdictions use public art as a marketing tool by mobilizing
                                   the media and publicizing a completed project, creating educational
                                   programs focusing on the artwork, and encouraging the participating
                                   developer to talk to others in the private sector about their positive
                                   experience. Educational materials should also explain the program to
                                   the public and put it into perspective by comparing it to other fees
                                   demonstrating that the percent of funds dedicated to art is really quite
                                   small. For a minimal cost, public art provides a high return to the
                                   community.
                                  Many jurisdictions are broadening the definition of how revenue
                                   generated from in-lieu fees can be used. This includes uses such as a
                                   funding dedicated City-staff person for the coordination of arts and
                                   culture, city-funded arts activities and programming, as well as funding
                                   for local arts organizations.
   ARTS AND CULTURE IN   Downtown San Jacinto is home to several cultural and art resources in a setting
        OUR DOWNTOWN     of significant historic buildings and elements. While the focus of this Element is
                         on the "arts" (including art, cultural, and entertainment activities), the
                         importance of Downtown's physical, natural and historic setting cannot be
                         overemphasized. The older buildings along Main Street and in the surrounding
                         residential neighborhoods form a fabric that anchor Downtown in time and
                         define its physical uniqueness in relation to other cities. The streetscape
                         environment throughout Downtown offers attractive landscaping, sidewalks,
                         crosswalks, and lighting to provide a pleasant pedestrian experience. In
                         addition, the striking backdrop of the San Jacinto Mountains to the north
                         creates a beautiful natural setting for Downtown. It is this combination of
                         Downtown San Jacinto's natural setting, pedestrian-friendly Main Street, and
                         historic fabric that provides a synergy in which arts are able to thrive.
                         As described previously in this Element, San Jacinto has had a long history of
                         involvement in the arts and hosting of cultural events. Some of Downtown’s
                         assets include:
                                  The historic Estudillo Mansion and Heritage Park, one of only three
San Jacinto General Plan                         AC-26                                       December 2013

                                                                      ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                 Riverside County sites to be on the National Register of Historic Places.
                                San Jacinto City Museum, one of only two municipal museums in
                                 Riverside County.
                                The moving and beautiful Veteran’s Memorial at Druding Park.
                                Many events and festivals along Main Street and at Estudillo Heritage
                                 Park.
                                Various murals in Downtown San Jacinto that illustrate the San Jacinto
                                 Mountains and several historical events and periods in the San Jacinto
                                 Valley.
                                Rock garden on Main Street by the late local artist Ken Kreigh.
                                Virginia Lee Hotel, a locally-designated historic building on Main Street
                                 that is currently vacant.
                                Many historic houses in the Downtown residential neighborhoods.
                         Downtown Issues and Opportunities
                         There are several issues that need to be addressed for Downtown to realize
                         opportunities to increase its cultural and arts foundation:
                                There is a vital need for increased daytime, nighttime, and weekend
                                 activity in the Downtown to complement existing and future art facilities
                                 and activities, as well as evening cultural events. There is a crucial lack
                                 of residential, retailing, entertainment and restaurant resources to
                                 complement cultural and arts opportunities. Supporting new
                                 development, including retailing, restaurants, coffee shops, bookshops,
                                 entertainment activities, etc., contributes to the overall experience of
                                 visiting an art facility or attending a cultural event. Increasing daytime,
                                 nighttime and weekend activity in the Downtown will complement and
                                 complete the arts and culture experience.
                                In the long term, as the intensity of arts uses increases, consideration
                                 should be given to a shuttle bus service to link Main Street, Estudillo
                                 Mansion, Mt. San Jacinto College (MSJC), and other facilities in
                                 Downtown to provide connectivity for residents, visitors and students to
                                 various arts and cultural facilities and events. In addition, for large
                                 Downtown events and festivals, consideration should be given to public
                                 shuttle service from an offsite parking location, such as MSJC, to
                                 reduce the vehicle trips into Downtown during an event.
                                There is a need for a permanent location for the City Museum. Its
                                 current location on the historic Estudillo Mansion site requires federal
                                 review of all improvements. The City should identify the future needs of
                                 the City Museum and identify potential Downtown sites for relocation.
                                 There are several City-owned properties and vacant lots in Downtown
                                 that could be considered. In addition, a relocated and expanded City
                                 Museum could also provide an opportunity for including local visual
                                 arts, in addition to the historic and cultural artifacts currently displayed
                                 in the museum.
                                A performing arts facility could help to expand the performing arts
                                 opportunities in San Jacinto, and to anchor Downtown as the arts,
                                 culture, entertainment and dining center of the City. The City should
                                 prepare a feasibility study to determine if there is a long-term future
                                 need for a new performing arts center. This study should identify the
                                 desired function, seating capacity, amenities, potential locations,
San Jacinto General Plan                       AC-27                                         December 2013

                                                                        ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                   funding sources, and necessary fee base for such a facility. In
                                   determining future needs and opportunities, there should be
                                   coordination with the performing arts facility planned by Mt. San
                                   Jacinto College (discussed in more detail under The Arts in Education
                                   section of this Element), as well as with DVAC. DVAC currently houses
                                   different theatre companies and music productions, and will also likely
                                   need to relocate in the future as rents increase and new tenants are
                                   interested in the retail space in which DVAC is currently housed.
                                  There should be a long-term plan for the Estudillo Mansion and
                                   Heritage Park. This facility is already a destination and attraction, and it
                                   has the potential to draw greater numbers of visitors. There is
                                   considerable vacant and underutilized land surrounding the site, which
                                   could be used to expand the arts and cultural events in Downtown. The
                                   upcoming Downtown Specific Plan will be addressing the potential of a
                                   transit center near Estudillo Mansion, which further supports the
                                   concept of further developing this area.
                                  Finally, there is a thriving community of local artists who are continually
                                   looking to expand their audience and share their work. There is a need
                                   for small, experimental, live/work and exhibit/gallery spaces for local
                                   artists, as well as a need to keep these spaces affordable to avoid
                                   displacement and to continue to attract new artists to Downtown. Local
                                   art contributes to the richness and diversity of art and culture in the
                                   City.
                         Arts and Culture District
                         As illustrated in Figure AC-1, a unique feature of Downtown San Jacinto that
                         sets it apart from many Southern California cities is its concentration of civic,
                         historic, and cultural facilities in a compact, attractive, walkable environment.
                         Downtown is a historical city center with a “main street” quality. This is one of
                         the most important aspects of Downtown's identity, and a great potential for its
                         revitalization.
                         To focus attention on Downtown San Jacinto and to encourage galleries and
                         art facilities to locate there, a Downtown Arts and Culture District should be
                         established. Cultural or arts districts are generally geographically defined areas
                         of a city where a high concentration of cultural facilities, art institutions and
                         related activities are located and complement one another. A primary
                         motivation behind the establishment of a cultural or arts district is often urban
                         revitalization. Cultural and arts districts are also an important marketing tool for
                         attracting increased business activity, tourists and residents to an area.
                         There are several mechanisms that could be used to create an Arts and Culture
                         District. One potential is via the upcoming Downtown Specific Plan, which
                         could establish the Downtown as an Arts and Culture District within the Plan.
                         For ease of implementation, the Arts and Culture District could have the same
                         boundary as the Downtown Specific Plan boundary. Another mechanism is
                         through the use of an overlay zone in the City of San Jacinto Development
                         Code. In either scenario, this District would be intended to represent the
                         cultural, artistic and entertainment "hub" of San Jacinto, which would also
                         coincide with the civic, retailing and restaurant center of the City. The purposes
                         of establishment of this District would be to facilitate the revitalization of
                         Downtown San Jacinto with arts and culture as the primary catalyst and to
San Jacinto General Plan                        AC-28                                         December 2013

                                                                        ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         strengthen the synergy between existing and proposed arts facilities.
                         Some potentials of what the Arts and Culture District could include are:
                                  Seasonal banners to promote events, celebrations and festivals;
                                  Rotating public art;
                                  Permanent or temporary public art in the streetscape environment,
                                   including the bulb-outs and medians;
                                  Display and performing arts venues/festivals;
                                  Gallery art walks, which are beneficial to revitalization because they
                                   bring people downtown and encourage retailing and dining;
                                  Dedication of space in businesses to display local art;
                                  Artist-designed street furniture, bike racks and signage;
                                  Identification of vacant buildings and/or under-utilized space that
                                   could be used for arts incubators, gallery space, or events;
                                  Walking tours and/or walking tour maps of the many historic homes in
                                   Downtown.
            ARTS AND THE The economic impact and value of arts and culture is significant. Arts programs
               ECONOMY   and facilities are major components of economic development programs. They
                         stimulate the local economy through tourism, crafts, and cultural attractions;
                         serve as a catalyst for downtown revitalization; and create vibrant public spaces
                         and local amenities, thereby improving regional and community image and
                         attracting more young professionals to an area. In addition, arts and culture-
                         related industries, or “creative industries”, create jobs, generate tax revenues,
                         attract investments, and help to infuse other industries with creative insights for
                         their products or services. The arts provide measurable benefits in the form of
                         increased business, tourism and revenue.
                         In 2004, the California Arts Council completed The Arts: A Competitive
                         Advantage for California II, which produced the following key findings:
                                  Approximately $5.4 billion in economic activity is generated by
                                   California nonprofit arts and related industries.
                                  The sector supports a workforce of more than 160,000.
                                  Nonprofit arts produce nearly $300 million in state and local taxes.
                                  California's tourism industry is significantly bolstered by the arts.
                                  Nonprofit arts create $2.7 billion in worker income-making the sector's
                                   overall labor income on par with sports and recreation clubs,
                                   commercial sports and auto rental industries in California.
                         By validating and increasing the role of the arts as a major player in the local
                         and regional economies, we strengthen its place in government and the private
                         sector for funding, support and decision-making. A goal of the City is to create
                         the environment necessary for the arts industry to develop in San Jacinto as a
                         successful contributor to an expanding economy.
                         Tourism
                         Recognizing the economic value of tourism and understanding that tourism is
                         an economic development tool, the San Jacinto Valley launched a new
                         multicultural tourism marketing program in July 2013. The new Visit San Jacinto
                         Valley tourism program showcases the many reasons for visiting, such as
                         outdoor recreation, multicultural activities and events, Southern California
San Jacinto General Plan                        AC-29                                           December 2013

                                                                      ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         history and has a component specifically to bring additional “snowbirds” to the
                         valley. Incorporating social media channels, along with traditional marketing
                         methods, the Visit San Jacinto Valley program will initially focus on the local
                         Southern California market, however, the “snowbird” marketing section is
                         intended to reach audiences throughout North America.
                         Working with the Visit San Jacinto Valley tourism program, the City should
                         further promote its colorful history and local arts and culture to increase tourism
                         to San Jacinto, which can, in turn, stimulate economic growth by providing new
                         venues that result in longer and more frequent tourist stays, expanding
                         consumer purchase options, and creating new jobs and investment
                         opportunities that service the growing tourism market.
                         Marketing, Promotion and Branding
                         Marketing, promoting and branding San Jacinto as a center for arts and culture
                         provides a major opportunity to attract both new residents and visitors to the
                         City, both as a destination within itself and as part of a regional attraction with
                         Hemet and Idyllwild. Coordinated, targeted marketing and promotion of the
                         cultural arts environment offered in San Jacinto and environs will help capture
                         this market. The City currently promotes events through its online calendar of
                         events. This should be maintained, as well as continuing coordination and
                         marketing though the Diamond Valley Arts Council (DVAC) and the Soboba
                         tribe. Additionally, as the local demographics are changing and moving
                         towards more young families with children, the arts and cultural events and
                         opportunities available in San Jacinto should be marketed to this demographic
                         through education, local sporting events, etc.
                         As marketing and promotions increase, the City should also consider creating
                         an iconic image for San Jacinto. Iconic images or elements are a great way to
                         promote the City and involve local artists in the design and representation of the
                         image. A regional example of this is in Riverside, California, which used
                         oranges (to represent its citrus history) as an iconic element for several art
                         events where local artists painted and tiled both large-scale and smaller-scale
                         fiberglass oranges. One potential iconic feature for San Jacinto is the
                         mastodon, which also represents pre-historic age for the entire Valley and which
                         was discussed by the community during the public workshops and meetings for
                         this Element.
 THE ARTS IN EDUCATION   As a community, the citizens of San Jacinto understand the value of
                         incorporating the arts and cultural activities into education. The previous section
                         of this Element highlights the arts and cultural programs provided through the
                         San Jacinto Unified School District (SJUSD) and Mt. San Jacinto College
                         (MSJC), as well as the Idyllwild Arts Academy based on its unique role in the
                         arts and its proximity to the City. Arts in education builds academic and social
                         skills, increases academic performance and test scores, improves behavior and
                         attendance and nurtures the kind of creative thinking required of people in the
                         workforce. Art also helps students connect to their school and community,
                         promoting civic engagement. It reaches children who are at risk of dropping out
                         of school by giving them a way to express themselves, develop talents and
                         improve self-esteem. Numerous studies provide evidence of enhanced learning
                         and achievement when the arts are a vital part of students’ educational
                         experience.
San Jacinto General Plan                       AC-30                                         December 2013

                                                                     ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                         K-12 Education
                         As described previously in this Element, San Jacinto’s schools currently have a
                         strong arts component, particularly in the area of award-winning competitions,
                         where local student work is shown at a national level. This is an asset that
                         should be explored at a community level. The City should work with SJUSD and
                         San Jacinto Valley Academy to build on arts programs in schools to expand
                         them into the community. One potential example of this would be to work with
                         the schools to have students create both temporary and permanent murals in
                         locations throughout the City, continuing with the City’s tradition of murals.
                         While every student in San Jacinto is exposed to arts as part of his or her
                         education, school funding for arts programs often becomes discretionary.
                         Funding is particularly difficult at the elementary school level for arts. By
                         documenting the direct correlation between the arts and improved test scores,
                         educators can help policy makers with their funding decisions. City support,
                         increased outside funding and more coordination with arts and culture facilities
                         in the area are crucial to maintaining and increasing the role of arts in K-12
                         education.
                         Mt. San Jacinto College
                         In addition to the arts programs in the elementary and secondary schools, Mt.
                         San Jacinto College (MSJC) also contains a tremendous wealth of cultural art
                         resources, programs and opportunities. The presence of the college also
                         provides more arts and culture performances, art shows, lectures and other
                         cultural events that the community can enjoy, and there are additional music
                         and food festivals in the planning stages at MSJC.
                         MSJC is awaiting funding to build a brand new performing arts center on their
                         campus. The City will need to coordinate with the college and support them in
                         this effort. The City should discuss with MSJC the potential of creating a joint-
                         use facility and/or locating this facility in the Downtown area. There are
                         numerous examples where colleges and universities locate one of their facilities
                         in a Downtown environment, rather than on campus. This can be beneficial to
                         help rejuvenate Downtown San Jacinto and concentrate art facilities in the
                         central city, as well as beneficial to MSJC to get more exposure in a Downtown
                         location. Whether located on the MSJC campus, or in Downtown San Jacinto, a
                         new performing arts center for MSJC will benefit both the student body and the
                         community at large. Collaborative efforts between the education community
                         and the general public will help to pool resources and integrate institutional
                         programs within the San Jacinto community.
San Jacinto General Plan                        AC-31                                        December 2013

                                                                           ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                                       Appendix: Implementation Program
                                                        This Implementation Program provides actions to
                                                        implement the adopted policies and plans identified in
                                                        this Element.      The Arts and Culture Element
                                                        Implementation Program is a series of actions,
                                                        procedures and techniques that includes a description of
                                                        the responsible agency/department, funding source,
                                                        time frame and related policies in the Arts and Culture
                                                        Element.
                             Arts and Culture in our City
                       AC-1  Integrate the arts physically and socially into community life and promote access
         Access to the Arts  to the arts to all San Jacinto residents by:
                                 Incorporating art in widely-utilized public places.
                                 Reducing barriers to program participation.
                                 Creating effective outreach for community programs, festivals, and
                                  celebrations.
                                 Understanding existing resources and community needs to ensure the
                                  provision of well-balanced and equitably distributed arts and cultural
                                  educational programs and services.
                                 Pursuing joint-use agreements, public-private partnerships and dedicated
                                  City funds to provide resources to further expand programs and services
                                  citywide and in target areas.
                Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, Economic Development, school districts, Mt. San
                             Jacinto College (MSJC), Valley Wide Recreation and Park District (VWRPD),
                             Diamond Valley Arts Council (DVAC)
           Funding Source:   General Fund
               Time Frame:   Short-term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 1.1 through 1.7
                       AC-2  Establish programs, such as the Mayor’s Arts Awards or other similar program,
           Arts Recognition  to officially recognize the accomplishments and contributions of community
                             members, artists, educators, organizations, and business leaders who are
                             committed to enriching their communities through the arts. Such programs help
                             cultivate greater visibility and understanding of the value of the arts, as well as
                             grow new leadership and new patrons of the arts. Solicit private sector
                             sponsorships, donations and event locations to help support the program.
                Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, City Council
           Funding Source:   General Fund, local businesses
               Time Frame:   Short-term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 10.5
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-32                                        December 2013

                                                                            ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                       AC-3  Support the provision of staff resources dedicated to the development of the arts
            Staff Resources  and culture in the City through arts programming, coordination and funding.
                             This could be a part or full time City staff position, or a joint position shared by
                             the City and the Diamond Valley Arts Council. Responsibilities of such a
                             position could include, among other things:
                                 Working with the Community Development Department for the
                                  identification and cultivation of arts spaces, particularly in existing and
                                  underutilized facilities.
                                 Coordinating departmental grant proposals with components including or
                                  promoting the arts and providing grant writing support to local arts and
                                  cultural organizations.
                                 Performing research on the benefits of the arts, focusing on economic
                                  impact, facilities data, and programming.
                                 Exploring new funding potentials for the arts.
                                 Managing the Arts Commission (see AC-4).
                                 Overseeing public artwork installation and dedications and ceremonies of
                                  art installations and artist recognition programs.
                                 Providing media advice and input with regard to the arts, cultural events
                                  and festivals.
                                 Creating arts educational materials.
                                 Coordinating with the Visit San Jacinto Valley tourism program with regards
                                  to the arts, cultural events and festivals.
                                 Administering the Percent for Arts Program (see AC-4).
                Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, Economic Development, DVAC
           Funding Source:   General Fund, Fees from Percent for Arts program once established
               Time Frame:   Mid-term (2-5 years)
           Related Policies: 1.1 through 1.8, 2.4, 2.6, 2.8, 3.1 through 3.6
                       AC-4  Establish an Arts Commission as an advisory body to the City Council to help
          Arts Commissions   facilitate City leadership and involvement in the arts. The ordinance should:
                                 Establish membership requirements, including the number and
                                  representation of commissioners. The membership should be diverse and
                                  include persons such as working artists, representatives from local arts and
                                  cultural organizations, educational institutions, community members, and
                                  business representatives.
                                 Identify the terms of service, including the terms of appointment, length of
                                  service, and attendance requirements.
                                 Set forth the duties of the Arts Commission, which could include:
                                  - Encouraging public art, establishing procedures for selection and
                                       approval of art pieces, suggesting placement of public art and
                                       arranging for ongoing maintenance of public art in public places;
                                  - Advising and assisting city departments, commissions, and committees,
                                       as well as the City Council, regarding artistic components of all
                                       municipal government projects under consideration by the City, as well
                                       as serving as a resource for artistic components of private
                                       developments;
                                  - Developing relationships with existing organizations and community
                                       groups having a stake and interest in good building and public space
                                       design and development;
                                  - Encouraging connections with regional, state, and national
San Jacinto General Plan                             AC-33                                        December 2013

                                                                            ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                        organizations with an interest in art, artistic values, and similar goals;
                                  -     Pursuing gifts and grants available to the City of San Jacinto for the
                                        purposes of cultural and artistic activities and enhancements of public
                                        spaces in the City; and
                                  -     Working with existing arts organizations, community groups, and artists
                                        in the delivery of programs and activities as well as assist in fostering
                                        collaboration and stability.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, City Council, City Manager’s Office
           Funding Source:   General Fund
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 1.1 through 1.8, 2.1, 2.2, 3.7
                       AC-5  Support increased funding for the arts by:
   Increased Arts Funding
                                 Identifying means to increase the provision of in-kind resources and services
                                  to the arts, including equipment, materials, security, and space.
                                 Exploring and securing new sources of revenue for the arts and cultural
                                  organizations through targeted grant proposals, development impact fees,
                                  and public-private partnerships.
                                 Reducing or eliminating, whenever possible, City-imposed costs associated
                                  with producing the arts by non-profit organizations and educational
                                  institutions. These could include costs associated with business licenses and
                                  permits and rents paid for usage of City facilities, among others.
                                 Developing and expanding ongoing partnerships with the private sector in
                                  support of the arts.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, City Council, City Manager’s Office, DVAC
           Funding Source:   General Fund, fees from Percent for Arts program once established,
                             development fees
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 3.1 through 3.6
                       AC-6  Develop a "Percent for Arts" program for new development in the City to
 Percent for Arts Program    increase public art projects in the City and to ensure that public art projects
                             occur in a way that meets citywide objectives. This program should include both
                             private sector commercial and mixed-use projects, as well as Capital
                             Improvement Projects. In most cities that have implemented such an ordinance,
                             the allocation generally ranges from 1-2% of project valuation, often with a
                             minimum threshold of project valuation. The ordinance should:
                                 Require a "Percent for Art" based upon construction project costs within the
                                  City. This fund could be used for a variety of arts related projects and
                                  programs.
                                 Include parameters in relation to collection, administration, and allocation
                                  of in-lieu development fees.
                                 Set forth criteria for the artworks and selection processes. The criteria for art
                                  should be flexible in its interpretation to maximize program benefits.
                                 Describe a mandated process for project implementation that includes
                                  coordinating with applicable City departments and stakeholders and
                                  providing a method of contracting with artists for the design, execution and
                                  siting of public art.
                                 Identify responsibilities for maintenance of public art.
San Jacinto General Plan                             AC-34                                           December 2013

                                                                           ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, Economic Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponents
               Time Frame:   Short-term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 1.2, 1.7, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1 through 4.3
                       AC-7  Initiate conversations to expand existing partnerships and forge new innovative
              Public-Private public-private partnerships to foster and promote art opportunities for
               Partnerships  maximizing funding, maintaining long-term viability of arts programs and
                             creating new opportunities for enhancing arts education and arts programming
                             in the community.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Economic Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund, public-private partnerships
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 1.3, 1.6, 2.2, 3.4 through 3.6
                       AC-8  Pursue joint-use agreements with school districts, Valley-Wide Regional
     Join-Use Agreements     Recreation and Park District, Mt. San Jacinto College, neighboring cities, public
                             agencies, private entities and nonprofit organizations that own and operate
                             facilities within the City. In addition to providing more space for recreational
                             and enrichment programming, strategic partnerships can provide the benefit of
                             shared renovation, development, maintenance and operational costs.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Economic Development, City Manager’s Office, school districts, VWRPD, MSJC,
                             DVAC
           Funding Source:   General Fund, public-private partnerships
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 1.5, 1.6, 2.3, 6.1 through 6.3, 10.6
                       AC-9  Use artistic elements in the City’s streetscape elements, including medians,
    Arts and Infrastructure  sidewalk bulbouts, landscaping, lighting, paving, bicycle racks, signage and
                             banners to strengthen San Jacinto’s identity and image. Also use public art at
                             the City’s gateways, transit stops, and in Downtown to increase the City’s
                             identity as a cultural and arts center for regional visitors.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
           Funding Source:   General Fund, grant funds, development fees
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 1.8, 5.7
                      AC-10  As demand increases, consider initiating a valley-wide transportation network of
                Arts Shuttle cultural facilities and events, such as an “Arts Shuttle.” Work with the local
                             transit providers to develop a shuttle bus that links the major cultural and art
                             facilities in San Jacinto and the surrounding communities. Consider using the
                             shuttles themselves as a form of public art by having them designed with
                             murals, artworks, pictures of San Jacinto’s cultural history, etc.
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-35                                       December 2013

                                                                           ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, Economic Development,                 Public Works, City
                             Engineer, local transit providers
           Funding Source:   General Fund, grant funds, County Funds
               Time Frame:   Long-term (5+ years)
           Related Policies: 2.7
                             Arts and Culture in our Downtown
                      AC-11  Promote arts and culture as a key component of Downtown revitalization by
  Downtown Specific Plan     supporting new development. Building a foundation and context for arts and
                             culture is an important aspect of growing arts-related activity in the area. This
                             can be achieved by preparing and implementing a Specific Plan for Downtown
                             San Jacinto. The Specific Plan should:
                                 Allow a mix of uses that supports a diversity of venues to showcase the arts;
                                  expanded retail, restaurant and entertainment opportunities, art galleries,
                                  and live/work artists’ studios.
                                 Encourage preservation, renovation and adaptive reuse of Downtown’s
                                  historic structures.
                                 Establish a Downtown Arts and Culture District (see also AC-12).
                                 Incentivize artist incubator spaces (see also AC-16).
                                 Encourage developers and property owners to provide affordable,
                                  strategically-located studio workspace and performance and exhibit space
                                  in underutilized buildings.
                                 Allow for the short term use of vacant retail space for artists’ displays (see
                                  also AC-17).
                                 Address the potential long term location in Downtown for a new performing
                                  arts facility and the City Museum (see also AC-13 and AC-15).
                                 Build on existing streetscape improvements to further enhance the
                                  Downtown environment.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, Economic Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, grant funds
               Time Frame:   Short term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 5.1 through 5.7, 8.2, 8.3
                      AC-12  Establish a Downtown Arts and Culture District that focuses attention on
  Arts and Culture District  Downtown San Jacinto and encourages galleries and art facilities to locate
                             there. This could be achieved as a part of the upcoming Downtown Specific
                             Plan (see also AC-11), or by establishing a stand-alone overlay in the City of
                             San Jacinto Development Code. In either scenario, this District should represent
                             the cultural, artistic and entertainment "hub" of San Jacinto, which would also
                             coincide with the civic, retailing and restaurant center of the City. A Downtown
                             Arts and Culture District should include:
                                 Seasonal banner program to promote events, celebrations and festivals.
                                 Rotating public art program.
                                 Permanent or temporary public art in the streetscape environment,
                                  including in bulb-outs and medians.
                                 Display and performing arts venues/festivals.
                                 Artist-designed street furniture, bike racks and signage.
                                 Identification of vacant buildings and/or under-utilized space that could be
                                  used for arts incubators, gallery space, or events.
San Jacinto General Plan                             AC-36                                       December 2013

                                                                          ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                  Gallery art walks.
                                  Walking tours and/or walking tour maps of the many historic homes in
                                   Downtown.
                Responsible
      Agency/Department:     Community Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund
               Time Frame:   Short term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 1.1 through 1.8, 2.6, 5.1 through 5.3, 7.2, 9.1 through 9.3
                      AC-13  Identify a permanent location for the San Jacinto City Museum, either in the
               City Museum   Downtown (see also AC-11) or another suitable location in the City. The new
                             location should meet the programmatic requirements of an expanded mission
                             for the Museum that includes additional art displays. This site could also
                             accommodate the needs of DVAC, which is in need of a permanent location as
                             well.
                Responsible
      Agency/Department:     Community Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund
               Time Frame:   Mid-term (2-5 years)
           Related Policies: 1.3, 2.3, 5.5, 9.1
                      AC-14  Prepare a long term facility and area plan for the Estudillo Mansion and
      Estudillo Masion and   Heritage Park and its immediate surrounding environment. The plan should
              Heritage Park  address the rehabilitation of the historic barn on the grounds and its potential
                             reuse as an art gallery space. The plan should also fully leverage the historic
                             and cultural value of this important resource to maximize its benefit to
                             Downtown, as well as assess adjacent vacant and/or underutilized properties
                             for potential expansion or support uses. The potential location of a transit center
                             in its immediate vicinity should also be evaluated.
                Responsible
      Agency/Department:     Community Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund, state funds and federal funds
               Time Frame:   Long term (5+ years)
           Related Policies: 1.3, 2.3, 5.4, 9.1-9.2
                      AC-15  Prepare a feasibility study to determine if there is a long-term need for a new
            Performing Arts  performing arts center in Downtown. This study should also identify the desired
                     Center  function, seating capacity, amenities, potential locations, funding sources, and
                             necessary fee base for such a facility. In determining feasibility, future needs and
                             opportunities, coordinate with Mt. San Jacinto College regarding their planned
                             facility, as well as with DVAC regarding their potential facility needs.
                Responsible
      Agency/Department:     Community Development, Economic Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund, public-private partnerships, DVAC, MSJC
               Time Frame:   Long-term (5+ years)
           Related Policies: 6.1 through 6.3
                      AC-16  Facilitate the development of arts incubator, or subsidized live-work and work-
     Arts Incubators Space   exhibit space for local artists and writers. This could be undertaken either as a
                             part of the Downtown Specific Plan (see also AC-11) or as a separate task:
San Jacinto General Plan                             AC-37                                         December 2013

                                                                          ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                                 Conduct an inventory of potential existing structures and vacant sites for
                                  suitable space.
                                 Review and update the San Jacinto Development Code to ensure zoning
                                  regulations and development standards allow such facilities in Downtown
                                  (or ensure implementation in the Downtown Specific Plan).
                                 Review and update the San Jacinto Development Code to provide
                                  regulatory incentives.
                                 Apply for available grants for funding.
                Responsible
    Agency/Departments:      Community Development, Economic Development
          Funding Sources:   General Fund, state and federal funds, grant funds, development fees
               Time Frame:   Mid-term (2-5 years)
            Related Policies 2.5, 2.6, 3.3, 8.3
                      AC-17  Develop a program to work with local artists to install artworks in the windows
              Art in Vacant  of vacant buildings to help revitalization efforts in Downtown. This effort would
          Spaces/Windows     help activate vacant spaces through the appearance of public art while at the
                             same time reduce the negative impact of vacant buildings during economic
                             downturns. Public art can inspire ideas for different uses and possibilities for
                             these spaces.
                Responsible
    Agency/Departments:      Community Development, Economic Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund, grants funds, public-private partnerships
               Time Frame:   Short-term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 5.1, 5.2
                      AC-18  For large scale events and festivals that are held in Downtown San Jacinto,
             Events Parking  work with various City departments, local transit service providers, and MSJC to
                             provide temporary shuttle service to allow for off-site parking. MSJC is a
                             potential site for off-site parking because of its proximity to Downtown and
                             available parking supply during off-peak hours. Besides reducing traffic in
                             Downtown, the off-site parking will encourage visitors to stay longer in
                             Downtown and frequent the local retail and dining establishments as well as
                             other arts and cultural facilities.
                Responsible
    Agency/Departments:      Community Development, Economic Development,                Public Works, City
                             Engineer, MSJC, local transit providers
          Funding Sources:   General Fund, grants, public-private partnerships
               Time Frame:   Short-term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 5.6
                             Arts and the Economy
                      AC-19  Maintain ongoing analysis to demonstrate the economic value of the arts to the
            Economic Data    City of San Jacinto by developing baseline data on existing hotel, retail, and
                             restaurant economic activities by day, week, month, quarter and year and
                             compare with new data on similar activities associated with new programming
                             for the arts and cultural activities. This economic data should be made readily
                             available to potential businesses and developers looking to locate their projects
                             in Riverside County.
San Jacinto General Plan                           AC-38                                        December 2013

                                                                            ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Economic Development, City Manager’s Office
           Funding Source:   General Fund
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 7.1, 7.3, 8.1, 9.1
                      AC-20  Work closely with the Visit San Jacinto Valley tourism program to link the City’s
                    Tourism  arts and culture goals and strategies to the Valley’s overall tourism efforts.
                             Promote San Jacinto’s arts and cultural offerings on the Visit San Jacinto Valley
                             website to increase tourism to San Jacinto.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Economic Development, City Manager’s Office
           Funding Source:   General Fund
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 7.1, 9.1 through 9.4, 9.6
                      AC-21  Include the arts and cultural activities in the City’s ongoing marketing and
 Marketing and Promotion     promotions programs:
                                 Provide coordinated, targeted marketing and promotion of the cultural arts
                                  environment offered in San Jacinto and environs.
                                 Use the City’s website, Visit San Jacinto Valley tourism website, regional
                                  Chambers of Commerce, trade publications, and other appropriate sources
                                  to promote San Jacinto’s cultural and arts opportunities.
                                 Continuing coordination and marketing though the Diamond Valley Arts
                                  Council (DVAC).
                                 As the local demographics are changing and moving towards more young
                                  families with children, market arts and cultural events to this demographic
                                  through education, local sporting events, etc.
                                 Use the local media to provide regular coverage of the arts, including arts
                                  and cultural events and festivals, facilities, artists, and arts in education.
                                 Consider creating an iconic image for San Jacinto to promote the City and
                                  involve local artists in the design and representation of the image.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Economic Development
           Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 9.1 through 9.4, 9.6
                      AC-22  Work with the County and the other Visit San Jacinto Valley tourism program
            Comprehensive    partners to create a unified wayfinding system and signage program to the
      Wayfinding Program     various art and cultural facilities in the San Jacinto Valley, as well as
                             improvements to roads and streetscapes to improve the paths of travel between
                             the facilities.
               Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, Riverside County, local
                             jurisdictions
           Funding Source:   General Fund, federal and state funds, development fees
               Time Frame:   Long-term (5+ years)
           Related Policies: 9.4, 9.5
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-39                                             December 2013

                                                                          ARTS AND CULTURE ELEMENT
                      AC-23  Consider establishing a Sister City or other cultural exchange program. Cultural
        Sister City Program  exchanges through the arts provide the foundation for the majority of sister city
                             relationships. These exchanges take many different forms, including elementary
                             school art projects, tours by internationally-renowned artists, musical
                             performances, art exhibits, cultural festivals, and teacher exchanges. These
                             programs can broaden the City’s appeal and further encourage tourism.
                Responsible
     Agency/Department:      City’s Manager’s Office
           Funding Source:   General Fund
               Time Frame:   Short-term (0-2 years)
           Related Policies: 9.7
                             The Arts in Education
                      AC-24  Advocate and assist in providing arts education programming and funding at all
      Arts Education in the  levels. In addition to programs in the schools, arts education also takes place in
                 Community   many other settings. Strengthen collaborations among educational institutions
                             and VWRPD, DVAC, the City Museum, Estudillo Mansion, Soboba Band of
                             Luiseño Indians, Ramona Bowl and other arts organizations and facilities in the
                             Valley. Work with the school districts and these organizations to build on the
                             arts programs in schools to expand them into the community. Several programs
                             in other cities include:
                                 Programs wherein students create both temporary and permanent murals in
                                  locations throughout the City, continuing with the City’s tradition of murals.
                                 Student art and essay contests wherein students submit either an individual
                                  piece of artwork or an essay that addresses a selected theme. Entire classes
                                  may also be invited to enter a joint submittal addressing the theme. In many
                                  cities the contest is judged and cash prizes are given to the winners based
                                  on contributions collected from local businesses, there is a City Council-
                                  attended awards ceremony, and the show is displayed for several months in
                                  City Hall or other community facility.
                                 Interactive and participatory programs that provide teachers the opportunity
                                  to schedule class tours of the public art in the City or region. These
                                  programs encourage students to learn about art while using their
                                  imagination in a variety of ways to define how the art makes them feel.
                Responsible
     Agency/Department:      Community Development, school districts, MSJC, DVAC, San Jacinto Library,
                             Soboba Tribe
           Funding Source:   General Fund, grant funds, public-private partnerships
               Time Frame:   Ongoing
           Related Policies: 10.1 through 10.8
San Jacinto General Plan                            AC-40                                         December 2013

Housing Element
   City of San Jacinto
          September 2013
  City Council Resolution No. _____
                                    Housing Element
This page intentionally left blank.
                                                                            Housing Element
A. Introduction
The Housing Element is the City’s primary policy guide for the maintenance, improvement,
and development of housing within San Jacinto. The Element provides an indication of the
need for housing in the community in terms of affordability, availability, adequacy, and
accessibility. It provides a strategy to address housing needs and identifies a series of
specific housing program actions to meet community needs. A detailed Housing Needs
Assessment, Constraints Analysis, and Resources Summary was prepared as part of the
Housing Element update and serves as the technical background document to the
Housing Element. Together, the two documents comprise the complete Housing Element.
PURPOSE OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The Housing Element is the City’s official response to a growing awareness for the need to
provide housing for all economic segments of the community, as well as a legal
requirement that housing policy be included as a part of the planning process. The
Housing Element provides San Jacinto with the opportunity to plan for the existing and
future housing needs in the community. The San Jacinto Housing Element has been
prepared in compliance with the 2013-2021 update cycle for cities in the Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG) region. This Housing Element identifies
strategies and programs that focus on: 1) conserving and improving existing affordable
housing; 2) providing adequate housing sites; 3) assisting in the development of affordable
housing; 4) removing governmental and other constraints to housing development; and
5) promoting equal housing opportunities.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The San Jacinto Housing Element consists of two documents: 1) the Housing Element,
which contains the Housing Plan (goals, policies, and programs) and 2) a Housing Element
Technical Report, which contains the Needs Assessment, Constraints, and Resources
chapters. Appendix A of the Technical Report provides an Evaluation of the previous
Housing Element and Appendix B includes the detailed Residential Land Inventory for
evaluating the City’s ability to meet its regional growth needs for the this planning period.
The State Legislature recognizes the role of local general plans and particularly the
Housing Element in implementing statewide housing goals to provide decent and
adequate housing and a suitable living environment for all persons. Furthermore, the
Legislature stresses continuing efforts toward providing affordable housing for all income
groups.
The major concerns of the Legislature with regards to the preparation of Housing Elements
are:
    •  Recognition by local governments of their responsibility in contributing to the
       attainment of State housing goals;
    •  Preparation and implementation of City and County Housing Elements which
       coordinate with State and federal efforts in achieving State housing goals;
San Jacinto General Plan                       1                              September 2013

                                                                            Housing Element
    •   Participation by local jurisdictions in determining efforts required to attain State
        housing goals; and
    •   Cooperation between local governments to address regional housing needs.
The State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) sets forth specific
guidelines regarding the scope and content of housing elements.
A number of local and regional plans and programs relate to the Housing Element. A brief
description of these plans and programs follows.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT (RHNA)
State Housing Element Law requires SCAG, or a designated subregion, to prepare a
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) every eight years to identify existing and
future housing needs. For the projection period of January 1, 2014 through October 31,
2021, the RHNA allocation for San Jacinto is 2,433 units. The RHNA process and how the
City will address this requirement is discussed further in the Resources section of the
Technical Report.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
The San Jacinto General Plan is comprised of the following seven elements: 1) Land Use;
2) Housing; 3) Circulation; 4) Resource Management; 5) Noise; 6) Public Safety; and 7)
Community Services and Facilities. Background information and policy direction presented
in one element is also reflected in other General Plan elements. For example, residential
development capacities established in the Land Use Element are incorporated into the
Housing Element. This Housing Element builds upon other General Plan elements and is
consistent with the policies and proposals set forth by the General Plan. For example, the
Land Use Element identifies use designations at densities that will facilitate the provision of
a range of residential housing products for all income groups. The Circulation Element
plays a role in the location of residential development in relation to roadways, transit,
pedestrian, and bicycle facilities. The Noise Element establishes noise levels appropriate for
residential uses. Whenever one element of the General Plan is amended, other elements,
including the Housing Element, will be reviewed and modified, if necessary, to ensure
consistency between elements.
Recent changes to Government Code §65302 require amendments to the Safety and
Conservation elements to include analysis and policies regarding flood hazard and
management information upon the next revision of the Housing Element after January 1,
2009. If necessary, amendments to this Housing Element will be processed concurrently in
order to maintain consistency between elements.
State law also requires that water and sewer providers grant service priority to new
developments with units that are affordable to lower-income households. The Housing
Element will be transmitted to these providers upon adoption of the element to ensure
that they have up-to-date information regarding the housing needs and objectives in San
Jacinto.
San Jacinto General Plan                      2                               September 2013

                                                                         Housing Element
Senate Bill 244 of 2011 amended the Government Code and the Water Code to require
cities and counties to analyze unincorporated island, fringe and legacy communities and
amend the Land Use Element of the General Plan prior to or concurrent with the next
update of the Housing Element. This bill also imposes requirements on Local Agency
Formation Commissions (LAFCOs) regarding annexations and the analysis of municipal
services in disadvantaged unincorporated communities (DUCs). The City is working with
Riverside County and LAFCO staff to compile the required information regarding
unincorporated communities and the water, sewer and fire protection services in these
communities for inclusion in the Land Use Element concurrent with the Housing Element
update.
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Section 65583(c)(5) of the Government Code states that “the local government shall
make diligent efforts to achieve public participation of all the economic segments of the
community in the development of the Housing Element, and the program shall describe
this effort.”
The City’s efforts to encourage public participation along with a summary of the
comments received during the update process are presented in Appendix C of the
Technical Report.
During the required 60-day review by HCD, copies off the Draft Housing Element were
made available to interested parties at the Planning Department and the San Jacinto
Library. In addition, a total of three public hearings were held on the Housing Element by
the Planning Commission and City Council. Notification was published in the local
newspaper in advance of each hearing, and direct notices were mailed to interested
individuals.
San Jacinto General Plan                      3                           September 2013

                                     Housing Element
This page intentionally left blank
San Jacinto General Plan           4  September 2013
                                                                        Housing Element
                                                                         Housing Plan
The following goals and policies focus on the maintenance and provision of a variety of
housing in terms of type, affordability, and style. The Housing Plan sets forth goals and
policies to address the following issue areas: 1) conserving and improving existing
affordable housing; 2) providing adequate housing sites; 3) assisting the development of
affordable housing; 4) removing governmental constraints; and 5) promoting equal
housing opportunity.
A. Goals and Policies
CONSERVE AND IMPROVE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Substandard and deteriorating housing units, in addition to the obvious problems of blight
and appearance, can expose occupants to a variety of hazards ranging from electrical
fire to toxic substances and materials used in construction. A number of factors will
determine the life expectancy of a housing unit including quality of workmanship, age of
unit, location, type of construction and degree of maintenance. As a city with a large
number of older housing units, it is important that on-going maintenance programs are
implemented in San Jacinto. In addition to rehabilitation efforts, conservation of the
existing stock of affordable housing is also important, as the cost to preserve existing
affordable housing is often lower than replacing the units.
HOUSING GOAL 1: CONSERVE, IMPROVE, AND REHABILITATE EXISTING HOUSING.
Policy 1.1:    Develop and foster activities to increase the health, safety, and property
               values of the City’s existing housing stock.
Policy 1.2:    Promote the 13 Neighborhood Concept program in planning for the
               conservation, improvement, and rehabilitation of these existing
               neighborhoods.
Policy 1.3:    Preserve existing single-family home neighborhoods.
Policy 1.4:    Encourage continued and new investments in established communities.
Policy 1.5:    Monitor the status of at-risk multifamily rental housing units, work with
               potential nonprofit purchasers/managers as appropriate, and explore
               funding sources available to preserve the at-risk units.
Related Housing Element Programs: 1, 2, 3, 4, 8
PROVIDE ADEQUATE HOUSING SITES
Economic forces are driving jobs and housing development eastward in Riverside County,
which will result in increased pressure in San Jacinto for new housing opportunities. From
1990 to 2008 the population of San Jacinto more than doubled. Although the recent
housing market downturn has interrupted this pattern of rapid growth, history suggests that
San Jacinto General Plan                       5                          September 2013

                                                                           Housing Element
the pause will be temporary and the long-term prospect for the Inland Empire is continued
economic expansion.
To keep pace with future growth, the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) has identified a need for 2,433 new housing units in San Jacinto for the January 1,
2014 through October 31, 2021 planning period. These new housing units must provide a
range of housing opportunities to allow for the upward mobility of San Jacinto residents, as
well as affordable housing opportunities for households of modest means.
HOUSING GOAL 2: PROVIDE ADEQUATE SITES FOR NEW RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TO MEET THE
     NEEDS OF ALL SEGMENTS OF THE COMMUNITY WITHOUT COMPROMISING THE CHARACTER OF THE
     CITY.
Policy 2.1:    Provide adequate sites for a range of new housing construction to meet the
               Regional Housing Need Assessment (RHNA) for San Jacinto of 2,433 units in
               the 2014-2021 planning period.
Related Housing Element Programs: 5, 10
ASSIST IN THE PROVISION OF HOUSING
New construction is a major source of housing for prospective homeowners and renters.
However, the cost of new construction can be high in comparison to housing preservation
programs. In addition, market-rate new construction may not provide housing that is
affordable, or adequate, for special needs populations such as the elderly, disabled,
farmworkers, and homeless. Incentive programs such as density bonuses offer a cost-
effective means of promoting affordable housing development. Public sector assistance
can also promote the construction of affordable housing that meets the needs of all
segments of the community. San Jacinto is fortunate in that the cost of land is relatively
low in comparison to much of Southern California, keeping the cost of new housing
affordable to most income groups.
HOUSING GOAL 3: ASSIST IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF A HOUSING SUPPLY WHICH IS AFFORDABLE TO ALL
     SEGMENTS OF THE COMMUNITY.
Policy 3.1:    Allow for the development of housing affordable to all income groups by
               utilizing a variety of public and private efforts.
Policy 3.2:    Assist with the development of housing that targets the needs of special
               populations, including the elderly, disabled, farmworkers, and homeless.
Policy 3.3:    Promote the development of attractive and safe housing to meet
               community needs.
Related Housing Element Programs: 7, 8, 9
San Jacinto General Plan                        6                           September 2013
                                                                               Housing Element
REMOVE GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Under current State law, the San Jacinto Housing Element must address, and where
appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to the maintenance,
improvement, and development of housing.
HOUSING GOAL 4: REMOVE GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS TO THE PROVISION OF HOUSING TO THE
      GREATEST EXTENT FEASIBLE AND LEGALLY PERMISSIBLE.
Policy 4.1:    Promote efficient and creative alternatives to help reduce governmental
               constraints.
Policy 4.2:    Provide incentives and regulatory concessions for affordable and senior
               housing.
Policy 4.3:    Improve the City’s development review and approval process to facilitate
               housing construction.
Policy 4.4:    Provide reasonable accommodation for housing for persons with disabilities.
Related Housing Element Programs: 5, 10, 11
PROMOTE EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Housing should be made available to all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, family
size, marital status, national origin, color, age, disability, or income. To make adequate
provisions for the housing needs of all segments of the community, the City must ensure
equal and fair housing opportunities for all residents.
HOUSING GOAL 5: PROMOTE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY FOR HOUSING THROUGHOUT THE CITY OF SAN
      JACINTO.
Policy 5.1:    Prohibit discrimination in the sale or rental of housing with regard to race,
               religion, disability, gender, family size, marital status, national origin, color, or
               income.
Policy 5.2:    Continue to further fair housing choices by actively expanding housing
               opportunities and removing impediments to fair housing.
Policy 5.3:    Encourage the development of residential units that are accessible to
               disabled persons or are adaptable for conversion to residential use by
               disabled persons.
Policy 5.4:    Accommodate emergency shelters and transitional housing facilities in
               compliance with applicable State laws and the City’s Development Code.
Related Housing Element Programs: 10, 11
San Jacinto General Plan                       7                                 September 2013

                                                                         Housing Element
B. Housing Programs
This section describes the programs that will implement Housing Element goals and
policies. The housing programs define the specific actions the City will undertake in order
to achieve the goals for the current planning period. Pursuant to State law, the programs
address the following issue areas:
      1.    Conserve and improve the existing housing stock
      2.    Provide adequate sites for the development of new housing
      3.    Assist in the provision of affordable housing
      4.    Minimize the impact of governmental constraints on housing production
      5.    Assure equal housing opportunity for all residents
CONSERVE AND IMPROVE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
1.    CODE ENFORCEMENT
As part of its Neighborhood Strategy, code enforcement staff use proactive techniques to
improve the physical condition of the City's homes and neighborhoods. The code
enforcement team addresses the following:
       Substandard housing
       Weed abatement
       Abandoned vehicle abatement
       General property and building maintenance
       Health and safety conditions
The most important elements of the code enforcement program are assisting in the
identification of substandard housing and providing information to the public about City
and County housing programs. During this Housing Element cycle, the City will seek grant
funding to complete a comprehensive windshield survey of housing conditions to
determine the number and types of housing problems and substandard housing
conditions in the City. The results of the survey will be used to target rehabilitation
programs to those areas in greatest need.
Responsible Agency:         Code enforcement staff
Financing:                  General fund
Program Objectives:         Continue to implement code enforcement program. By the end of
                            FY 14/15, complete a comprehensive housing conditions survey.
                            Use the survey to target funding priorities of Program 2B, if
                            available.
Schedule:                   Housing conditions survey in FY 14/15; code enforcement
                            throughout the planning period
San Jacinto General Plan                        8                          September 2013

                                                                         Housing Element
2.    HOUSING REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
A. Home Rehabilitation Loan Program. The Home Rehabilitation Loan Program targets
lower-income homeowners who need extensive repairs to improve the condition of their
homes. The primary focus of the program is code-related improvements, including major
improvements such as roofing, plumbing, and electrical, followed by aesthetic
improvements, such as paint, carpet, and landscaping. The program includes
improvements needed to correct health and safety violations. The program provides loans
of up to $50,000, with affordability covenants and no interest for 45 years. The City is
attempting to find an alternate source of funding for this program after the loss of
redevelopment funds. Since San Jacinto is not an “entitlement city” it does not receive
funding directly from HUD. The City will investigate the possibility of obtaining funding
assistance for this program through Riverside County.
Responsible Agency:      Not determined at this time
Financing:               A replacement funding source has not been identified after the
                         loss of Redevelopment set-aside funds
Program Objectives:      Two units/year (although funding has not been identified at this
                         time).
Schedule:                Contact Riverside County EDA annually regarding funding
                         opportunities
B. Enhanced Senior Home Repair Grant Program: The Enhanced Senior Home Repair Grant
Program provides one-time grants of up to $3,000 to qualified low-income seniors for
needed repairs to both mobile home units and conventional housing. As noted in Program
2.A above, the City will investigate the possibility of obtaining funding assistance for this
program through Riverside County.
Responsible Agency:      Not determined at this time
Financing:               A replacement funding source has not been identified after the
                         loss of Redevelopment set-aside funds
Program Objectives:      Two units/year (although funding has not been identified at this
                         time).
Schedule:                Contact Riverside County EDA annually regarding funding
                         opportunities
3.    CONSERVATION OF EXISTING AND FUTURE AFFORDABLE UNITS
San Jacinto has several assisted affordable housing developments, although none is at risk
of conversion to market rate during the current planning period. However, the City will
continue to monitor the status of these projects and take steps to preserve affordability
should any become at-risk of conversion in the future.
Responsible Agency:      Community Development Department, U.S. Department of
                         Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the California Depart-
San Jacinto General Plan                     9                             September 2013

                                                                         Housing Element
                         ment of Housing and Community Development (HCD), and the
                         Housing Authority of Riverside County (HARIVCO)
Financing:               HUD Section 8 vouchers, other funding sources as available.
Program Objectives:      Monitor the status of assisted projects.
Schedule:                Throughout the planning period
4.    SECTION 8 RENTAL ASSISTANCE
The Section 8 Rental Assistance Program provides rental subsidies to very-low-income (up
to 50 percent of areawide median income – [AMI]) family and elderly households who
spend more than 30 percent of their income on rent. The subsidy represents the difference
between 30 percent of monthly income and the actual rent. Section 8 assistance is issued
to the recipients as vouchers, which permit tenants to choose their own housing and rent
units beyond the federally determined fair market rent in an area, provided the tenants
pay the extra rent increment.
According to the Housing Authority of Riverside County (HARIVCO), approximately 300
households are receiving Section 8 assistance in San Jacinto.
Responsible Agency:      Housing Authority of Riverside County
Financing:               Section 8 vouchers
Program Objectives:      Continue to support the HARIVCO’s applications for additional
                         Section 8 allocations and efforts to provide vouchers for lower
                         income San Jacinto residents.
Schedule:                Throughout the planning period
PROVIDE ADEQUATE HOUSING SITES
5.    LAND USE ELEMENT
Planning and regulatory actions to ensure adequate housing sites are achieved through
the Land Use Element and Development Code. The Land Use Element provides for a
variety of residential types, ranging from lower-density single-family houses to higher-
density apartments and condominiums. A significant portion of the inventory of sites for
higher-density housing is located in large planned developments. In some cases, large
parcels must be subdivided to create suitable building sites prior to construction. When
large sites must be divided into smaller parcels prior to development, the City will facilitate
this process through pre-application meetings to clarify procedures, concurrent priority
processing of subdivision maps with any other required approvals, and incentives such as
density bonus and modified development standards when the project includes affordable
multi-family housing. The City has a successful track record of facilitating development
applications, and will continue to work cooperatively with developers to streamline the
permit process for large parcels requiring subdivisions.
San Jacinto General Plan                     10                            September 2013

                                                                         Housing Element
The Very High Density Residential (VHDR) land use designation allows multi-family
residential development at 18.1 – 22.0 units/acre (excluding density bonus) and is suitable
for lower-income housing in the San Jacinto market area. The High Density Residential
(HDR) land use designation allows multi-family housing at a density of 14.1 – 18.0
units/acre. As noted in the Technical Appendix, all recent multi-family developments (both
market rate and deed-restricted) in San Jacinto have been affordable to lower-income
households regardless of density.
Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
Financing:               General fund
Program Objectives:      Maintain adequate sites to accommodate San Jacinto’s regional
                         housing needs throughout the planning period.
Schedule:                Throughout the planning period
FACILITATE THE PROVISION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
6.    PROVIDE INCENTIVES AND ASSISTANCE TO AFFORDABLE AND SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING
      DEVELOPMENTS
In order to facilitate the development of housing for low- and moderate-income
households and persons with disabilities (including developmental disabilities), the City will
implement the following actions:
    •  Provide administrative assistance to developers seeking available state and federal
       funding and/or tax credits for the construction of low- and moderate-income
       housing
    •  Facilitate projects that incorporate affordable units and accessible units by
       granting modifications to development standards, expedited processing, or
       financial incentives consistent with state law.
    •  Affordable housing developers will be contacted each year to solicit interest and
       apprise them of available assistance programs.
    •  Targeted assistance for special needs housing and extremely-low-income (ELI) units
       will be provided through density bonuses and/or regulatory incentives, modified
       development standards and fee deferrals, when feasible.
    •  Coordinate with the Inland Regional Center regarding the needs and assistance
       programs targeted for persons with developmental disabilities, and make
       information available on the City website.
Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
Financing:               General Fund
Program Objectives:      Facilitate affordable housing development commensurate with
                         the RHNA and the production of accessible housing for persons
                         with disabilities.
San Jacinto General Plan                      11                           September 2013

                                                                               Housing Element
Schedule:                Contact the Inland Regional Center annually and apply for
                         funding assistance at least once during the planning period;
                         Program implementation throughout the planning period.
7.    DOWNPAYMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Prior to the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012, the Downpayment
Assistance Program provided downpayment or closing cost assistance of up to 6% of the
sales price (up to $390,450) to persons or families earning up to 120% of the area median
income. This program may be reactivated if an alternate funding source becomes
available.
Responsible Agency:      TBD
Financing:               TBD
Program Objectives:      If funding is available, provide downpayment or closing cost
                         assistance to five qualified persons or families annually.
Schedule:                Throughout the planning period
8.    SINGLE-FAMILY INFILL HOUSING PROGRAM
Development of single-family infill housing helps to promote homeownership and
neighborhood improvement. Single-family infill housing can be developed in the older
portions of the City, which helps to improve vacant lots and provide additional affordable
housing opportunities. Several City-owned properties may be available for development.
To enhance the affordability of the units, down payment assistance may be provided. The
City may continue to identify individual vacant lots that are appropriate for single-family
housing development and cooperate with private property owners to develop housing on
these properties if staff and funding is available. The City may offer assistance for
developing the properties with housing for income-qualified households to the extent
feasible.
Responsible Agency:      TBD
Financing:               CDBG, HOME, tax credits, bond financing
Program Objectives:      Assist in the development of one single-family home annually.
Schedule:                Throughout the planning period
9.    PURSUE STATE AND FEDERAL FUNDING
The City will continue to pursue available state and federal funding sources in cooperation
with private developers, non-profit housing corporations, and other interested entities to
assist in meeting the needs of lower-income households. The City will work with developers
or other entities to identify the funding sources most appropriate to meet a specific need
and apply for funds, or assist other entities in applying for funds, during available funding
cycles. City assistance to other entities will include, but not be limited to:
San Jacinto General Plan                        12                              September 2013
                                                                           Housing Element
    •   Providing data that is necessary for a funding request; and
    •   Expediting permit decisions on proposed projects that require City approval or that
        will be more competitive with City approval, prior to submitting funding requests.
For example, the City is not eligible to apply directly for HOME funds, but this program is
available through the County of Riverside Economic Development Agency (EDA). HOME
funds are disbursed on a project-need basis. The City has worked with developers to
design and construct low-income housing projects and will continue to support developer
applications for HOME funds through the County EDA. During the timeframe of this Housing
Element, the City will work with affordable housing providers to assist in the development
of at least one family housing project that will reduce the incidence of overcrowding
among low-income families who rent.
Responsible Agency:      County of Riverside EDA, HCD, CalHFA, and others.
Financing:               CDBG, HOME, tax credits, and bonds
Program Objectives:      Work with at least one developer or interested entity annually.
                         When a developer expresses interest in developing affordable or
                         special needs housing in San Jacinto, determine funding priorities
                         and sources and support applications for funding.
Schedule:                Throughout the planning period
10. MORTGAGE CREDIT CERTIFICATE PROGRAM
A Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) entitles qualified home buyers to reduce the
amount of their federal income tax liability by an amount equal to a portion of the interest
paid during the year on a home mortgage. This tax credit allows the buyer to qualify more
easily for a loan by increasing the effective income of the buyer. The Riverside County
MCC Program provides for a 15% rate which can be applied to the interest paid on the
mortgage loan. The borrower can claim a tax credit equal to 15% of the interest paid
during the year. Since the borrowers taxes are being reduced by the amount of the credit,
this increases the take-home pay by the amount of the credit. The buyer takes the
remaining 85% interest as a deduction. When underwriting the loan, a lender takes this into
consideration and the borrower is able to qualify for a larger loan than would otherwise be
possible. This program was initiated by the Riverside County Economic Development
Agency (EDA) in 2008. The City will provide information regarding this program on the City
website, at City Hall and other public locations.
Responsible Agency:      Riverside County EDA
Financing:               Federal tax credits and EDA
Program Objectives:      Provide information regarding the MCC Program to eligible home
                         buyers.
Schedule:                Throughout the planning period
San Jacinto General Plan                     13                              September 2013

                                                                           Housing Element
PROMOTE EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
11. FAIR HOUSING SERVICES
San Jacinto is not an Entitlement City and is therefore not required to contract directly with
a fair housing service provider. The City will continue to work with County of Riverside,
which provides fair housing services to all unincorporated areas of the county and non-
entitlement cities. Fair housing services offered by the County include counseling and
information on potential discrimination and landlord/tenant problems; special assistance
for ethnic minorities and single-parent households; and bilingual housing literature.
Information regarding available services will be provided at City Hall, on the City website,
and at other governmental offices within the city. In addition, the City will work
cooperatively with the County of Riverside to distribute fair housing information annually.
Responsible Agency:       Riverside County
Financing:                General fund
Program Objectives:       Continue to work with the County of Riverside to provide fair
                          housing services to residents of San Jacinto.
Schedule:                 Throughout the planning period
12. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION IN HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act
require local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. modifications or
exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations to allow disabled persons
an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The Development Code establishes
administrative procedures for reviewing and approving such requests in conformance with
state law. The City will continue to implement this ordinance.
Responsible Agency:       Planning Department
Financing:                Department budget
Program Objectives:       Continue to process requests for reasonable accommodation in
                          conformance with state law and the Development Code.
Schedule:                 Throughout the planning period
13. HOUSING FOR EXTREMELY-LOW-INCOME PERSONS
State law requires local governments to consider the needs of extremely-low-income (ELI)
persons in formulating housing programs. In San Jacinto, housing is much more affordable
than most areas of Southern California, and therefore ELI households have less difficulty
finding suitable housing than many other areas. However, in order to encourage and
facilitate additional housing for persons with extremely-low-incomes the City will pursue the
following actions:
    •   Provide expedited permit processing for new housing that includes ELI units, such as
        SROs and transitional/supportive housing
San Jacinto General Plan                      14                            September 2013

                                                                              Housing Element
    •   Provide regulatory concessions and/or financial incentives when developers
        include ELI units in affordable developments
    •   Conduct annual outreach to non-profit developers
Responsible Agency:        Planning Department
Financing:                 Grant funds, Riverside County EDA
Program Objectives:        Strive to facilitate development of 50 ELI units, if feasible, during
                           the planning period.
Schedule:                  Throughout the planning period.
14. RESIDENTIAL ENERGY CONSERVATION
With the adoption of AB 32, California’s greenhouse gas legislation, energy conservation is
a growing concern. In addition to helping to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions,
residential energy efficiency can reduce home heating and cooling costs.
      a.    Through the Energy Leader Partnership Program, Southern California Edison
            provides support to local governments to identify and address energy efficiency
            opportunities in municipal facilities, take actions supporting the California Long
            Term Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan and increase community awareness and
            participation in demand side management opportunities. A key goal in SCE's
            local government partnerships is helping cities and counties lead by example in
            addressing energy efficiency first in their own municipal facilities. In addition, the
            program strives to expand the policies and the energy management capacity
            at local governments to maintain a long term sustainability focus. The City of
            San Jacinto will seek to participate in the Energy Leader Program with SCE to
            encourage and facilitate opportunities for energy efficiency.
      b.    Support the use of innovative building techniques and construction materials for
            residential development, such as energy efficient buildings that utilize solar
            panels and sustainable building materials that are recyclable.
      c.    Encourage maximum utilization of Federal, State, and local government
            programs, such as the County of Riverside Home Weatherization Program and
            the Western Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG) HERO Program, that
            assist homeowners in providing energy conservation measures.
      d.    Maintain and distribute literature on energy conservation, including solar power,
            additional insulation, and subsidies available from utility companies, and
            encourage homeowners and landlords to incorporate these features into
            construction and remodeling projects.
      e.    Encourage energy conservation devices including but not limited to lighting,
            water heater treatments, solar energy systems for all residential projects.
Objectives:                Work cooperatively with property owners, utility companies and
                           other government agencies to reduce energy use in residential
                           developments.
San Jacinto General Plan                        15                              September 2013

                                                                               Housing Element
Responsible Agency:         Planning Department
Funding:                    General Fund; grant programs, as available
Timeline:                   Throughout the planning period
C. Quantified Objectives
The City’s quantified objectives for the development, rehabilitation, and conservation of
housing during the 2008-2014 planning period are summarized in the following table. The
accomplishment of these objectives will depend on general economic conditions and the
availability of funding assistance.
                                           New                          Conservation/
            Income Category            Construction      Rehabilitation  Preservation
            Extremely-Low                   281               5*            417**
            Very Low                        281               5*
            Low                             394               5*
            Moderate                        441
            Above Moderate                 1,036
             Notes:
             *Depending on available funding to replace lost redevelopment revenues
             **Assisted units (see Technical Report Table 18)
San Jacinto General Plan                         16                              September 2013

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                              Introduction
                                                The Land Use Element is a guide to land use
                                                planning within the City of San Jacinto and
                                                affects many of the issues addressed in the other
                                                General Plan elements. The Land Use Element
                                                identifies the type and location of future land
                                                uses within the City. The specific land uses and
                                                their location within the community in turn affect
                                                the remaining General Plan elements.           For
                                                example, the location and type of land uses
                                                outlined in the Land Use Element affect the
                         circulation system that is identified in the Circulation Element, and
                         the allowable density of residential land identified in the Land Use
                         Element affects the Housing Element policies.            The land uses
                         identified in the Land Use Element also reflect the community’s goals
                         for its future form and character.
        PURPOSE OF THE   State law requires that San Jacinto prepare and adopt a General
                         Plan as a tool for guiding the physical development of the city. The
     LAND USE ELEMENT
                         Land Use Element is a mandatory element or chapter of the General
                         Plan.
                         The purpose of the Land Use Element is to describe present and
                         planned land use activity that has been designed to achieve the
                         community’s long-range goals for the future. The Land Use Element
                         identifies the proposed general distribution, location, and extent of
                         land uses such as residential, commercial, industrial, public
                         institutional, and open space. The element consists of text, maps,
                         and diagrams that outline the future land uses within the City and
                         how these uses are integrated with the other General Plan elements
                         and policies. The Land Use Policy Map is a particularly important
                         feature of the element since it shows the location and types of
                         development within the City. The element also describes the
                         intensity or density of development within the City. The Land Use
                         Element also addresses the relationship between development and
                         environmental quality, potential hazards, and social and economic
                         objectives.
                         The Land Use Element of the San Jacinto General Plan represents
                         the City’s desire for long-range changes and enhancements of land
                         uses. The current element and its policies form a continuation with
                         policies and goals to create a future in which the traditional
                         character of the City is preserved and enhanced by new
                         development. Finally, the goals and policies contained in this
                         element establish the framework for future land use planning and
                         decision making in San Jacinto.
San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-1                                   October 2012

                                                                         LAND USE ELEMENT
  SCOPE AND CONTENT      The Land Use Element complies with the requirements of the General
       OF THE LAND USE   Plan Land Use Element mandated in Government Code Section
                         65302(a).     The element is comprised of three sections: 1)
               ELEMENT   Introduction, 2) Issues, Goals, and Policies, and 3) the Land Use Plan.
                         An appendix to the element comprises the Implementation
                         Program. In the Issues, Goals, and Policies section, major land use
                         issues are identified and related goals and policies are established
                         to address these issues. The goals, which are overall statements of
                         the community’s desires, are comprised of broad statements of
                         purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for reviewing
                         development proposals, planning facilities to accommodate
                         growth, and accomplishing community development strategies. To
                         achieve these goals and policies, a logical, organized land use
                         pattern is established in the Plan with standards for future community
                         development. The Plan contains the Land Use Policy Map that
                         graphically identifies the planned land uses within San Jacinto. The
                         land use designations are described, including the type and density
                         of allowed uses, and a statistical summary of the future land use
                         composition is provided. Specific implementation programs for the
                         element are located in the appendix.
         RELATED PLANS   There are a number of related plans and programs that are
       AND PROGRAMS      considered in the formulation, adoption, and implementation of local
                         land use policy. Related plans and programs are both local and
                         regional in nature. Regional planning agencies, such as the Southern
                         California Association of Governments (SCAG) and the Western
                         Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG), recognize that planning
                         issues extend beyond the boundaries of individual cities. Efforts to
                         address regional planning issues such as air quality, transportation,
                         affordable housing, and habitat conservation have resulted in the
                         adoption of regional plans. The form and distribution of development
                         in San Jacinto are affected by regional plans. Relevant local and
                         regional plans related to the Land Use Element are discussed briefly in
                         the following sections.
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-2                                    October 2012

                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
             California  The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the
        Environmental    State legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
  Quality Act (CEQA)     environmental analysis of projects that might affect the environment.
      and Guidelines     The provisions of the law and environmental review procedures are
                         described in the CEQA Statutes and the CEQA Guidelines that were
                         amended in 1998. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the
                         decision making stage of development, City officials and the general
                         public will be able to assess the environmental impacts associated
                         with private and public development projects.
  City of San Jacinto    The Development Code is the primary implementation tool for the
 Development Code        Land Use Element. Together, the Development Code and Zoning
                         Map identify specific types of land use, intensity of land use, and
                         development and performance standards applicable to specific
                         areas and parcels of land within the City. Table LU-1 illustrates the
                         consistency between the General Plan Land Use designations and
                         the zoning districts.
                         The Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation
    Western Riverside    Plan (MSHCP) is one component of an integrated plan that also
      County Multiple    includes an updated Riverside County General Plan and a
               Species   Transportation Corridor Plan.       The MSHCP provides for the
Habitat Conservation     conservation of approximately 160 species on 1.25 million acres of
         Plan (MSHCP)    land in the rapidly urbanizing area of Riverside County. The Plan is
                         intended to comply with the guidelines of habitat conservation
                         planning required under Section 10(a) of the Endangered Species
                         Act.    The ultimate goal of the plan is the development and
                         management of preserve areas within the urban landscape. The
                         preserve areas and management techniques contained in the final
                         MSHCP will affect land use planning and development opportunities
                         within the San Jacinto Planning Area. kkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkk
        SCAG Growth      The SCAG Growth Management Plan recommends methods to
   Management Plan       direct regional growth to minimize traffic congestion and better
                         protect environmental quality.        The goals of the Growth
                         Management Plan include balancing jobs and housing. While
                         SCAG has no authority to mandate implementation of its Growth
                         Management Plan, principal goals have implications for the land
                         use composition of San Jacinto. The SCAG goals are generally
                         reflected throughout all of the General Plan elements, including the
                         Land Use Element.
      South Coast Air    The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) mandates a
                Quality  variety of measures to improve air quality. To comply with the
   Management Plan       AQMP, the Land Use Element organizes land uses in relation to the
                         circulation system, promotes commercial and industrial land uses
                         with convenient access to transportation, and provides a balanced
                         Land Use Plan that promotes a favorable relationship between jobs
                         and housing.
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-3                                 October 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                                                                    Table LU-1
                                                                                                    General Plan and Zoning Consistency Matrix
     General Plan Land Use Designation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Zoning Designation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Residential, Medium Density (RM)                                                                         Residential, Very High Density (RVH)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Residential, Medium High Density
                                                                      Open Space Recreation (OSR)                                                                                  Residential, Low Density (RL)                                                                         Residential, High Density (RH)                                            Commercial Downtown (CD)   Commercial Neighborhood (CN)
                                                                                                    Residential Agriculture
                                           Open Space General (OSG)                                                             Estate Residential (ER)   Rural Residential (RR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Commercial General (CG)   Commercial Regional (CR)                                                                    Industrial Heavy (IH)   Public Institutional (PI)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (RMH)                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Office Park (OP)    Business Park (BP)   Industrial Light (IL)                                                       Specific Plan (SP)
                                                                                                    Accessory Business (RAAB)
  Open Space Land Use Designations
  Open Space (OS)                               X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X
  Open Space Recreation (OS-R)                  X                             X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            X
  Parks (P)                                     X                             X                                                        X                         X                         X                                X                                     X                              X                                    X                                                                                      X                                                                                                                                                                             X
  Residential Land Use Designations
  Estate Residential (ER)                                                                                                              X                       O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X
  Rural Residential (RR)                                                                                      X                                                X                          O                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                        O                                                                                                                                                                            X
  Low Density Residential (LDR)                                                                               X                                                                           X                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                        O                                                                                                                                                                            X
  Medium Density Residential (MDR)                                                                                                                                                                                          X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X
  Medium High Density Residential (MHDR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X
  High Density Residential (HDR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X
  Very High Density Residential (VHDR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X
  Commercial Land Use Designations
  Community Commercial (CC)                                                 O                                O                       O                         O                          O                               O                                      O                              O                                                                                                     X                      X                                                                                                                                                                             X
  Downtown Commercial (DC)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            X                                   X                                                  X                                                                                                                                                                             X
  Regional Commercial (RC)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X                                     X                                                                                                                                       X
San Jacinto General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                 LU-4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 October 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                                                                           Table LU-1
                                                                                                           General Plan and Zoning Consistency Matrix
      General Plan Land Use Designation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zoning Designation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Residential, Medium Density (RM)                                                                         Residential, Very High Density (RVH)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Residential, Medium High Density
                                                                             Open Space Recreation (OSR)                                                                                  Residential, Low Density (RL)                                                                         Residential, High Density (RH)                                            Commercial Downtown (CD)   Commercial Neighborhood (CN)
                                                                                                           Residential Agriculture
                                                  Open Space General (OSG)                                                             Estate Residential (ER)   Rural Residential (RR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Commercial General (CG)   Commercial Regional (CR)                                                                    Industrial Heavy (IH)   Public Institutional (PI)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (RMH)                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Office Park (OP)    Business Park (BP)   Industrial Light (IL)                                                       Specific Plan (SP)
                                                                                                           Accessory Business (RAAB)
  Industrial Land Use Designation
  Office Park (OP)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X                                                  X                                                                                                                   X
  Business Park (BP)                                  O                            O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               X                   O                                                                          X
  Industrial (I)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                   O                    O                      X                      X                                                 X
  Public Institutional Land Use Designation
  Public Institutional (PI)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X
  Special Land Use Designations
  Specific Plan (Planned Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X                                                                                                                                                                                                    X
  Development (SP)
  Central City Planning Area                          O                            O                                                                                                                                                                                     X                              X                                    X                                   X                         O                               X                                                                                                                                                                    O
  Gateway Area Specific Plan                          O                            O                                                                                                                                                                                     X                              X                                    X                                                                                             X                                                  X                    X                                                                                              X
X = Clearly compatible
O = May be compatible based on availability of services, surrounding land uses, timing and interim uses
San Jacinto General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                        LU-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 October 2012
                                                                          LAND USE ELEMENT
       RELATIONSHIP TO   According to state planning law, the Land Use Element must be
 OTHER GENERAL PLAN      consistent with the other General Plan Elements. Each element is
                         independent and all of the elements together comprise the General
              ELEMENTS   Plan. All elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a degree,
                         and certain goals and policies of each element may also address
                         issues that are the primary subjects of other elements.            The
                         integration of overlapping issues throughout the General Plan
                         elements provides a comprehensive basis for implementation of
                         plans and programs, and achievement of community goals.
                         The Land Use Element relates very closely to all of the other General
                         Plan elements. This element establishes the planned land use
                         pattern for San Jacinto based on the historic formation of the City
                         and the community’s vision for the future. Alternatively, the other
                         General Plan elements ensure that infrastructure and public facilities
                         are available to accommodate planned land uses, and that the
                         unique qualities of San Jacinto are safeguarded and enhanced.
                         For example, the Housing Element of the General Plan provides the
                         basis for construction of a variety of housing types that meet the
                         affordability requirements and special needs of the community. The
                         Circulation Element provides a Circulation Plan to accommodate
                         increased traffic from planned development. The use of alternative
                         transportation modes and reduction of automobile trips are
                         addressed in the Circulation Element to meet the transportation
                         demands from new development, and to mitigate the impact of
                         development on regional air quality and traffic conditions.
                         A number of areas are designated for open space and recreational
                         purposes on the Land Use Policy Map. The Community Services and
                         Facilities Element provides policies and plans to maintain and
                         enhance existing parks and recreational facilities and to develop
                         new facilities to meet new demand from population growth. The
                         Resource Management Element is also designed to protect natural
                         resources.
                         The Noise and Public Safety Elements ensure that planned land uses
                         identified in the Land Use Element are compatible and will not result
                         in public safety hazards or exposure of people to excessive noise.
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-6                                  October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                         Issues, Goals and Policies
                                               The Land Use Element addresses future land use
                                               within the community. The Element focuses on
                                               how vacant land will be allowed to develop, as
                                               well as how certain developed land may be
                                               redeveloped for other uses.
                                               Seven major issues are addressed in the goals,
                                               policies, and implementation actions of the
                                               Land Use Element. These major issues include:
                                               1) developing a balanced land use pattern to
                         meet community needs; 2) managing and directing future growth
                         within the City so that the community and its neighborhoods are
                         protected and enhanced; 3) ensuring compatible land uses and
                         environmental conditions; 4) promoting compatible, high quality
                         development; 5) rejuvenating the downtown area; 6) preserving
                         and protecting important cultural, historic, and visual resources
                         within the community; and 7) targeting local and regional economic
                         development opportunities.
            BALANCE OF   Every community requires a mixture of land uses: residential to
             LAND USES   provide housing for those living within the community; commercial
                         and industrial to provide goods and services, tax revenue and
                         employment opportunities for the City’s residents; public and
                         institutional uses to provide services such as education and utilities;
                         and open space and recreational uses for the enjoyment of all.
                         San Jacinto is fortunate to contain housing that is affordable to the
                         majority of its residents, and has a variety of opportunities for the
                         development of employment generating uses.
                         Land Use Goal 1: Develop a balanced land use pattern that meets
                         community needs for residential, commercial, industrial, public, and
                         recreational uses.
                         Policy 1.1: Promote a land use composition in San Jacinto that
                                        provides a balance or surplus between the generation
                                        of public revenues and the cost of providing
                                        community services and facilities.
                         Policy 1.2: Create housing opportunities that match employment
                                        opportunities within the community.
                         Policy 1.3: Attract       light   industry and     other   compatible
                                        employment generating businesses.
                         Policy 1.4: Provide public/institutional land use designations and
                                        development standards that encourage the location
                                        and operation of adequate public facilities to serve the
                                        community.
San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-7                                 October 2012

                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                         Policy 1.5: Plan and designate adequate open space and
                                       parkland to meet the community's parks, open space,
                                       and recreational needs.
                         Policy 1.6: Maintain land use designations and regulations that
                                       permit the successful development and operation of
                                       public and private educational facilities at appropriate
                                       locations within the planning area.
                         Policy 1.7: Encourage additional retail development to increase
                                       sales tax revenues and expand the range of services
                                       available to the community.
                         Policy 1.8: Encourage the development of business parks and
                                       office parks to expand the number and type of job
                                       opportunities in San Jacinto.
                         Policy 1.9: Support the provision of outdoor gathering places such
                                       as plazas, greens and squares to strengthen social
                                       interaction and provide visual relief in developed areas.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-1, LU-2, LU-3
          MANAGE AND     San Jacinto, as well the surrounding region, has experienced
       DIRECT GROWTH     substantial growth over the past 20 years. Growth projections show
                         that this trend is expected to continue during the next two decades.
                         New development brings change and a changing community
                         character.      While recognizing that change is inevitable, the
                         community can plan and guide future development that
                         complements the existing community and protects and enhances
                         the existing character found in San Jacinto and its neighborhoods.
                         Land Use Goal 2: Manage and direct growth so that the community
                         and its neighborhoods are protected and enhanced.
                         Policy 2.1: Assure that new development is complementary to the
                                       existing character of the City.
                         Policy 2.2: Encourage infill development to be consistent with and
                                       complement the bulk, scale, intensity, and character of
                                       the existing surroundings.
                         Policy 2.3: Ensure that development corresponds to the provision
                                       of community services and facilities and new
                                       development funds its share of improvements (e.g.,
                                       parks, schools, trails, utilities).
                         Policy 2.4: Ensure that adequate infrastructure and public services
                                       are provided in concert with development so that no
                                       negative fiscal or service impact occurs as a result of
                                       new development.
San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-8                                   October 2012
                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                         Policy 2.5: Preserve and enhance the quality of San Jacinto’s
                                      neighborhoods by restricting           or    abating      non-
                                      conforming buildings and uses.
                         Policy 2.6: Annex land within the sphere of influence prior to its
                                      development to ensure development is compatible
                                      with that in San Jacinto.
                         Policy 2.7: Locate retail and commercial land uses along major
                                      circulation routes at major intersections where there is
                                      maximum access and visibility.
                         Policy 2.8: Direct higher density housing and higher intensity
                                      employment around commercial uses and job centers
                                      near transit nodes and areas served by a well-
                                      developed transportation network.
                         Policy 2.9: Where feasible and beneficial to the City and its
                                      residents, encourage the joint use of public facilities.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-4, LU-5, LU-6,
                         LU-7
       ENVIRONMENTAL     Certain features of San Jacinto, such as hillsides, fault lines, and flood
         COMPATIBILITY   plains, pose risks to future development. Through proper land use
                         planning, the community can identify these sensitive areas and
                         reduce potential environmental impacts by matching development
                         or designating areas for environmentally compatible land uses.
                         Land Use Goal 3: Foster development in San Jacinto that
                         ensures the compatibility of land uses with environmental
                         conditions.
                         Policy 3.1: Limit development in the hillsides, ridgelines, flood
                                      plains, and other high risk areas.
                         Policy 3.2: Explore methods to preserve areas of severe natural
                                      hazards, such as landslides, ground subsidence,
                                      liquefaction, and flooding as open space.
                         Policy 3.3: Permit the joint-use of preserve areas and easements
                                      such as seismic faults and drainage basins for open
                                      space and recreational uses.
                         Policy 3.4: Preserve       prominent      ridgelines     by      restricting
                                      development on slopes of 40% or higher.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-3, LU-8,LU-9,
                                      LU-10
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-9                                      October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
         LAND USE AND    San Jacinto is primarily a residential community and will continue to
           CIRCULATION   have a substantial portion of its land devoted to housing. While the
                         City requires a comprehensive circulation system and revenue
         COMPATIBILITY   generated by commercial, industrial, and agricultural uses to
                         support the needs of the community, these roadways and non-
                         residential land uses must be compatible with the existing
                         community. Land uses such as open space can be used to buffer
                         residential areas from non-residential uses. Land use designations
                         can also limit the type of industrial and commercial activities that
                         may occur to those that are most compatible with residential areas,
                         as well as limit the type and amount of residential uses located
                         adjacent to major roadways.
                         Land Use Goal 4: Promote high-quality development that ensures
                         compatibility with surrounding land uses and major transportation
                         corridors.
                         Policy 4.1: Evaluate the compatibility of new development with
                                       surrounding uses when reviewing development
                                       proposals and designing the circulation system
                                       improvements.
                         Policy 4.2: Ensure that new development is compatible with the
                                       physical characteristics of the site, surrounding land
                                       uses, and available public infrastructure.
                         Policy 4.3: Maximize        commercial, retail, and employment
                                       opportunities along the City's major corridors and
                                       intersections, including the SR-79, the Ramona
                                       Expressway, Sanderson, and Cottonwood.
                         Policy 4.4: Ensure new development provides roadways that meet
                                       the City's standards based on the classifications shown
                                       in the Circulation Master Plan and the level of traffic
                                       expected to be generated by the proposed project.
                         Policy 4.5: Minimize the number of vehicular access points on
                                       major corridors by using reciprocal access agreements
                                       whenever feasible.
                         Policy 4.6: Enhance pedestrian access both within shopping
                                       centers and to and from commercial uses to reduce
                                       vehicle trips generated within the City.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-8, LU-11,
                         LU-12, LU-13
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-10                                 October 2012
                                                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
            DOWNTOWN     The downtown area is the traditional core of the City. The
         REJUVENATION    area is a historic focal point for the community and is
                         pedestrian-friendly, which encourages people to walk from
                         destination to destination. With new development drawing
                         commercial activities away from the downtown area, there is
                         a need for the rejuvenation of the downtown, building on the
                         numerous opportunities offered.
                         Land Use Goal 5: Rejuvenate San Jacinto’s downtown area.
                         Policy 5.1: Support the location and retention of appropriate,
                                     smaller     scale   local-serving and      visitor-oriented
                                     businesses within the downtown area.
                         Policy 5.2: Work with others to refurbish and re-use older buildings
                                     for mixed-use residential, commercial, and office uses.
                         Policy 5.3: Encourage mixed use developments that provide well
                                     designed, higher density residential development over
                                     non-residential uses.
                         Policy 5.4: Encourage projects that offer pedestrian scaled
                                     designs and walkability to reduce vehicle trips and
                                     parking demand within the downtown.
                         Policy 5.5: Maintain and rejuvenate public and private properties
                                     in the downtown area through activities such as code
                                     enforcement, weed abatement, and trash removal.
                         Policy 5.6: Remove constraints to commercial activities in the
                                     downtown areas, such as the lack of parking and lack
                                     of space for expansion of building floor area.
                         Policy 5.7: Rejuvenate residential neighborhoods that surround the
                                     downtown to encourage more aesthetically pleasing
                                     development and community activity in the central
                                     core of the City.
                         Policy 5.8: Emphasize and enhance the downtown area's cultural
                                     resources and historical environment.
                         Policy 5.9: Encourage      project amenities that enhance the
                                     pedestrian environment, such as tree plantings,
                                     pedestrian-scaled signs and lighting, street furniture,
                                     and sidewalk improvements throughout the downtown.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-14, LU-15,
                         LU-16
San Jacinto General Plan                   LU-11                                   October 2012

                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
             RESOURCE    The community of San Jacinto has a long history, beginning before
          PRESERVATION   the arrival of European settlers when the Luiseños lived within the
                         San Jacinto area. Archaeological remains from this period have
                         been found throughout the City and sphere of influence. Historical
                         districts and structures located within the City’s boundary, such as
                         the Estudillo Mansion and Victorian houses, are remains of the City’s
                         historic past. Along with evidence of its historic past, the visual
                         character of the community is defined by the surrounding
                         agricultural resources and mountain views. Future development
                         should be compatible with the preservation of these resources.
                         Land Use Goal 6: Preserve and protect the City’s cultural, historic,
                         agricultural, and visual resources.
                         Policy 6.1: Balance the benefits of development with potential
                                       impacts to existing cultural resources.
                         Policy 6.2: Identify, designate, and protect buildings, districts, and
                                       sites of historic importance within San Jacinto.
                         Policy 6.3: Use landscaping for screening, solar control, parking lot
                                       shade, and other beautification purposes throughout
                                       the City.
                         Policy 6.4: Encourage outdoor gathering spaces, such as mini-
                                       parks and plazas that encourage social interaction and
                                       also enhance the visual character of the community.
                         Policy 6.5: Encourage the use of project design features that
                                       reduce impacts to important local and regional
                                       environmental resources.
                         Policy 6.6: Identify funding programs to assist private property
                                       owners in the preservation of historic resources.
                         Policy 6.7: Preserve and enhance public views of the mountains
                                       and hillsides and other scenic vistas.
                         Policy 6.8: Preserve large groupings of trees, rock outcroppings,
                                       and other valuable scenic resources.
                         Policy 6.9: Protect valuable agricultural resources and encourage
                                       the continuation of agricultural activities.
                         Policy 6.10: Promote the maintenance of private and public
                                       properties to enhance the visual appearance of the
                                       community.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-18, LU-19,
                         LU-20
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-12                                   October 2012

                                                                             LAND USE ELEMENT
            ECONOMIC     In order to maintain a fiscally healthy and balanced economy, a
          DEVELOPMENT    strong economic development program is needed for the
                         community.      Economic development is influenced by almost
                         everything the City does, including maintaining a high quality
                         environment, improving parks and enhancing public safety, and
                         improving streets and other physical infrastructure, which are
                         intricately connected to activities of outside agencies and
                         organizations such as schools, utilities, and telecommunications.
                         In addition, the City is fortunate to be located in close proximity to
                         the newly completed Diamond Valley Reservoir and the Soboba
                         Indian Reservation.        Both of these facilities offer economic
                         development opportunities for the community since some people
                         traveling to each location may pass through the City.                 By
                         coordinating development efforts with these facilities, the
                         community of San Jacinto can formulate a plan to benefit from the
                         increase in area visitors. A City economic development program
                         needs to address all of these factors to be successful.
                         Land Use Goal 7:          Capitalize on the City's many economic
                         development opportunities to promote a strong and economically
                         healthy community.
                         Policy 7.1: Promote the economic stability of the San Jacinto Area
                                       by encouraging diversification of the City’s commercial
                                       and industrial base by:
                                           Encouraging a variety of industries to locate in
                                            San Jacinto, including retail, high technology,
                                            manufacturing, and professional services in order
                                            to promote the development of a mixed
                                            economic base; and
                                           Encouraging the expansion of existing businesses if
                                            possible and extending efforts at business
                                            retention.
                         Policy 7.2: Ensure that State Route 79 provides the maximum
                                       economic benefits to the local economy by
                                       encouraging appropriate development along the
                                       corridor and at major interchanges.
                         Policy 7.3: Target the potential benefits from the Diamond Valley
                                       Reservoir and gaming and entertainment uses of the
                                       Soboba Indian Reservation by promoting the
                                       recreational opportunities available in the San Jacinto
                                       area.
                         Policy 7.4: Support the development of visitor-oriented activities
                                       and businesses that build upon the opportunities
                                       provided by the Diamond Valley Reservoir and the
                                       Soboba Indian Reservation.
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-13                                   October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                         Policy 7.5: Pursue a variety of public and non-profit funding
                                      sources to fund community rejuvenation and economic
                                      development activities.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-21
                         Land Use Goal 8: Promote a growing and skilled labor force that will
                         attract a range of jobs and wage levels to satisfy the employment
                         and income needs of the City’s labor force through all cycles of the
                         economy.
                         Policy 8.1: Promote the development of a broad range of skill and
                                      wage levels in job opportunities in San Jacinto through
                                      expanded commercial, office, business park, and
                                      industrial facilities.
                         Policy 8.2: Promote training, educational and labor support
                                      programs that enhance the quality of the area’s labor
                                      force, and assist them in obtaining new employment
                                      opportunities.
                         Policy 8.3: Develop collaborative relationships between private
                                      and public entities to         affect and     maintain a
                                      comprehensive          and     coordinated      economic
                                      development process.
                         Policy 8.4: Support the location of local and regional serving
                                      medical facilities in San Jacinto.
                         Related Land Use Element Implementation Programs: LU-21
   COMMUNITY DESIGN      San Jacinto is expected to experience continued growth over the
                         next few decades. It is important that new development and
                         redevelopment activities be planned and designed in a manner
                         that enhances the community’s quality of life. Comprehensive
                         policies, standards, and guidelines to encourage thoughtful
                         community design should be implemented.
                         Land Use Goal 9: Encourage thoughtful community design that
                         enhances San Jacinto’s quality of life.
                         Policy 9.1: Ensure new development is compatible with its natural
                                      surroundings and the built environment in terms of
                                      architecture, scale, grading, and massing.
                         Policy 9.2: Encourage development that respects and enhances
                                      the Valley’s rich history and pastoral setting.
                         Policy 9.3: Support      pedestrian-friendly and pedestrian-scaled
                                      development that encourages more social interaction
San Jacinto General Plan                   LU-14                                     October 2012

                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                     and less automobile use, including mixed use and
                                     clustered developments.
                         Policy 9.4: Provide public spaces and activity centers that
                                     encourage social involvement, physical activity, and
                                     community pride.
                         Policy 9.5: Support “green” and “sustainable” developments that
                                     respect and conserve the region’s important resources.
                         Policy 9.6: Require the use and maintenance of extensive
                                     landscaping in new development and redevelopment
                                     projects to beautify the surroundings, screen outdoor
                                     uses, provide shade, establish pedestrian paths, buffer
                                     incompatible land uses, and provide visual interest.
                         Policy 9.7: Encourage public art, such as murals, sculptures,
                                     creative street furniture, and fountains in new public
                                     and private developments.
                         Policy 9.8: Develop and enforce development standards and
                                     design guidelines that provide clear yet flexible
                                     direction for achieving quality community design in
                                     new development and redevelopment projects
                                     throughout the community.
                         Related Land Use Implementation Programs: LU-6, LU-11, LU-16, LU-18
San Jacinto General Plan                   LU-15                                October 2012

                                                                             LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                           Land Use Plan
                                               San Jacinto is a city that has recently
                                               experienced substantial growth and has the
                                               need to plan for the continued expansion of
                                               urban development. The nature and character
                                               of existing development, the desire for greater
                                               economic development, planned infrastructure
                                               capacity, and the desire to avoid development
                                               in areas that contain sensitive environmental
                                               resources or pose a risk to the public health and
                                               safety, all have an influence on the development
                         of land use policy and planning for future land use.
                         Natural and human made corridors located through the community
                         also affect land use planning in San Jacinto. The San Jacinto River,
                         surrounding ridgelines, and existing and planned roadways form
                         constraints to development, but also provide a variety of
                         opportunities. While limiting development in the flood plain, the
                         San Jacinto River provides recreational opportunities and adds to
                         the character of the community. The major roadways create
                         physical barriers and are sources of noise, but they also provide
                         access to the City and carry customers to existing and planned
                         commercial uses and business centers.
                         The Land Use Plan describes the approach that will be used to build
                         upon the community’s history of sound planning. The Plan addresses
                         the issues identified in the previous section of the Element. The goals
                         and policies described in that section provide the basis for the Plan
                         and are supported by approaches to maintain an advantageous
                         balance among land uses, manage and direct growth, reduce the
                         risk to residents from natural hazards, ensure that new development
                         is compatible with surrounding land uses and circulation system,
                         rejuvenate the downtown area, preserve and protect important
                         cultural and natural resources, and implement a strong economic
                         development strategy.
            BALANCE OF   The variety of land uses within San Jacinto affects the balance
             LAND USES   between the generation of public revenues and the provision of
                         public facilities and services, as well as the balance between local
                         residential and employment opportunities.               Achieving and
                         maintaining a balance of land uses can ensure fiscal stability and
                         also create a desirable community in which people can work, shop,
                         reside, and enjoy a range of recreational opportunities.
                         The San Jacinto Planning Area includes a mixture of existing urban
                         development, mainly within the City limits, and undeveloped
                         agricultural and vacant lands within the unincorporated
San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-16                                  October 2012

                                                                          LAND USE ELEMENT
                         undeveloped lands are identified for preservation for open space
                         uses, the majority of the undeveloped Planning Area is identified for
                         future development. The Land Use Plan identifies the appropriate
                         land use composition for these areas to promote a balance
                         between the generation of public revenues and the cost of
                         providing public facilities and services.
                         Implementation of the Land Use Plan will also assist in creating a
                         balance between the number of jobs and housing units within the
                         City. A balance between jobs and housing allows some people to
                         live and work within the same community. This results in a reduction
                         of traffic, thereby reducing the level of air pollution and improving
                         the quality of life for the community.
                         San Jacinto is located within a housing rich sub-region. The City has
                         identified undeveloped land that is appropriately located for
                         employment generating uses. The City will implement the Land Use
                         Plan to assure that a balance of land uses occurs, maintaining fiscal
                         stability and an improved jobs/housing balance.
              LAND USE   The Land Use Policy Map (Figure LU-1) illustrates the various types
        CLASSIFICATION   and distribution of land uses planned for San Jacinto. The land use
                SYSTEM   classification system includes 19 land use designations as presented
                         in Table LU-2. These land use designations identify the types and
                         nature of development allowed in particular locations depicted on
                         the Land Use Policy Map.
                         The residential category includes seven designations that allow for a
                         range of housing types and densities. The non-residential categories
                         include a variety of designations, such as community commercial,
                         downtown commercial, business park, and industrial to promote a
                         wide range of revenue and employment generating businesses.
                         Other non-residential designations include public institutional and
                         open space.
San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-17                                October 2012
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                   Table LU-2
                                       Land Use Classification System
                                                                       Maximum         Average Dwelling
                                                                    Dwelling Units Per   Units Per Net
          Land Use Designation and Summary Description
                                                                      Net Acre or      Acre or Average
                                                                     Maximum FAR1            FAR1
 Open Space Land Use Designations
 GENERAL OPEN SPACE (OS). General open space and open space
 for the conservation of natural and scenic resources and the
 protection of public and property from natural hazards.             0.025 du/acre      0.017 du/acre
 Residential uses are permitted at a maximum density of one             0.10 FAR          0.001 FAR
 dwelling unit per 40 acres. Park and outdoor recreational uses
 permitted at a maximum FAR of 0.10.
 OPEN SPACE RECREATION (OS-R). Outdoor recreational facilities,
 including golf courses, swimming schools, tennis clubs and                0.10              0.10
 equestrian clubs.
 PARKS (P). Passive and active recreation sites operated by the
                                                                           0.15              0.10
 City and regional agencies.
 Residential Land Use Designations
 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL (ER). Allows a maximum of 1 detached single
 family dwelling unit per 2 acres. Appropriate for rural areas and          0.5               0.4
 preservation of hillside and scenic resources.
 RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RR). Allows a maximum of 2 detached single-
 family dwelling unit per acre, small agricultural operations and           2.0               1.5
 rural-oriented residences.
 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (LDR). Allows a maximum of 5 dwelling
 units per acre. Single-family detached residential                       2.1-5.0             4.0
 development.
 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (MDR). Allows up to 10 dwelling units
 per acre for the development of single family attached and
                                                                         5.1-10.0             6.0
 detached units, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses,
 condominiums, as well as mobilehome parks.
 MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (MHDR). Allows up to 14 dwelling
 units per acre. Multi-family housing, including garden style
                                                                        10.1-14.0            11.0
 units, apartments, condominiums, townhouses, as well as
 mobilehome parks.
 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (HDR). Allows up to 18 dwelling units per
 acre. Multi-family housing, including garden style units,
                                                                        14.1-18.0            16.0
 apartments, condominiums, townhouses, as well as
 mobilehome parks.
San Jacinto General Plan                               LU-18                                October 2012
                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                   Table LU-2
                                         Land Use Classification System
                                                                         Maximum         Average Dwelling
                                                                      Dwelling Units Per   Units Per Net
          Land Use Designation and Summary Description
                                                                        Net Acre or      Acre or Average
                                                                       Maximum FAR1            FAR1
 VERY HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (VHDR). Allows up to 22 dwelling units
                                                                          18.1-22.0            20.0
 per acre. Intended for apartments and condominiums.
 Commercial Land Use Designations
 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CC). Allows a maximum FAR of 0.40.
 Broad range of service and retail commercial activities at
 various intensities. Offices uses may also be considered                    0.40              0.25
 appropriate for provision of services and employment-
 generating purposes.
 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (DC). Allows a maximum FAR of 2.0 for
 commercial uses. Also allows a maximum residential density of
 5 dwelling units per acre to allow for a mix of residential and        5.0 du/acre        1.0 du/acre
 commercial uses. Commercial and residential uses with strong              2.0 FAR           0.75 FAR
 pedestrian orientation that enhances the City’s small town
 character.
 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL (RC). Allows a maximum FAR of 0.5 for
 commercial uses designed to attract regional traffic, including
                                                                              0.5               0.3
 big box retail, auto dealerships, and visitor-oriented
 commercial uses.
 Industrial Land Use Designation
 OFFICE PARK (OP). Allows a maximum FAR of 0.35. Single-tenant
 and multi-tenant offices, including legal, medical, financial,              0.35              0.25
 administrative, and general business.
 BUSINESS PARK. (BP). Allows a maximum FAR of 0.35. Warehousing
 and storage, R & D, corporate, high technology and general                  0.35              0.25
 business.
 INDUSTRIAL (I). Allows a maximum FAR of 0.40. Variety of industrial
 and manufacturing activities that do not generate significant               0.40              0.30
 amounts of pollution.
 Public Institutional Land Use Designation
 PUBLIC INSTITUTIONAL (PI). Existing and planned publicly owned
 property and facilities, including the Eastern Municipal Water              0.50              0.05
 District properties. Allows a maximum FAR of 0.50.
San Jacinto General Plan                                LU-19                                 October 2012

                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                   Table LU-2
                                       Land Use Classification System
                                                                      Maximum         Average Dwelling
                                                                   Dwelling Units Per   Units Per Net
          Land Use Designation and Summary Description
                                                                     Net Acre or      Acre or Average
                                                                    Maximum FAR1            FAR1
 Special Land Use Designations
 SPECIFIC PLAN (PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT) (SP). A Specific
 Plan is required for all projects of 100 acres or more. A SP must
 include detailed regulations, conditions and programs for              Varies**          Varies**
 development. Permitted densities/uses are based on
 underlying General Plan designation per parcel.
 CENTER CITY (CC). The Center City overlay designation is applied
 to an approximately 1,500-acre area in San Jacinto’s urban
 core. Development in these areas will be subject to additional
                                                                        Varies**          Varies**
 design and development standards intended to help revitalize
 the downtown area.
 1 FAR = floor area ratio.
 ** Density allowed depends on underlying General Plan
 designations and Zoning.
San Jacinto General Plan                              LU-20                                October 2012

                               LAND USE ELEMENT
San Jacinto General Plan LU-21       October 2012
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
San Jacinto General Plan LU-22       October 2012
                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
 LAND USE DENSITY AND    This element uses certain terminology to describe the 19 land use
              INTENSITY  designations. The term density is used for residential uses and refers to
                         the population and development capacity of residential land. Density is
                         described in terms of dwelling units per net acre of land (du/net acre).
                         Development intensity, which applies primarily to non-residential uses,
                         refers to the extent of development on a parcel of land or lot (i.e., the
                         total building footage, building height, the floor area ratio, and/or the
                         percent of lot coverage). Intensity is often used to describe non-
                         residential development levels; but in a broader sense, intensity is also
                         used to express overall levels of both residential and non-residential
                         development types.
                         Floor area ratio (FAR) represents the ratio between the total gross floor
                         area of all buildings on a lot and the total area of that lot. The FAR
                         controls the intensity of use on a lot. FAR is determined by dividing the
                         gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the land area of that lot. For
                         example, a 20,000 square foot building on a 40,000 square foot lot yields
                         a FAR of 0.50. A 0.50 FAR allows a single story building which covers 50
                         percent of the lot, or a two-story building with reduced lot coverage.
                         Figure LU-2 depicts the calculations of FAR.
                                                                                        Figure LU-2
                                                                                   Floor Area Ratio
San Jacinto General Plan                    LU-23                                   October 2012
                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                          State General Plan law requires that the Land Use Element indicate
                          the maximum densities and intensities permitted within the Land Use
                          Plan. Table LU-2 lists each of the land use designations shown on the
                          Land Use Policy Map and provides a corresponding indication of
                          maximum density or intensity of development. Maximum allowable
                          development on individual parcels of land is governed by these
                          measures of density or intensity.
                          Many parcels in the community have not been developed to their
                          maximum density or intensity and in the future, maximum
                          development as described in this Element can be expected to
                          occur only on a limited number of parcels. For this reason, the table
                          also includes the average overall level of development within each
                          land use designation within the Planning Area. These average levels
                          of development represent an anticipated overall density and
                          intensity of development for the Planning Area and are, therefore,
                          less than the absolute maximum allowed for an individual parcel of
                          land. The average levels are for planning purposes only and do not
                          represent the maximum level of development that could occur.
                          The overall future development of the City is anticipated to occur at
                          the average level of density or intensity indicated in Table LU-2.
                          Development at an intensity or density between the average and
                          maximum will often occur where projects offer exceptional design
                          quality, important public amenities or benefits, or other factors that
                          promote important goals and policies of the General Plan.
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS     All land in the San Jacinto Planning Area is assigned one of the land
                          use designations described below:
                          Open Space Designations
                          General Open Space (OS): The Open Space designation allows for:
                          open space areas; hiking, biking and equestrian trails; outdoor
                          recreation; and extremely low density single-family dwellings. This
                          designation provides for the conservation of natural and scenic
                          resources and the protection of property from natural hazards. The
                          maximum allowable density is 1.0 unit per 40 net acres and the
                          average density is 1.0 dwelling unit per 60 net acres. The maximum
                          intensity of development is a FAR of 0.10, with an average intensity
                          of a FAR of 0.001. Park and outdoor recreational uses are permitted
                          at the maximum intensity of 0.10.
                          Open Space – Recreation (OS-R): The Open Space Recreation
                          designation provides for outdoor recreational facilities, including golf
                          courses, swimming schools, tennis clubs, equestrian clubs and
                          caretaker facilities.    The maximum and average intensity of
                          development is a FAR of 0.10.
 San Jacinto General Plan                    LU-24                                    October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                         Parks (P): The Park designation allows for passive and active
                         recreation sites operated by the City and regional agencies. These
                         parks may include areas for active sports play, including large
                         multipurpose fields for community events and informal recreation,
                         sports fields and courts, concessions, tot lots, picnic areas, support
                         facilities, and caretaker facilities.
                         The maximum intensity of development is a FAR of 0.15 and an
                         average intensity of a FAR of 0.10.
                         Residential Designations
                         Estate Residential (ER): The Estate Residential land use designation
                         provides for the development of very low density single-family
                         dwellings and accessory buildings. The ER designation is generally
                         most suitable in rural areas and areas where scenic and natural
                         resources should be protected, or where natural hazards limit
                         development potential. Uses such as mobile and modular homes,
                         public facilities, and other uses that are compatible with and
                         oriented toward serving the needs of estate single-family
                         neighborhoods may also be allowed. Horses are allowed in this
                         area.
                         This designation allows a maximum of 1.0 unit per two net acres of
                         land, with an average density of one dwelling units per 2.5 net acres
                         of land. The maximum density of this land use designation may be
                         exceeded to complement General Plan Housing Element policy in
                         accordance with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of
                         the California Government Code and as an incentive for planned
                         developments.
                         Rural Residential (RR): The Rural Residential land use designation
                         provides for the development of low density detached single-family
                         dwellings and accessory buildings. The RR designation is generally
                         most suitable in areas that consist of small agricultural operations
                         and rural-oriented residences. Horses and other farm animals are
                         allowed in these areas. Uses such as mobile and modular homes,
                         public facilities, and other uses which are compatible with and
                         oriented toward serving the needs of rural single-family
                         neighborhoods may also be allowed.
                         This designation allows a maximum of 2.0 dwelling units per net acre,
                         with an average density of 1.5 dwelling units per net acre. The
                         maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded to
                         complement General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance
                         with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
                         Government Code and as an incentive for planned developments.
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-25                                 October 2012
                                                                          LAND USE ELEMENT
                         Low Density Residential (LDR): The LDR designation is primarily for
                         single-family detached residential uses and accessory buildings. Uses
                         such as mobile and modular homes, townhomes and condos, public
                         facilities, and other uses which are compatible with and oriented
                         toward serving the needs of low density single-family neighborhoods
                         may also be allowed.
                         This designation allows a maximum density of 5.0 dwelling units per
                         net acre, with an average density of 4.0 dwelling units per net acre.
                         The maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded
                         to complement General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance
                         with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
                         Government Code and as an incentive for planned developments.
                         Medium       Density Residential (MDR): The MDR land use
                         designation allows for a range of housing types including single-
                         family attached and detached units, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes,
                         condominiums, townhouses, and mobilehome parks, as well as
                         accessory structures. Uses such as mobile and modular homes,
                         second dwelling units, public facilities, and other uses which are
                         compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of medium
                         density neighborhoods may also be allowed.
                         This designation allows a maximum density of 10.0 dwelling units per
                         net acre, with an average density of 6.0 units per net acre. The
                         maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded to
                         complement General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance
                         with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
                         Government Code and as an incentive for planned developments.
                         Medium High Density Residential (MHDR): The Medium High
                         Density Residential land use designation provides for a variety of
                         multi-family housing types, including: garden style units, apartments,
                         condominiums, townhouses, and mobilehome parks. Uses such as
                         mobile and modular homes, second dwelling units, public facilities,
                         and others which are compatible with and oriented toward serving
                         the needs of high-density single-family neighborhoods may also be
                         allowed.
                         This designation allows a maximum density of 14.0 dwelling units per
                         net acre, with an average density of 11.0 units per net acre. The
                         maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded to
                         complement General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance
                         with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
                         Government Code and as an incentive for planned developments.
                         High Density Residential (HDR): The High Density Residential land
                         use designation provides for a variety of multi-family housing types,
                         including: apartments, condominiums, and townhouses.
                         This designation allows a maximum density of 18.0 dwelling units per
                         net acre, with an average density of 16.0 units per net acre. The
San Jacinto General Plan                    LU-26                                   October 2012
                                                                              LAND USE ELEMENT
                         maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded to
                         complement General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance
                         with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
                         Government Code and as an incentive for planned developments.
                         Very High Density Residential (VHDR).               The VHDR land use
                         designation is intended primarily for apartment units, condominiums,
                         senior housing, and housing affordable to lower- and moderate-
                         income families. This designation allows a maximum density of 22.0
                         dwelling units per net acre, with an average density of 20.0 units per
                         net acre. The maximum density of this land use designation may be
                         exceeded to complement General Plan Housing Element policy in
                         accordance with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of
                         the California Government Code and as an incentive for planned
                         developments.
                         Commercial Designations
                         Community Commercial (CC): The Community Commercial land
                         use designation provides for a variety of retail and service-oriented
                         business activities, including offices uses, at various intensities to serve
                         the local community and population, as well as the broader market
                         area. The maximum intensity of development is a FAR of 0.40, with
                         an average intensity of a FAR of 0.25.
                         Downtown Commercial (DC): The Downtown Commercial land
                         use designation allows for a variety of commercial uses with a strong
                         pedestrian orientation and design that enhances the City’s small
                         town character. Mixed commercial, office, and residential
                         development (residential uses above commercial uses) is also
                         permitted in the DC designation. The maximum intensity of
                         development is a FAR of 2.0, with an average intensity of a FAR of
                         0.75. A maximum of 5.0 dwelling units per net acre is permitted, with
                         an average density of 1.0 unit per net acre.
                         Regional Commercial (RC): The Regional Commercial land use
                         designation provides for large scale commercial development with
                         retail, entertainment, and or service uses of a scale and function to
                         serve a regional market. This designation is applied to areas that are
                         considered suitable for the development of new Regional
                         Commercial uses. Uses allowed in the RC category include hotels,
                         auto sales, auto repair, auto repair related uses, “big box” retail,
                         factory outlets, and movie theaters. The maximum intensity of
                         development is a FAR of 0.50, with an average intensity of a FAR of
                         0.30.
                         Industrial Designations
                         Office Park (OP): The Office Park designation provides for
                         employment and community serving uses including single-tenant
                         and multi-tenant offices that include professional, legal, medical,
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-27                                     October 2012

                                                                             LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                    financial, administrative, research and
                                                    development, corporate and general
                                                    business offices, and other supporting uses.
                                                    Also included are small convenience or
                                                    service commercial activities intended to
                                                    meet the needs of the on-site employee
                                                    population. Other uses that are determined
                                                    to be compatible with the primary uses may
                                                    also be allowed. The maximum intensity of
                                                    development is a FAR of 0.35, with an
                                                    average intensity of a FAR of 0.25.
                         Business Park (BP): The Business Park designation provides for
                         single-tenant and multi-tenant offices that include primarily
                         employment generating uses such as research and development,
                         corporate headquarters and offices, high technology, product
                         development, and general business.             Also included are small
                         convenience or service commercial activities intended to meet the
                         needs of the on-site employee population. Other uses that are
                         determined to be compatible with the primary uses may also be
                         allowed. The maximum intensity of development is a FAR of 0.35,
                         with an average intensity of a FAR of 0.25.
                         Industrial (I): The Industrial designation allows for a variety of
                         low-polluting and non-polluting industrial and manufacturing
                         activities, including limited regional and sub-regional commercial
                         activities that are non-polluting and which can co-exist compatibly
                         with surrounding land uses. Allowable uses include research and
                         development, light manufacturing and processing, large single
                         tenant distribution and sales, automobile sales and leasing, offices,
                         warehousing and storage, high technology production, and related
                         uses. Other uses that are determined to be compatible with primary
                         uses may also be allowed. The maximum intensity of development is
                         a FAR of 0.40, with an average intensity of a FAR of 0.30.
                         Public Institutional Designation
                         Public Institutional (PI): The Public Institutional designation provides
                         for publicly owned properties and facilities including, schools, fire
                         stations, police stations, community centers, utility substations, water
                         facilities, administrative offices and City government office
                         complexes. Other uses that are determined to be compatible with
                         primary uses may also be allowed. The maximum intensity of
                         development is a FAR of 0.50, with an average intensity of a FAR of
                         0.05.
                         Special Designations
                         Specific Plan (Planned Community Development) (SP): A
                         Specific Plan is required for all projects of 100 acres or more. A SP
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-28                                   October 2012
                                                                             LAND USE ELEMENT
                          must include detailed regulations, conditions and programs for
                          development. Permitted densities/uses are based on underlying
                          zoning per parcel. The future Gateway Specific Plan is described in
                          more detail below.
                              Gateway Specific Plan (SP-G) Overlay:                The 1,700-acre
                              Gateway Specific Plan area is strategically located around the
                              SR-79 and the Ramona Expressway corridor. As the primary
                              entryway to San Jacinto from the north, extensive scenic views of
                              the City and the Valley are available from this area. A specific
                              plan or plans are necessary to help the City achieve its goals for
                              providing additional quality employment, civic, and housing
                              opportunities in this area. Although the Gateway Specific Plan or
                              plans will further refine the land uses in this area, the projected
                              breakdown of land uses in the Gateway Specific Plan area is as
                              follows:
                                      Regional Commercial – 15% of net area
                                      Office Park – 30% of net area
                                      Business Park – 35% of net area
                                      Residential – 20% of net area
                          Center City (CC): The Center City overlay designation is applied to
                          an approximately 1,500-acre area in San Jacinto’s urban core.
                          Development in these areas will be subject to additional design and
                          development standards intended to help revitalize the downtown
                          area.
DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY      The Land Use Plan for San Jacinto includes average levels of
                          residential and non-residential development, where all land in the
                          Planning Area is developed according to the Plan. The average
                          levels of development establish a capacity for the Land Use Plan
                          that is expressed as estimates of total dwelling units, total population,
                          and total square footage of non-residential development in the
                          future.
                          Table LU-3 provides a breakdown of land uses within San Jacinto for
                          purposes of identifying the estimated development buildout of the
                          Land Use Plan per the average development densities and
                          intensities identified in Table LU-3.
 San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-29                                  October 2012

                                                                                                                                LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                         Table LU-3
                                                                  Development Capacity
                  Land Use                             Assumptions                                         Projected
                                               Maximum              Average1                                 Non-
                                            DU/acre     FAR DU/acre          FAR             Projected    Residential
                                                                                     Net      Dwelling    Square Feet     Projected      Projected
                                                                                    Acres       Units       (1000s)     Population1     Employees
  Open Space Designations
  General Open Space (OS)                  0.025       0.1      0.017       0.001  5,414     72         186            208            93
  Open Space – Recreation (OS-R)                       0.1                  0.01   515       0          2,241          0              112
  Parks (P)                                            0.15                 0.01   525       0          294            0              11
  Residential Designations
  Estate Residential (ER)                  0.5                  0.4                7         3          0              9              0
  Rural Residential (RR)                   2.0                  1.5                768       1,152      0              3,305          0
  Low Density Residential (LDR)            5.0                  4.0                5,510     21,112     0              60,591         0
  Medium Density Residential (MDR)         10.0                 6.0                1,689     11,256     0              32,303         0
  Medium High Density Residential (MHDR)   14.0                 11.0               175       1,817      0              5,216          0
  High Density Residential (HDR)           18.0                 16.0               0         0          0              0              0
  Very High Density Residential (VHDR)     22.0                 20.0               70        1,823      0              5,233          0
  Commercial Designations
  Community Commercial (CC)                            0.4                  0.25       945   0          10,357         0              12,344
  Downtown Commercial (DC)                 5.0         2.0      1.0         0.75        36   34         1,095          96             2,355
  Regional Commercial (RC)                             0.5                  0.3           0  0          0              0              0
  Industrial Designations
  Professional Office (PO)                             0.35     0.25                      0  0          .              0              0
  Business Park (BP)                                   0.35     0.25                    30   0          331            0              232
  Industrial (I)                                       0.4      0.3                    349   0          4,558          0              3,190
  Public/Institutional Designations
  Public/Institutional (PI)                            0.5      0.05                   844   0          1,869          0              1,838
  Special Designations
  Gateway Specific Plan Area (SP-G)                    0.35     0.25                 1,488 02           16,199         02             11,339
  Central City Overlay3                              Not applicable.                 1,492 0            0              0              0
  TOTAL                                                                               18,414     37,269         37,130        106,961         31,514
  Notes: 1 – estimated persons per household = 2.87. 2 – residential units (and thus population) determined by approved Specific Plan. 3 –
  Although total acreage is presented, as an overlay, acreage and buildout assumptions are already assumed through the mixture of underlying
  land use designations and should not be double-counted.
  Table is in net acres. Net acres = 0.875 Multiplied by gross acres.
San Jacinto General Plan                                              LU-30                                                               October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                         The degree to which the estimated capacity exceeds projected
                         population is referred to as “overage”. Some overage is desirable to
                         make allowances for inevitable small pockets of undevelopable
                         land, to allow for difficulty in recognizing development trends in
                         completely vacant areas, to allow for unforeseen need for public
                         utilities, and to recognize that some owners will maintain their land in
                         an undeveloped state beyond the time span of the Plan. The
                         Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) has
                         recommended that Plan capacity should be at least 1.20 to 1.25
                         times the projected population.
                         For the San Jacinto Planning Area, SCAG’s projected population in
                         2035 is approximately 99,100 (Source: 2012 Regional Transportation
                         Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy). San Jacinto has more than
                         enough vacant developable land to accommodate this projected
                         population growth.
  MANAGE AND DIRECT      The San Jacinto region has experienced great levels of growth over
              GROWTH     the years, with the population increasing about 60 percent between
                         1990 and 2000. To preserve the character of the community and
                         provide adequate levels of public services to new development and
                         residents, growth should be managed and directed.
                         One of the ways that City plans for growth in the community is
                         through its “Neighborhood Planning Concept”. The existing City has
                         been broken into thirteen neighborhoods, as depicted in Figure LU-3.
                         The currently recognized neighborhoods include:
                                Heritage                 Hill
                                California               College
                                DeAnza                   River
                                Ramona                   Soboba
                                Alessandro               Equestrian Downs
                                Spice Ranch              Sunrise Ranch
                                Rose Ranch
                         As new areas are developed, additional neighborhood areas will be
                         identified. The neighborhood planning concept allows the City to
                         ensure that adequate levels of public services and facilities are
                         available throughout the community and not concentrated in only
                         a few areas. For example, the San Jacinto Parks Master Plan
                         analyzes the need for parks by neighborhood versus simply looking
                         at the need for parks at a community level of analysis. This ensures
                         that each neighborhood is provided adequate parkland, which is
                         especially important for older areas that may not have been
                         developed originally with adequate amounts of parkland.
                         The City also manages growth through the use of Specific Plans (SP)
                         and Planned Development Permits (PDP). Both of these planning
                         processes require developers to identify how they will provide
                         adequate levels of public services and facilities to the new
                         development.
San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-31                                October 2012

                                                                          LAND USE ELEMENT
                         development. The property included in either a PDP or SP will be
                         planned in a comprehensive manner that encourages a more
                         desirable living environment in which flexible development
                         standards can be applied to protect important natural features and
                         create a harmonious variety of land uses and building types.
                         Undeveloped areas within the City and sphere of influence area
                         proposed for development, the City will continue to apply the
                         Specific Plan and Planned Unit Development regulations to ensure
                         that new development occurs in a compatible manner with the
                         existing community and that adequate services and facilities are
                         provided.
       ENVIRONMENTAL     The Land Use Element identifies where the future growth in
                         population will occur in the Planning Area. Future growth in areas
         COMPATIBILITY
                         which are susceptible to natural hazards, such as in the flood plain,
                         the hillsides, and along earthquake fault lines, has been limited
                         through the use of natural and recreational open space easements,
                         and the designation of lower intensity land uses in these high risk
                         areas.
                         The City Development Code is one of the primary regulatory
                         documents that is used to ensure land use compatibility and public
                         safety. The Development Code includes specific regulations to
                         address development on hillsides and within the floodplain. The
                         standards for development within these high risk areas include
                         allowable uses, grading requirements, and development standards.
                         In addition to the Development Code, the City Subdivision
                         Ordinance is an important regulatory tool to control the subdivision
                         of land in preparation for development. To protect the safety of the
                         community and preserve important open space areas, San Jacinto
                         will review and amend, when necessary, its Development Code and
                         Subdivision Ordinance to ensure that they are consistent with new
                         State legislation and court decisions and provide the required level
                         of protection for the community.
                         In regard to faults lines found in the Planning Area, the City will
                         continue to enact programs to reduce geologic, seismic and
                         structural hazards in order to protect public safety. During the
                         review of development proposals involving grading in areas with
                         active faults, potential ground fissures, liquefaction potential,
                         unstable soils, and other hazardous conditions, surveys of
                         geotechnical and geologic conditions will be required. Based on
                         the results of the survey, design measures are incorporated into
                         projects to minimize geologic hazards. Open space easements to
                         create buffers are also considered to avoid geologic hazards.
                         Programs to address hazards related to earthquake fault lines are
                         discussed in more detail in the Public Safety Element.
                         Systematic enforcement of the City’s ordinances and monitoring of
                         development within and around the community will be used to
                         maintain the public safety and quality of life.        Development
                         monitoring by the City
San Jacinto General Plan                     LU-32                               October 2012

                               LAND USE ELEMENT
San Jacinto General Plan LU-33       October 2012
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
San Jacinto General Plan LU-34       October 2012
                                                                              LAND USE ELEMENT
                         monitoring by the City can be used to ensure that City facilities
                         and services are able to provide sufficient levels of public services to
                         new development, ensuring the public safety.
         LAND USE AND    As new development occurs, review of projects and their design is
           CIRCULATION   important to ensure compatibility with the existing development and
                         future residential areas. Roadways and non-residential, employment
         COMPATIBILITY   generating development has the potential to impact residential
                         areas especially with additional noise and visual impacts. New
                         residential development can also negatively impact adjacent
                         existing residential development if the new development is not
                         designed well. The Land Use Policy Map has been designed to
                         minimize the location of incompatible uses adjacent to each other.
                         For example, new industrial development is concentrated to the
                         north of the community and is separated from residential uses in
                         large part, by the Ramona Expressway.
                         The City will continue to review development projects as they are
                         proposed to identify potential incompatibilities.             The City’s
                         Development Code contains regulations for the review and design
                         of new development. In addition to the general development
                         standards that for each land use type, the Development Code
                         contains site development plan review standards and compatibility
                         standards for single family housing development.
                         Many projects, especially larger projects such as the SR-79 extension,
                         will also be subject to review under the California Environmental
                         Quality Act (CEQA). Some of the potential impacts reviewed under
                         CEQA include noise and aesthetic impacts. When significant
                         impacts are identified, mitigation measures are also identified to
                         reduce the impact. The City will continue to review projects for
                         compliance with CEQA.
            DOWNTOWN     As one of the oldest communities in Riverside County, San Jacinto is
         REJUVENATION    fortunate to have a traditional downtown commercial area, located
                         along Main Street and San Jacinto Street. As new commercial
                         development occurs in other areas of the City and building
                         requirements change for major commercial uses, the downtown
                         area has lost many of its traditional businesses and customers to
                         newer commercial areas. Recognizing the changing role of the
                         downtown from the primary commercial area to one that builds on
                         its historic character to fill a specialized niche, such as tourist serving
                         retail, the City will continue to work to rejuvenate the downtown
                         area and promote its continued success through rejuvenation
                         programs such as the Urban Corridor Overlay District, and Center
                         City Design Guidelines.
                         The Land Use Plan designates a majority of the area as Downtown
                         Commercial. This land use category allows a mixture of retail and
                         residential uses. By allowing residential to be mixed in with retail
                         uses, as well as allowing higher density residential in the areas
                         surrounding
San Jacinto General Plan                      LU-35                                   October 2012

                                                                              LAND USE ELEMENT
                         surrounding the downtown, more people will be drawn to the area,
                         helping support the economic success of the area. The Downtown
                         Commercial land use designation encourages a pedestrian friendly
                         commercial area to help attract shoppers into the area and
                         facilitate their ability to walk to the various shops.
                         The Land Use Plan also identifies an approximately 1,500-acre area
                         within the downtown core as the “Central City”. Development
                         within the Central City overlay will be required to implement the
                         enhanced development and design standards identified in the
                         Center City Design Guidelines that are intended to help revitalize the
                         downtown core.
                         The City will also work to continue enforcing the municipal code for
                         property maintenance within the downtown and the surrounding
                         neighbors to create a visually attractive environment.
            ECONOMIC     The City’s key location in the Inland Empire and Riverside County
          DEVELOPMENT    along with availability of large parcels of land available, allow it to
                         position itself as a regional location for retail, commercial and
                         industrial activity. The main issue will be how to produce a diversified
                         economic base with professional services, manufacturing
                         (particularly clean industries) and high technology companies.
                         Interest in commercial and industrial activity has increased as large
                         tracts of vacant farmland have become available.
                         In particular, there are future industrial and commercial
                         development opportunities available in the western part of the
                         Planning Area with the provision of necessary infrastructure. A
                         primary need exists to install water and sewer facilities to serve the
                         west side of the City. Currently the City is using a recent Economic
                         Development Agency (EDA) grant to provide water and sewer
                         services.
                         The cities of San Jacinto and Hemet cooperate with the Economic
                         Development Agency, the California Economic Development
                         Department, and the Valley Economic Development Department as
                         well as with the business community in promoting job training and
                         opportunities. This collaboration is very important in promoting
                         economic development and lowering the unemployment rate, and
                         will continue to be fostered along with other public-private
                         partnerships.
                         With State Route 79 passing though the City, San Jacinto has the
                         potential to benefit economically from visitors to the Soboba Indian
                         Reservation and the newly completed Diamond Valley Reservoir.
                         The Indian Reservation attracts visitors by offering gambling,
                         concerts, and sporting and cultural events, while others are
                         attracted by the outdoor activities available at the new Diamond
                         Valley Lake, including boating and fishing. The City will create an
                         economic development plan to help capture some of the dollars
                         that these visitors spend during their trip. This includes locating visitor-
                         oriented retail, lodging, and commercial uses along major
San Jacinto General Plan                        LU-36                                  October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                         oriented retail, lodging, and commercial uses along major
                         transportation corridors and in the downtown. As shown on the
                         Land Use Policy Map, there will be a concentration of retail and
                         employment generating uses along the proposed Highway 79
                         alignment. The actual location of these uses may need to be
                         adjusted when the final highway alignment is adopted, but the
                         general land use design will be the same. The downtown provides
                         an opportunity to build on the historic character to attract tourists as
                         they travel through to the Soboba Indian Reservation.
             RESOURCE    San Jacinto has a number of impressive resources. The City must
     PRESERVATION AND    ensure that new development and redevelopment activities are
                         designed in a manner that protects and enhances these resources.
   COMMUNITY DESIGN      Important community design goals to consider when planning future
                         projects include, but are not limited to:
                            Respecting the region’s history and environmental surroundings.
                            Enhancing important natural resources, including scenic
                             resources and vistas.
                            Minimizing impacts to important cultural, agricultural, and
                             biological resources in creative and meaningful ways.
                            Providing development that is pedestrian-friendly and
                             encourages social interaction.
                            Encouraging a balanced community where people can live,
                             work, shop, learn, and recreate.
                            Providing visually pleasing and well-landscaped development
                             that increases civic pride.
                         The City’s Development Code, Subdivision Ordinance, Urban
                         Corridor Overlay District and Center City Design Guidelines provide
                         guidance and standards to ensure that development meets the
                         City’s community design goals.          Specific Plans and Planned
                         Developments are planning tools that may also be used to assure
                         well-planned and well-designed development occurs.
                         The City’s Hillside Development Regulations help preserve scenic
                         vistas and reduce cut and fill on the City’s hillsides. The City is also
                         working to establish scenic routes in the community. Other City
                         programs designed protect important resources, include developing
                         an infill incentives program and working with private property owners
                         to protect historic structures.
San Jacinto General Plan                       LU-37                               October 2012

                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                    Land Use Element Appendix:
                                                        Implementation Program
                         This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the
                         adopted policies and plans identified in this Element. The Land Use
                         Element Implementation Program is a series of actions, procedures
                         and techniques that includes a description of the responsible
                         agency/department, funding source, time frame and related
                         policies in the Land Use Element.
                         Balance of Land Uses
                   LU-1  The City will:
                Review
         Development          a) Review discretionary development proposals for how the
              Proposals           project would affect the community’s jobs/housing balance
                                  and fiscal stability.
                              b) Require a jobs/housing balance study and fiscal analysis be
                                  prepared for projects that propose 500 or more residential
                                  units or 500,000 or more non-residential square feet.
                              c) Ensure developments provide their fair share of parks and
                                  recreational opportunities or pay in lieu fees toward the
                                  development/extension of the parks, recreation, and trails
                                  programs.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2
                   LU-2  Use the City’s website, regional Chambers of Commerce, trade
 Attract Revenue and     publications, and other appropriate sources to promote
          Employment     San Jacinto’s development opportunities.             Make economic
      Generating Uses    development and business surveys readily available to businesses
                         and developers looking to locate their projects in Riverside County.
           Responsible   Community Development, San Jacinto Economic Development
  Agency/Department:     Specialist, Valley Economic Development Department
       Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 1.3
San Jacinto General Plan                 Appendix LU-1                              October 2012

                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                   LU-3  Review and update the Development Code and Subdivision
 Development Code        Ordinance to address the following:
      and Subdivision
   Ordinance Update          Continue to ensure consistency between General Plan land use
                              designations and Development Code regulations in order to
                              implement General Plan policies.
                             In order to enhance the design of higher density residential uses,
                              the Development Code and Subdivision Ordinance shall include
                              enhanced design, open space amenities, and landscaping
                              standards for higher density residential development over and
                              above minimum requirements.
                             Consider an option for density transfers to increase density in
                              order to preserve ridge lines, steep slopes, scenic features, and
                              other natural resources.
                             Review permitted uses, particularly industrial uses, to promote
                              “clean industry” in San Jacinto.
                             Incorporate standards that expand upon the goals and policies
                              found in the Urban Corridor Overlay Zone addressing pedestrian-
                              oriented,     neo-traditional   development      throughout    the
                              applicable sections of the Development Code.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
       Funding Source:   General Fund
            Time Frame:  Review and update Development Code and Subdivision Ordinance
                         by end of fiscal year 2012/13
       Related Policies: 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 3.1
                         Manage and Direct Growth
                   LU-4  Process      development       proposals   pursuant    to   the  City’s
       Neighborhood      “Neighborhood Planning Concept” requiring provision of adequate
   Planning Concept      public facilities. Give priority processing to projects proposed within
                         or adjacent to areas served by existing infrastructure, parks, and
                         services. Require developers to prepare a plan for providing and
                         financing parks and services that meet City standards.
           Responsible   Community Development, Public Works, Local Agency Formation
  Agency/Department:     Commission (LAFCo), utility and service providers
       Funding Source:   General Fund, project proponent
            Time Frame:  Ongoing in response to development proposals
       Related Policies: 2.3, 2.4
San Jacinto General Plan                  Appendix LU-2                             October 2012

                                                                          LAND USE ELEMENT
                    LU-5 Cooperate with LAFCo and the County of Riverside to direct growth
        Local Agency     outside the City limits on lands that are served or are planned to be
             Formation   served, with a full range of urban services, such as public water and
Commission (LAFCo)       sewer, an extensive road network, public transit, safety and
                         emergency response services, parks, trails, and open space.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development, LAFCO, County of Riverside
       Funding Source:   General Fund
            Time Frame:  Ongoing and annual basis
       Related Policies: 2.3, 2.4, 2.6
                    LU-6 Implement Planned Development Permits and Specific Plan (SP)
               Planned   requirements during the review of applicable projects. Encourage
         Development     Planned Development Permits and Specific Plans to include creative
 Permits and Specific    and thoughtful design solutions that enhance not only the project,
                         but the community as a whole.
                  Plans
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 9.1 through 9.8
                    LU-7 Abate non-conforming buildings and uses through a Code
  Code Enforcement       Enforcement Program. Provide code complaint forms online and at
                         City Hall. Annually assess the success of the programs and the
                         staffing levels through the budget process.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, violation fees
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 2.5, 5.5, 6.9
                         Environmental Compatibility
                    LU-8 Ensure all projects are reviewed and processed per California
        CEQA Review      Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 3.1, 3.2, 6.1
                    LU-9 Ensure all projects proposed on hillside properties are reviewed,
                Hillside graded and developed in accordance with the City’s Hillside
         Development     Development Regulations.
San Jacinto General Plan                  Appendix LU-3                            October 2012

                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 3.1, 3.2
                  LU-10  Continue to apply the rules and regulations of the City’s Floodplain
            Flood Plain  Management Ordinance to development in areas of special flood
         Management      hazards as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
                         Agency (FEMA) and as illustrated on the most recent Flood
                         Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Ensure FEMA regularly updates the
                         FIRMs to reflect improvements to the City's flood control and levee
                         system.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, FEMA
       Funding Source:   General Fund
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 3.1, 3.2
                         Land Use and Circulation Compatibility
                  LU-11  Require the provision and maintenance of buffers (e.g., open space,
                 Buffers landscaped berms, non-residential land uses, trees) between major
                         roadways and sensitive land uses. Ensure buffers are adequate to
                         mitigate noise to the acceptable levels identified in Tables N-2 and
                         N-3 of the Noise Element. Also ensure that buffers are designed to
                         meet engineering and visibility standards, while providing aesthetic
                         appeal.
           Responsible   Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, Caltrans,
  Agency/Department:     RCTC
       Funding Source:   General Fund
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 4.1, 4.2
                  LU-12  The City will:
        SR-79 Corridor
                             Promote      commercial,     visitor-serving,  and   employment
                              generating land uses along the SR-79 Corridor.
                             During the planning phase of the SR-79 alignment, ensure that
                              the alignment of the highway and proposed off-ramps are
                              compatible with and complement San Jacinto’s plans for
                              revenue-generating land uses along the SR-79 corridor.
                             Upon adoption of a preferred alignment by the agencies
                              responsible for constructing the SR-79, review the City’s land use
                              and circulation plans and maps to ensure consistency and
                              compatibility with the SR-79. Amend the City’s General Plan and
                              Development Code, if necessary to achieve compatibility with
                              the SR-79 alignment.
San Jacinto General Plan                Appendix LU-4                              October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
           Responsible   Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer, Caltrans,
  Agency/Department:     RCTC
       Funding Source:   General Fund
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 4.3, 7.2
                  LU-13  Review discretionary development proposals for potential impacts
 Circulation Planning    to the transportation and infrastructure system and to ensure the
  and Traffic Analysis   roadway system meets City standards.            The Level of Service
                         Standards established in the Circulation Element will be used to
                         determine the significance of impacts. Intersection level of service
                         will be determined by the Vehicle Delay and the Highway Capacity
                         Manual calculations.           Mitigation in the form of physical
                         improvements and/or impact fees will be required to reduce the
                         significant impacts.
                         When development is proposed that is shown to impact the
                         intersections of State St, (NS) at Cottonwood Avenue (EW), State St,
                         (NS) at Esplanade Avenue (EW), and San Jacinto Av. (NS) at
                         Esplanade Avenue (EW), the City may require roadway
                         improvements, including roadway widening beyond the normal
                         General Plan cross-sections, at the intersections of State St, (NS) at
                         Cottonwood Avenue (EW), State St, (NS) at Esplanade Avenue (EW),
                         and San Jacinto Av. (NS) at Esplanade Avenue (EW). Adequate
                         right-of-way along new roadways will also be required to permit
                         pedestrian and bicycle facilities, where applicable. Proper roadway
                         drainage must also be provided to ensure a safe system. This is the
                         same program as Circulation Element Implementation Program C-1.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development, Public Works, City Engineer
       Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
            Time Frame:  Ongoing in response to development proposals
       Related Policies: 4.4
                         Downtown Rejuvenation
                  LU-14  Promote revitalization of the downtown area through the City’s
       Neighborhood      Neighborhood Strategy program.              Include funds for the
               Strategy  Neighborhood Strategy program during development of the annual
                         CIP and budget process.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development Department
       Funding Source:   General Fund, state and federal funds
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 5.1, 5.2, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7
                  LU-15  Highlight San Jacinto’s historic resources in tourism and promotional
   Historic Downtown     materials.
San Jacinto General Plan                  Appendix LU-5                            October 2012

                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
           Responsible    Community Development, San Jacinto Development Director,
  Agency/Department:      San Jacinto Economic Development Specialist, Valley Economic
                          Development Department
       Funding Source:    General Fund, development fees
            Time Frame:   Ongoing
       Related Policies:  5.8
                   LU-16  Adopt and implement design guidelines for the Center City Area
            Center City   that encourage:
   Design Guidelines
                              Enhancement and restoration of historic resources;
                              Development and redevelopment that is compatible with and
                               complementary to the historic feel of the downtown;
                              Increased landscaping for shading, beautification, and
                               screening;
                              Pedestrian-orientation, amenities and scale;
                              Thoughtful solutions to the existing lack of parking;
                              A mixture of uses to promote activity in the area both day and
                               night;
                              Common open spaces, such as mini-parks and plazas; and
                              A unique identity for the downtown area.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:      Community Development
       Funding Source:    General Fund, State and federal funds
            Time Frame:   Adopt guidelines by the end of 2007; ongoing implementation with
                          review of development proposals
       Related Policies:  5.2, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7, 9.8
                   LU-17  Enforce the Urban Corridor Overlay District standards on all
       Urban Corridor     properties having frontage on San Jacinto Avenue between
       Overlay District   Seventh Avenue and Menlow Avenue, and all properties having
                          frontage along Esplanade Avenue between Hewitt Street and State
                          Street. Also, consider amending the Overlay District to encompass
                          the Mid County Parkway and fronting properties.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:      Community Development
       Funding Source:    General Fund, State and federal funds
            Time Frame:   Amend guidelines by the end of 2007; ongoing implementation with
                          review of development proposals
       Related Policies:  5.2, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9
                          Resource Preservation
                   LU-18  Give priority to redevelopment and infill projects that reduce
               Infill and development pressure on agricultural lands and other sensitive
      Redevelopment       resources. Establish an incentive program to promote these projects,
San Jacinto General Plan                   Appendix LU-6                                       October 2012

                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                         such as priority permit processing and density bonuses for such
                         developments.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, and state and federal funds
            Time Frame:  Establish incentive program by the end of 2007, ongoing
       Related Policies: 5.1, 5.2, 5.6, 6.1
                  LU-19  Preserve San Jacinto’s rich history by maintaining important historic
     Preserve Historic   structures and continually updating the exhibits in the San Jacinto
              Structures Municipal Museum. Wherever economically feasible, retain historic
                         structures and resources through local, state and federal programs,
                         such as the Mills Act. Work with the Estudillo Mansion Committee to
                         identify and preserve historic resources, and use these resources as
                         educational tools and tourist draws.              See also Resource
                         Management Implementation Programs RM-16 through RM-22.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, and state and federal funds
            Time Frame:  Establish incentive program by the end of 2007, ongoing
       Related Policies: 6.2, 6.6, 6.9
                  LU-20  Designate local scenic routes and vistas and develop guidelines for
 Local Scenic Routes     development visible from these scenic routes to minimize impacts to
                         scenic vistas. This is the same program as Program RM-15.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community Development
       Funding Source:   General Fund, development fees, project proponent
            Time Frame:  Identify scenic routes and develop guidelines by the end of 2007
       Related Policies: 6.7, 6.10
                         Economic Development
                  LU-21  Continue to perform economic development activities including:
             Economic
         Development         Provide the San Jacinto Business Resource Guide at public
                              locations. Update periodically to maintain current business
                              listings, and consider mailing out the guide on an annual or semi-
                              annual basis.
                             Hold the Mayor’s Business Breakfast on a quarterly basis to meet
                              with representatives from various industries located in
                              San Jacinto or considering locating in San Jacinto.
                             Work with business owners to redevelop properties that are
                              currently underdeveloped, require rehabilitation, or need
                              infrastructure upgrades.
                             Perform periodic surveys of the local and regional business
                              community to assess business needs.
San Jacinto General Plan                  Appendix LU-7                            October 2012

                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                             Pursue and make available public and non-profit funding for
                              redevelopment and revitalization activities, including updating
                              existing development to meet the Center City Design Guidelines.
                             Make economic development and business reports and surveys
                              readily available to businesses and developers looking to locate
                              their projects in Riverside County.
                             Use the City’s website, regional Chambers of Commerce, trade
                              publications, and other appropriate sources to promote
                              San Jacinto’s development opportunities particularly in the
                              Gateway Specific Plan Area, the Center City Area, and along
                              the SR-79 corridor.
                             Retain Business Services/Economic Development staff to
                              facilitate business development, expansion, and retention.
                             Support the expansion of job training programs in the community
                              and advertise them through flyers at the public counter and
                              other community facilities and on the City’s website.
           Responsible
  Agency/Department:     Community            Development,       Business    Services/Economic
                         Development staff
       Funding Source:   General Fund
            Time Frame:  Ongoing
       Related Policies: 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3
                         Community Design
                         The following previously identified implementation programs
                         also address the City’s community design goals and policies:
                          LU-3 Development Code and Subdivision Ordinance
                              Updates
                          LU-6 Planned Development Permits and Specific Plans
                          LU-16 Center City Design Guidelines
                          LU-17 Urban Corridor Overlay District
San Jacinto General Plan                  Appendix LU-8                             October 2012

