                        CHAPTER III
            COMMUNITY CHARACTER
GOALS:
The City of Brisbane...
                        and its Mountain
                        will remain a place independent
                        and distinct,
                        with a small town quality and
                        a volunteer spirit,
                        where diversity is welcomed
                        and everyone can participate
                        in town meetings,
                        and elected officials carefully
                        consider the desires and needs of the
                        citizens, and
                        govern through circumscribed rules
                        and regulations, only as required
                        for the public health and safety and
                        the protection of the environment.
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER
                          Chapter Index
                                                                                               Page
San Bruno Mountain …….............................................................................. 39
Volunteer Community Service and City Government...........................…….... 40
                                  - 38 -

                                         CHAPTER III
                              COMMUNITY CHARACTER
III.1 SAN BRUNO MOUNTAIN
                                                "This is about Brisbane and its mountain. It stands
                                                more than a thousand feet high, this great
                                                outcropping of rock and scrub brush that surrounds
                                                the town like a pair of loving hands, isolating
                                                Brisbane from the busy metropolis grown up
                                                around, preserving here a time capsule of the way
                                                life was years ago - quiet, unhurried, comfortable in
                                                its familiarity with the land."
                                                                         Walter Blum
                                                                         California Living Magazine
                                                                         April 6, 1975 (1)
Many factors contribute to the sense of security and well being of the members of a community,
including family, shelter, food and safety. In Brisbane this sense of security and well being is
also provided by San Bruno Mountain. There is a very personal feeling in Brisbane about the
Mountain. As former Mayor Anja Miller said in 1975, "You're protected. In a way this is what
makes us a community. We all look at each other in this bowl and there is a feel of
neighborhood that you don't get in other towns." (2) This chapter attempts to capture the
importance of how the Mountain looks and feels to Brisbane and how we can be good stewards
for it.
San Bruno Mountain rises above the San Francisco Bay and dominates the landscape of northern
San Mateo County. Despite all the development in its valleys and on its slopes, it retains the
character of what it may have looked like to the Costanoan Indians and Spanish explorers. The
brushlands and grasslands still mix with the chaparral, oak and coastal sage growing in their
native habitat. On the sheltered eastern side of the Mountain, Owl and Buckeye Canyons face
northerly and contain the largest woodland communities. The Mountain is habitat for many
small animals, including meadow mice, ground squirrels, moles, raccoons, rabbits, opossums,
and even foxes. (See Chapter IX, Conservation.)
The significance of San Bruno Mountain lies in its roles as a natural protector from the elements,
a habitat for protected and endangered species, a course for carrying storm waters, a centerpiece
of local identity and history, a resource for recreational activities, a definer of geographical
identity within its bowl, and an enduring source of visual beauty.
                                                 - 39 -
The residents of Brisbane view the Mountain as their totem, keeping the fog from their houses
and protecting their safety by limiting access to its boundaries.
The steep slopes of the Mountain rise to form a boundary between Brisbane and the surrounding
cities of South San Francisco on the south, Daly City on the west, and San Francisco on the
north. The San Francisco Bay wraps around Brisbane to the east. The majority of the City's
residents live in a "bowl" nestled into Mountain. The borders of the Mountain and the Bay give
the residents a sense of geographic insulation and respite from the surrounding urban areas. This
feeling of isolation is enhanced by the Peninsula as a whole, with water on three sides and the
Santa Cruz Mountains to the south.
As an ecological island, San Bruno Mountain is home to many species of plant, animal and
insect life, which are unique to the Mountain. Best known of these are the Mission blue and
callippe silverspot butterflies, which are listed on the Federal endangered and candidate species
lists. Some 2,300 acres of the Mountain have been protected by the creation of the San Bruno
Mountain State and County Park. The City Council and many citizens in Brisbane, especially
Mimi Whitney and the Committee to Save San Bruno Mountain, worked very hard to preserve
the Mountain in open space. The "Saddle in Open Space Amendment," which was ultimately
approved by the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors in 1976, called for the Saddle to be
preserved as a part of a regional park and allowed development of the South Slope in South San
Francisco, the Western Ridges in Daly City and the Northeast Ridge in Brisbane. In 1989,
Buckeye Canyon, the only pristine northerly-facing canyon, and the adjacent Owl Canyon, were
purchased as an ecological reserve by the Wildlife Conservation Board using State Proposition
70 bond funds. Local citizens, conservation groups and the City government actively lobbied
for its purchase.
The policies set forth in the General Plan envision the City continuing to take an activist and
leading role in maintaining the beauty, wildlife and habitat of the Mountain and teaching others
of its importance as a resource.
III.2 VOLUNTEER COMMUNITY SERVICE AND CITY GOVERNMENT
                                                "It seemed to me that the people who came here
                                                were very poor, but they had this spirit of
                                                independence. They'd get these old boards or old
                                                tar paper, whatever, and put up these old shacks,
                                                you might say. But still it was your shack. It was
                                                your old tar paper. It was your old boards."
                                                                        Dorothy Radoff
                                                                        City Historian
                                                                        A Spirit of Independence (3)
                                                 - 40 -
This section is concerned with the history of Brisbane, how the community sees and expresses
itself and wishes to be governed. It is an attempt to translate the intangible sense of history,
environment, well being and independent spirit into the tangible policies and programs needed to
keep Brisbane a fine place to live, to work, and to raise a family.
The Costanoan Indians, the first habitants on San Bruno Mountain, found an idyllic life. The
Mountain with its animals and vegetation, and the marshlands and San Francisco Bay with their
shellfish provided abundantly. There are some remains of the Indians, including shell mounds in
the canyons and ravines, but after the Spanish conquistadors and Mexican rule, the lands of San
Bruno Mountain were given in a land grant to others. These lands passed through many hands
including renowned Charles Crocker, who purchased the bulk of the Mountain - a little over
3,000 acres - for $4,000 in 1884. It was these lands that welcomed Brisbane's pioneers.
Brisbane's character has been especially influenced by the early pioneers who came in 1908 after
the San Francisco earthquake, and in 1929 through 1933 during the Great Depression. The town
grew from the 28 residents during the 1920s, adding 400 families between 1929 and 1933.
Brisbane's founders were working men and women who, despite the hard times, were committed
to improving the quality of life in Brisbane. The families who lived in Brisbane during these
times helped establish the community character by creating the Brisbane Volunteer Fire
Department in 1932, the Brisbane Improvement Club in 1930, the Girl and Boy Scouts Club in
1932 and the Community Baptist Church and Catholic Church in 1937. The new Brisbane
Elementary School was built in 1939, with its four rooms, auditorium, and four teachers.
The early settlers focused on improving the quality of life, educating their children and keeping
the town safe. The organizations they formed were based on the volunteer efforts of the
townspeople. They got together and helped a war veteran move out of a mud hut into a house,
and they drew up plans and built the first firehouse. They shared food and clothing, each person
knowing that he or she might be the one in need of the aid the next time. Brisbane's founders
organized the community and built the projects, tasks which would normally fall to a city
government. Some of the families who came in 1908 and their descendants were named
Allemand and Mozzetti; others who came in the late 1920s and early 1930s were named Walch,
Schmidt, Gomez, Williams and Schwenderlauf. Their sense of independence and spirit of
helping hands are not just history, but are alive in the third and fourth generations of these
founding families, many of whom are still here today.
The activities of local clubs and organizations in Brisbane reflect the volunteer spirit of the
community, which is the pride and cornerstone of this City. The commitment to giving a
helping hand, providing a community service or raising funds for those in need is evident in the
local services clubs, organizations and churches. These groups are currently very active and
productive, and provide a window to the community's character.
The Lions Club and Federated Women's Club are in the forefront of providing direct service to
the community. The Brisbane Federated Women's Club has given generously in such projects as
the Senior Alert Computer, the Fire Hydrant Painting Project and in sponsorship of annual
community events like the Senior Citizen Holiday Brunch. The Lions hold barbecues and
sponsor annual fund drives, and assist other clubs with their own fund raisers. The Lions also
                                                - 41 -
provide eye glasses and Christmas gifts for needy residents, meals for the homebound and funds
for student scholarships, sponsor health fairs and provide support to Brisbane youth
organizations. Traditional holiday events, including a pumpkin patch, egg hunt, Santa's Visit,
and holiday tree sales, are sponsored by the Lions. The Eagles Club focuses its fundraising
efforts on behalf of the Leukemia and American Heart Associations, as well as the needs of the
local cub scouting program.
The Parents' Club, Brisbane Dance Workshop, Boy Scout Troop, and Brisbane Educational
Support Team provide assistance to the schools and school age children. These groups provide
programs, funding and adult leadership to the community's youth. In providing for the entire
range of services for elder residents, the Seniors' Club has a weekly social gathering, as well as
educational and travel opportunities.
The Friends of the Brisbane Library stage story telling, magic and puppet shows for children of
all ages and assist in all aspects of the library operations, as well as provide assistance with the
City's historical archives. In addition, the Friends of the Library host an annual Brisbane History
Night.
The annual scholarship fund for college students and the making of the Christmas stars show the
wide interest and community effort of the local Chamber of Commerce. The Brisbane Yacht
Club sponsors a youth sailing program and an annual Marina event with a boating competition.
Families have joined together to help each other through the Brisbane Baby Sitting Coop to
provide emotional support and childcare for its members.
The Brisbane Community Association, Brisbane Beautification Committee, and Brisbane
Garden Club are devoted to enhancing and complementing the physical beauty of the City. An
annual flower show, community clean-ups and maintenance of community landscaping are focal
points of these volunteers.
The Community Emergency Volunteers are a trained and ready volunteer force for any
community need. Arising out of the 1989 earthquake, citizens began training and organizing for
community preparedness.
The local churches are regularly attended, reflecting the faith and spiritual values of many of the
members of the community and, in an effort to assist neighbors in solving community problems,
many citizens volunteer as community mediators.
The founders considered the idea of an independent city government starting back in the 1930s.
It was always a touchy subject. Up until the time of incorporation in 1961, there had been only
special purpose government districts for sewer, water or fire. Early efforts failed for a variety of
reasons: differences regarding the extent of the boundaries, perceived higher taxes and costs,
disputes with adjacent property owners such as the Crocker Land Company or the Southern
Pacific Railroad, and perhaps because, as founder
                                                  - 42 -
Fred Schmidt stated, "They didn't want the mayor or somebody else telling them what the heck
to do. "(4) One of the major reasons for the eventual incorporation was a potential move on the
part of the County of San Mateo to make Brisbane an Urban Renewal project and bulldoze many
of the existing houses.
Joining together to fight outsiders has been the bedrock of much of Brisbane political tradition.
The local government has had to struggle with San Francisco's landfill operation, plans for
filling San Francisco Bay, the proposed resource incinerator center, the habitat conservation plan
and development proposals for all of San Bruno Mountain, the annexation of the Quarry,
Crocker Park and the Northeast Ridge. These were not small town issues. They tested the
newly formed government and engendered volatile disputes among the voters. Many of these
issues lead to recalls, ballot initiatives and lawsuits. The one recurring theme in all the disputes
was self-determination. While some citizens saw opportunities to secure financial independence
for the City government and others saw outsiders as jeopardizing a small town way of life and its
environment, whichever side was taken, the Brisbane way was to stand up for yourself and your
rights. This strong sense of self-determination set the tone and foundation for Brisbane's City
government. Given the origins and history of the City's incorporation, the citizens saw the main
function of government as protecting them from outsiders and ensuring that outside proposals
and plans would enhance and not degrade the quality of life in Brisbane.
On the other hand, Brisbane citizens have not embraced the City's rules or regulations regarding
their conduct or accepted City projects without their input and support. Local government has
been viewed as a bottom up proposition, with Council meetings akin to the old town hall
meetings that were common when the nation was first founded. The City's capital improvement
projects have been subject to heated debates, citizen committees, surveys and votes. The City's
regulations regarding minimum lot size and setbacks, and even the need for a police department,
have been part of the public dialogue. Brisbane's citizens have always looked to the City
government to justify what it is doing and to get the citizens' permission. The spirit that has
motivated Brisbane citizens to battle with outside interests spills over into battles with the City
government. As Dorothy Radoff said, what's "even more remarkable, Brisbane's history reveals
that you can actually fight city hall--and win!!"(5) Brisbane's tradition of direct input and
involvement has lead to a participatory rather than representative form of local politics and to a
laissez faire rather than regulatory form of local governmental controls.
Policy 4         Acknowledge the fundamental rights of citizens to freely act and to use their
                 own property, except to the extent government rules or regulations are
                 necessary for the public health and safety and for protection of the
                 environment.
Policy 5         Use the least intrusive rules and regulations consistent with overall
                 governmental needs and State and Federal law.
Policy 6         Set clear and definitive standards for all rules and regulations.
                                                  - 43 -
Brisbane's tradition of participation in community affairs serves several important functions,
including identifying community values, informing the public, providing the opportunity for
public comments and evaluations, and creating an atmosphere in which conflicting opinions and
demands can be resolved. The City often makes special efforts to obtain citizen involvement in
planning and evaluating issues of concern to the community. The extensive uses of the public
bulletin board, direct mass mailings, special meetings, workshops and telephone and personal
surveys have been the approaches and techniques used to ensure public involvement. In
addition, the City Council makes appointments of citizens to its Planning Commission and
Parks, Beaches and Recreation Commission, which act to resolve certain issues and advise on
others. Wider participation in City government informs and improves public policy
development and lends strength and legitimacy to City goals.
Policy 6.1      Assist and facilitate the local service groups in their volunteer efforts on
                behalf of the community.
Policy 7        Continue to provide opportunities for citizen participation as part of the
                City's decision-making process.
                Program 7a: Actively disseminate information to the public through the public
                bulletin board, the Brisbane Star, press releases, water bills, postings in public
                buildings and public mailings.
                Program 7b: Hold periodic community, neighborhood and business meetings to
                solicit input and provide information regarding emergency services.
                Program 7c: Use water bills and the Brisbane Star to solicit public opinion and
                provide mechanisms for public response.
Policy 7.1      Acknowledge the socially enriching value of various ages, ethnicities,
                economic groups and occupations within the community.
                                                - 44 -
                                FOOTNOTES
1. Walter Blum, "Shadow on the Mountain," California Living Magazine (April 6, 1975).
2. Waiter Blum, "Shadow on the Mountain," California LivingMagazine (April 6, 1975).
3. H1-1, p.9.
4. Hl-1, p.45
5. H1-2, p.154
                                     - 45 -
                       CHAPTER IV
LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 GOALS:
 Brisbane will be a place where economic development...
                                  Stabilizes and diversifies the tax
                                  base;
                                  Serves the community by
                                  encouraging convenient and
                                  beneficial commercial
                                  development;
                                  Provides sufficient revenues for
                                  necessary City services;
                                  Facilitates employment of
                                  residents; and
                                  Sees sustainable growth as
                                  dependent on preservation and
                                  replenishment of natural
                                  resources.
                             LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                                   Chapter Index
                                                                                                                Page
A Brief Economic Overview .................................……………….............................................. 47
The City's Tax Base and General Fund Revenues........………………………………………... 48
Employment Opportunities .................................................…………........................................ 50
Environment and Natural Resources .....................................………..……................................ 51
       Quality of Life..........................................................…………………........................... 51
       Sustainable Economic Welfare .......................................………………….................... 51
                                                           - 46 -

                                        CHAPTER IV
                         LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
IV.1 A BRIEF ECONOMIC OVERVIEW
                                                     "My initial interpretation of the goals of the
                                                     leaders of Brisbane was that they wanted
                                                     self determination for their own future ...
                                                     I'm not ashamed to say that I tried to be not
                                                     only active but aggressive in getting as
                                                     much of the unincorporated land as I could
                                                     for Brisbane... We were able to put some
                                                     financial muscle into the City of Brisbane."
                                                                     Lanier "Len" Brady
                                                                     First Brisbane City Manager
                                                                     Brisbane City of Stars(1)
The first City Council of Brisbane, John Turner, Jess Salmon, Ernest Conway, James Williams
and Ed Schwenderlauf, saw that Brisbane's biggest problem in the years to come was going to be
a lack of municipal revenues. It was clear that property taxes on homeowners were not likely to
supply the funds needed for major municipal operations and improvements. Through the efforts
of the City Council and City Manager, in late 1962 both Southern Pacific and PG&E announced
that they would request Brisbane to annex their property. Together, the Southern Pacific and
PG&E properties, which totaled over 700 acres, doubled the land area of Brisbane. Since
Southern Pacific's property lines extended into the Bay, Brisbane also greatly increased the
amount of water acreage within its jurisdiction. The annexation increased Brisbane's tax base
tremendously. The City's locally assessed valuation tripled, going from $3 million to $9 million
overnight.
The issues of self-determination and financial independence led a subsequent City Council
composed of Don Bradshaw, Art Montenegro, Jeanine Hodge, Fred Smith and William
Lawrence and its City Manager, Brad Kerwin, in 1979 to actively seek the annexation of the
Northeast Ridge and Crocker Park into the City. The president of Crocker Land Company,
which owned the Northeast Ridge and developed Crocker Park, wanted the property to go to
Daly City. He described Brisbane as lacking sufficient staff and financial resources. The City
Council and City Manager won the annexation in 1983 by arguing that the impacts of any
development would profoundly affect Brisbane and revenues from the Park would allow the
financing of necessary capital improvements and operating expenses. As a result of the
annexation of Crocker Park, the locally assessed property valuation rose from $47 million to
$113 million and sales tax revenues jumped dramatically from $900 thousand to $3 million.
                                              - 47 -
The City of Brisbane has always recognized the importance of its economic health, which is
dependent upon maintaining a dynamic economic climate. The City must maintain adequate
revenue sources if it is to provide a satisfactory level of service to its residents and businesses.
Cities in the next decade face a world of declining revenues and higher citizen expectations. A
recessionary economy has slowed the growth of local government revenues; local costs have
been driven up by inflation; State and Federal regulations increasingly require that particular
services be provided or expenditures made; and the State legislature, in order to balance it own
budget, has taken away "traditional" city and county revenues. Meanwhile, Federal and State
aid to cities has been reduced or eliminated, and voters have imposed legal limits - such as
Proposition 4 and Proposition 13 - that restrict spending or taxes. At the same time, the costs of
growth have been polluted waterways, soil and air, the irreplaceable loss of non-renewable
resources, and the continuing failure to replenish renewable resources.
Communities are faced with the challenge of guiding and controlling economic growth and
expansion, while maintaining the quality of the environment and non-renewable and renewable
resources. Communities are also faced with such problems as lagging growth rates,
unemployment, a declining tax base, reduced municipal services, and an aging infrastructure that
is costly to maintain and replace.
For the City of Brisbane, its financial resources have been declining, and the future economic
indicators are mixed. However, the land use alternatives, especially along Bayshore Boulevard
and west of Highway 101, provide opportunities for guiding any future growth to meet the long-
range economic as well as environmental policies. This chapter provides local economic
development policies. It is divided into three general areas. However, these areas should not be
viewed as independent of one another; they are interactive and interdependent and together
constitute a continuous economic policy and process.
IV.2 THE CITY'S TAX BASE AND GENERAL FUND REVENUES
In order to support its other economic development strategies, the City recognizes the need to
maintain adequate revenues to provide essential support services to residents and businesses.
Without a well-maintained infrastructure, emergency services, and a range of recreational and
cultural activities, the City loses its ability to attract new businesses and to retain the quality of
life of its current residents. In order to provide these services, the City must receive revenues that
keep pace with increasing costs. Recognizing that tax rate increases are not a viable solution to
this challenge, the City is committed to maintaining a tax base that provides the necessary
revenues. In addition to its goal of preserving property values, the City will seek to generate
needed revenues through increased retail activity without losing sight of the need to maintain a
retail presence that is in keeping with Brisbane's small size and character.
The changing revenue stream to cities finds Brisbane increasingly reliant on sales tax revenues.
In 1992-93, over 40% of Brisbane's General Fund, which is the general revenue for traditional
                                                   - 48 -
governmental services, was comprised of sales taxes. Therefore, if current revenue sources
remain, promotion of retail sales is of central importance in maintaining the resources of
government. Revenues generated by property taxes, amounting to a little less than 20% of the
General Fund, are also important, if they are not overshadowed by new service costs to the
City associated with development. Local hotels do provide revenues for some cities adjacent
to Brisbane that exceed 25% of General Fund revenues. Hotel transit occupancy taxes are
locally enacted and collected and, on the County average, are 8-10% of room charges.
Policy 8       Maintain and diversify the City's tax base, consistent with community
               character, in order to generate adequate revenues for City Government
               and sustain a healthy local economy.
               Program 8a: Assess service costs and revenues associated with proposed
               developments on a short and long-term basis.
               Program 8b: Maintain information on available or potential sites for economic
               development and seek to conserve suitable locations for appropriate uses.
               Program 8c: Encourage local equity ownership in local development in order to
               retain more economic benefits within the community.
               Program 8d: Prepare informational and promotional materials to encourage
               desired development.
               Program 8e: Encourage the Chamber of Commerce to develop promotional
               materials and to actively solicit businesses that benefit the City.
               Program 8f: Investigate available programs which assist in rehabilitation,
               seismic upgrade or repair of businesses.
               Program 8g: Develop economic programs including incentives available under
               the Community Redevelopment Act to encourage and facilitate the development of
               appropriate retail activity and hotels.
               Program 8h: Use Redevelopment Agency funds, as appropriate, to assist in the
               construction of planned public improvements in the project's areas.
               Program 8i: Promote attractive retail development in planned areas instead of in
               strip areas adjacent to an arterial highway or freeway corridor.
               Program 8j: Consider mixed-use zoning, which would encourage a combination
               of business and commercial uses, making sites more responsive to market
               conditions.
                                               - 49 -
IV.3 EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Essential to any economic development strategy is the creation of jobs within the community.
The census estimates that of persons over 18 years old, 58.7% have some college education,
24.1% completed high school, 14% had some high school education but not a diploma, and 3.3%
had less than 9th grade education. Among Brisbane residents, the most frequent occupations are
administrative support (24%), executive and managerial (15.9%), precision production, craft and
repair (13.8%), professional specialty (11.7%), operators and laborers (11.4%), sales (10.6%),
service (9.6%), and technicians (2.9%). Regrouping these categories and comparing with results
of earlier census data (GP-2 & 3), the trend toward increasing white collar employment
replacing blue collar employment is apparent:
                                            TABLE 3
                                     Employment Distribution
                                                             1970           1980            1990
Administrative/Professional/Technician/Sales/Clerical        49%            62%             65%
Production/Industrial                                        37%            27%             25%
Food/Protective/Other Service                                13%              9%            10%
Farming/Forestry/Fishing                                       0%             2%             0%
The primary objective of economic development policies is to provide jobs that are matched
with the skill and training level of community residents so as to maximize and retain the wealth
generated by the expansion in employment. Also, in human terms, unemployment or
underemployment has severe repercussions on individuals, children, families, the local economy
and the social fabric of the community. While recognizing the importance of generating
employment for local residents, the City is aware that the needs of the small and diverse labor
force in Brisbane cannot overcome market forces, which dominate job creation. Brisbane
currently has more jobs within its borders than residents that work. An increase in the
proportion of Brisbane residents hired by Brisbane employers can both help unemployment and
reduce commuting and its effects on individuals and the environment.
Studies of job creation in San Francisco and environs have found that small businesses create the
majority of new jobs. Small businesses also contribute to economic diversity, which expands
workers' job opportunities and provides some resilience during economic turndown. Locally
owned businesses provide economic strength because they are more likely than outside firms to
seek local sources of materials and to reinvest locally.
Policy 9        Seek fuller employment of Brisbane residents.
                                               - 50 -
                Program9a: Encourage the City and other Brisbane employers to give
                consideration to residency of equally qualified applicants and to advertise jobs
                locally in order to strengthen the economic and social health of the community.
                Program9b: Provide, as applicable, incentives to businesses that provide jobs for
                unemployed sectors of Brisbane's labor force.
                Programe9c: Encourage small and locally owned businesses.
IV.4 ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL, RESOURCES
Quality of Life
Over time, the economic health of Brisbane will depend also on its environmental sensitivity
and the ability to preserve and restore its natural resources. Increasingly, cities are measured
by their "livability," and that measure reflects their appeal to businesses and residents.
As a City, and as a community that is greatly influenced and defined by its surrounding
physicality, such as San Bruno Mountain and the San Francisco Bay, Brisbane is keenly aware
of the need to respect and preserve the natural environment. It is this environment that helps
make Brisbane such a unique and desirable place to live and work. But while the City is
committed to protecting its natural resources to maintain the living environment, it is also
committed to preserving and restoring the environment as an economic development strategy
in itself.
Sustainable Economic Welfare
Just as a healthy environment is necessary for people to live and thrive, a healthy environment
is necessary for the long term success of business. This holds true whether the environment is
viewed as a source of raw materials, as a place where people can actively pursue consumption,
or as a "sink" into which commercial wastes are disposed and recycled. The bottom line is that
without preserving and renewing the natural environment, there is no economic development
strategy that can bring prosperity to a community.
While it would be easy to argue that because of Brisbane's small size, no matter how its
environment is treated the larger environment would not be affected and resources could be
obtained elsewhere, the City takes the view that it must do at home what must be done on a
state, national and global scale. Recognizing that its resources are finite, the City seeks to
encourage renewable uses and the preservation and restoration of its truly unique natural
features. Development decisions are to be analyzed so as not to overwhelm the long-term
environment and in a manner that provides for sustainable development. Such sustainable
development has been defined as "development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. " (2) Using incentives
and the CEQA environmental process, the City will strive to protect the natural environment and
                                                - 51 -
make clear that in Brisbane, environmental protection means good business as much as it
denotes quality of life.
Policy 10      Establish environmental welfare as a major objective of the City's economic
               development policy.
               Program 10a: Develop an environmental strategy for economic development. The
               strategy should include methods of encouraging the use of renewable resources
               and the preservation and restoration of the unique features of the community for
               future generations.
                                             - 52 -
                                    FOOTNOTES
1. H1-2, pp. 1b-18.
2. Raymond C. Miller, "In Order to Save the World for Human Habitation, We Must Stop
   Teaching Economics!" School of Education Review, San Francisco State University,
   Vol. 4 (Spring 1992), pp. 41-55, quoting from World Commission on Environment and
   Development, Our Common Future (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987).
                                         - 53 -
                     CHAPTER IX
               CONSERVATION
GOALS:
The City of Brisbane...
                      Where there is daily contact with the
                      Mountain and Bay
                      And there is an awareness of the finite
                      nature of resources;
                      Where the citizens are judicious in the use
                      of water and energy
                      And recycling has become part of everyday
                      life...
                      A community that carefully manages the
                      present to protect the future.
                                                           CONSERVATION
                                                              Chapter Index
                                                                                                                        Page
Biological Resources ...................................................................................………………….139
         Plant and Animal Species ……………….....................................................................139
Soils ..........................................................................................................…………………....149
Water Resources ………………….......................................................................................... 150
Mineral Resources ........................................................................................…………………155
Cultural Resources …………………........................................................................................157
Domestic Water ..........................................................................................…………………. 159
Energy ………………….......................................................................................................... 159
Solid Waste ..........................................…………………........................................................ 160
                                                                      - 138 -

                                            CHAPTER IX
                                      CONSERVATION
Conservation policies address the management of resources. The principle of conservation
recognizes that natural resources are fragile and finite and must be maintained if future
generations are to enjoy and benefit from what is taken for granted today.
In recent years, conservation practices have become a part of Brisbane's daily life. Residents and
businesses have faced water restrictions and energy shortages. They have been asked to separate
materials from their waste stream and to be careful of what flows to their storm drains. They
have been asked to conserve energy and water and practice soil conservation measures when
constructing or improving their homes and businesses. Conservation has become an integral part
of every issue area addressed in this Plan.
The involvement of government in regulating the conservation of resources has expanded
significantly in the last ten years. Legislation, especially at the State and Federal level, has not
only established new agencies, but has given existing agencies broader regulatory powers. The
relationship between private individuals, the City and other government agencies is complex in
regard to conservation issues, where the City's authority is often preempted or circumscribed by
the regulations and requirements of others. The challenges in this General Plan period are to
most efficiently conserve resources, communicate well with the public and work constructively
with other agencies. These challenges are reflected in the policies in this chapter.
This chapter contains a number of sections. It begins with consideration of the natural resources
in the planning area, including plant and animal species, soils, water and mineral resources. It
next addresses cultural resources, and then turns to issues of domestic water, energy and waste
disposal.
IX.1 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Plant and Animal Species
The portions of San Bruno Mountain that fall within the General Plan area contain many species
of plants and animals native to California. The locally unique ecosystem on the Mountain makes
it the center of efforts in conservation biology. The Mountain is home for two species of
butterfly that are listed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service as endangered. Two
additional species are listed as candidate and threatened species. Two species of plants,
Arctostaphylos pacifica and A. imbricata are listed by the State of California as endangered. San
Bruno Mountain is an exceptional natural resource.
                                                - 139 -
                                            TABLE 8
                               Butterflies of San Bruno Mountain
        Butterfly                                                                 Federal Status
Mission blue                                                                      Endangered
        (Icaricia Icarioides Missionensis)
San Bruno elfin                                                                   Endangered
        (Incisalia Fotis Bayensis)
Callippe silverspot                                                               Candidate
        (Speyeria Callippe Callippe)
Bay checkerspot                                                                   Threatened
        (Euphydrays Editha Bayensis)
                                            TABLE 9
                                Rare Plants in the Planning Area
Scientific Name                               Common Name                         R-E-D Code*
Arabis blepharophylla                         coast rock cress                    1-1-3
Collinsia franciscana                         San Francisco collinsia             1-1-3
Arctostaphylos imbricata imbricata            San Bruno Mt. manzanita             3-3-3
Arctostaphylos imbricata montaraensis         Montara Mt. Manzanita               3-2-3
Erysimum franciscanum                         Franciscan wallflower               1-2-3
Helianthella castanea                         Diablo helianthella                 3-2-3
Silene verecunda verecunda                    San Francisco campion               3-2-3
Pentachaeta bellidiflora                      White-rayed pentachaeta             3-2-3
* RARITY (R)                          1=rare, 2=several populations, 3=one population
  ENDANGERMENT (E)                    1 =not endangered, 2=endangered in portion of range,
                                      3=endangered throughout range
  DISTRIBUTION (D):                   1 =widespread, 2 =rare outside Calif, 3=indemic to Calif
Source: CNPS Rare Plant Inventory
                                               - 140 -
The technical background reports (EIR-1 and NR-1) and Figures IX-A through IX-F provide
more detailed information on the vegetation communities and plant and animal species native to
the Mountain.
Rare and endangered biological communities are strongly protected by State and Federal law.
The Federal Endangered Species Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, and wetlands
legislation are the best known of these legislative protections. The technical background reports
(NR-1 and EIR-1) provide an overview of the various agencies with conservation responsibilities
and describe key pieces of legislation.
The butterfly species on San Bruno Mountain are covered by a Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP)
prepared under the authority of the Endangered Species Act. The HCP was approved by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Game, and allows
limited development on San Bruno Mountain in conjunction with the implementation of a
biological program for the remaining habitat. The biological program includes a provision for
controlling the spread of invasive non-native plant species and monitoring the status of the
species of concern.
Any parcel located within the area of the HCP must follow its provisions. Areas subject to the
provisions of the HCP are shown in Figure IX-F. Authority to regulate compliance with the
HCP is vested in the County of San Mateo as the Plan Operator, manager of the habitat. The
responsibilities of the City are to identify when lands affected by a development proposal are
subject to the HCP, and to refer that proposal to the manager of the habitat for review. The City
must incorporate the conditions imposed by the Plan Operator into the City's action when
considering a land use development permit.
The HCP provides a good example of the type of relationship the City has with responsible
agencies with authority for resource conservation. The State Department of Fish and Game, the
Army Corps of Engineers, the Water Quality Control Board and the Bay Conservation and
Development Commission are among the agencies that have the authority to require conditions
on whether and how projects can be implemented. The City turns to these agencies for their
expertise and cooperates with their directives. General Plan policy in the area of resource
conservation emphasizes the relative responsibilities of these agencies and the need for good
communication and coordination between all concerned in the interest of providing good public
service.
                                                - 141 -
.
  - 142 -
- 143 
- 144 
- 145 
- 146 
- 147 
Policy 118 Preserve areas containing rare and endangered species habitat to the extent
           allowed by law and available resources.
Policy 119 Comply with the provisions of the Habitat Conservation Plan and the
           Agreement with respect to the San Bruno Mountain Area Habitat
           Conservation Plan.
Policy 120 Cooperate with local, State and Federal agencies in conservation efforts for
           biological resources.
Policy 121 Support efforts to acquire additional rare and endangered species habitat
           and enlarge San Bruno Mountain State and County Park.
Policy 122 Cooperate with other agencies in conservation efforts.
           Program 122a: Work with the Habitat Conservation Plan Operator, the State
           Department of Fish and Game, the U. S Fish and Wildlife Service, and other
           agencies as appropriate regarding plans and programs that may affect biological
           resources in the planning area.
           Program 122b. Consult the maps in the technical background reports and
           information supplied by responsible agencies to determine potential for
           environmental impacts to biological resources and take appropriate action.
           Program 122c: Consult with local, State and Federal agencies to determine when
           field studies are required to supplement or update existing data.
           Program 122d: Work with appropriate agencies to prevent motor bikes and other
           unauthorized off-road vehicles on San Bruno Mountain.
           Program 122e: Encourage applicants to initiate early CEQA consultation on
           conservation issues.
Policy 123 Conserve important biological communities through sensitive project design.
           Program 123a: In land use development applications, consider the siting of
           structures and utilities so as to conserve identified biological communities.
           Program 123b: Request that the HCP Operator study the Brisbane Acres to
           determine whether there is the potential to meet the 40% requirement for
           conserved habitat by dedication of large areas of land rather than small portions
           of parcels.
                                            - 148 -
In Brisbane, the urban setting is an important part of the ecosystem. Street trees in the public way
and landscape on private properties contribute to the richness of the plant and animal
communities that make Brisbane a special place. The City's policies can have a direct effect on
the conservation of the urban environment.
Policy 124     Conserve the urban landscape.
Policy 125     Protect heritage trees.
               Program 125a: Refine the ordinance that establishes requirements for protection
               of heritage trees in the urban setting.
Policy 126     Continue and refine street tree and public landscape programs.
Policy 127     Encourage the use of plants that are compatible with the natural flora in
               landscape programs.
Policy 128     Encourage the use of native plants in landscape programs that provide food
               and shelter to indigenous wildlife.
               Program 128a: Encourage conservation groups to provide public information on
               plant materials.
IX.2 SOILS
Chapter X addresses the issue of erosion of soils in regard to slope and hazard. Conservation of
soils approaches the issue from a different perspective: the retention of soils that have properties
to support plant and animal life. When topsoil erodes, the exposed rock and colluvium are
extremely difficult to revegetate. Thus, conservation of existing soils is an important aspect of
the conservation of plant and animal communities.
Policy 129     Require erosion controls to mitigate soil disturbance.
               Program 129a: Encourage all property owners, especially of the Quarry, to
               address erosion on their properties through revegetation or other measures.
                                               - 149 -
IX.3 WATER RESOURCES
Water resources in the planning area consist of watersheds and drainage basins, open water in the
Bay and Lagoon, marshes and intermittent streams. There are two watersheds, the Guadalupe
Valley and Visitacion Valley Watersheds, and five drainage basins, the GVMID, San
Bruno/Bayshore, Downtown, Bayshore and Beatty Basins, in the area. Sierra Point is a self-
contained drainage area. (See Figures IX-G and IX-H.) The technical background reports (NR-1
and UT-l) speak to these in some detail. Drainage generally runs through open flood channels or
via the Brisbane Lagoon to the Bay.
No aquifers or recharge areas have been identified in the area by the U.S. Geological Survey.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shares primary responsibility for regulating waters and
wetlands in the United States with the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. Most of the
waters and wetlands in the planning area would be subject to Corps jurisdiction if an activity
would result in dredging or filling of waters or the alteration of wetlands. The State Department
of Fish and Game and the Water Quality Control Board also have regulatory powers over water
resources and wetland habitats.
Policy 130     Conserve water resources in the natural environment.
               Program 130a: As an ongoing part of land use planning and CEQA analysis,
               determine whether proposals could affect water resources.
               Program 130b: Require, as appropriate, project analysis of drainage, siltation,
               and impacts on vegetation and on water quality.
               Program 130c: Consult with responsible agencies for design parameters and
               potential mitigation measures for the conservation of all water resources,
               especially pertaining to wetlands conservation.
               Program 130d: Work with the U.S. Geological Survey to identify the water
               resources in the planning area.
               Program 130e: Obtain maps of drainages and aquifers in and around the City as
               they become available.
               Program 130f: Brisbane will review the San Francisco Bay Estuary Plan to
               determine whether any amendments to the Brisbane General Plan are
               appropriate.
                                               - 150 -
- 151 
- 152 
Policy 130.1 The City requires restoration of wetland losses. The determination of which
             land areas are wetlands will be done by those Federal and State agencies
             having jurisdiction. The City, however, is especially concerned with those
             wetlands surrounding the perimeter of the Brisbane Lagoon, the Bay
             shoreline, the Levinson Marsh and the Quarry sediment ponds. The ratios of
             restoration may exceed the regulatory agencies' mitigation minimums.
Policy 130.2 Consider wetland restoration as a part of flood control projects.
Policy 130.3 Seek grant funding for a wetland restoration plan in Brisbane.
             Program 130.3a: As a part of the annual reviews called for in the General Plan,
             such as in the Open Space Plan, determine the feasibility of cooperative grant
             applications for wetland restoration or enhancement and proceed appropriately.
Policy 130.4 Wetland and mitigation areas that are mitigations for project impacts must
             be protected by recorded deed restrictions.
Policy 130.5 It is Brisbane's desire that mitigation for Brisbane's wetland losses occur
             somewhere within the jurisdictional boundaries or sphere of influence of the
             City of Brisbane, if feasible.
Policy 131   Emphasize the conservation of water quality and of riparian and other
             water-related vegetation, especially that which provides habitat for native
             species, in planning and maintenance efforts.
             Program 131a: Encourage studies by responsible agencies and conservation
             groups of the environmental values and conservation and maintenance
             requirements of the various water courses in the planning area.
Policy 132   Recognize the importance of the Brisbane Lagoon and the Levinson Marsh
             as wildlife habitats, valuable community resources and drainage basins, and
             cooperate with responsible agencies in their conservation.
Policy 133   Reduce the amount of sediment entering waterways.
             Program 133a: Participate in programs to improve water quality in the Lagoon
             and the Bay.
                                            - 153 -
           Program 133b: Require all development, especially that involving grading, to
           exercise strict controls over sediment.
           Program 133c: Require the Quarry, as a major source of sediment far the
           Lagoon, to closely monitor its containment systems to ensure their effectiveness.
Policy 134 Reduce the amount of pollutants entering waterways.
           Program 134a: Cooperate with the Water Quality Control Board and County
           Department of Environmental Health and participate in the NPDES Program to
           monitor and regulate point and non point discharges.
           Program 134b: Provide public information on how individual citizens can
           contribute to the reduction of pollutants in the storm drain and sewer systems.
           Program 134c: Encourage wetlands restoration projects to remove or fix
           toxicants and reduce siltation.
           Program 134d: Utilize wetlands restoration projects to remove or fix toxicants
           and reduce siltation where appropriate.
                                           - 154 -
IX.4 MINERAL RESOURCES
The State requires that General Plans identify areas of mineral resources in the planning area and
establish policies for their conservation. The only designated mineral resource within the
General Plan planning area is the Guadalupe Valley Quarry. In January 1987, the California
Division of Mines and Geology designated the Quarry as a "regionally significant construction
aggregate resource area" (Figure IX-I). Although the Quarry is within the City's planning area, it
is not under the jurisdiction of the City. The County of San Mateo has permit authority for the
Quarry as well as enforcement obligations.
The Quarry operates as an open pit mining operation, crushing and producing aggregate rock,
which it sells on site. The Quarry has also been collecting recycled materials to crush and sell
intermixed with native rock.
As noted in other chapters of this Plan, the mining and recycling operation raises issues of air
quality, noise and circulation. For the City, these impacts must be considered, as well as the
issue of the conservation of the mineral resource.
Chapter XII sets forth subarea policies for the Quarry. The policies emphasize the City's strong
interest in concluding the quarrying operation as soon as possible and converting the property to
other beneficial uses. The Quarry operator is required to address this conversion in a reclamation
plan that must be submitted and approved by State agencies. The policies in this chapter address
the conservation of the mineral resource at the Quarry by responsible management practices.
Policy 135      During the limited time of the County of San Mateo permit, conserve mineral
                resources at the Quarry through responsible mining and management
                practices.
                Program 135a: Request that the County of San Mateo regularly monitor the
                Quarry operation to assure that the operator is meeting all health and safety
                obligations and required management practices.
                Program 135b: Contact the County of San Mateo, the Bay Area Air Quality
                Management District and the Water Quality Control Board if it appears that there
                are violations of local, State or Federal requirements at the site.
                Program 135c: Actively participate in County permit review to develop conditions
                of approval that address air pollution and water quality issues in conjunction with
                mineral resource conservation.
                                                - 155 -
- 156 
                Program 135d: In conjunction with any application for annexation of the Quarry
                to the City, develop and adopt a Mineral Resources Element to the General Plan
                to establish parameters and conditions for short-term Quarry operation and long-
                term reclamation.
IX.5 CULTURAL RESOURCES
Conservation of cultural resources has become important throughout the State. Cultural resources
are defined as historical resources, which include structures over 50 years old, and prehistoric
resources, generally archeological sites.
Brisbane has several older structures that remain from the railroad period, including the
Roundhouse, as well as some residential structures of significance to the history of the City.
(See background report OS-1 for further identification of local historical resources.)
Due to Brisbane's location and natural amenities, the area was favored by Native Americans.
Several archeological sites have been recorded in this locality. (See Figure IX-J.) City policy to
preserve archeological resources is based on consistency with CEQA requirements.
Policies in this chapter address the conservation of historical and archeological resources.
Policy 136      Entourage the maintenance and rehabilitation of structures important to the
                history of Brisbane.
                Program 136a: Provide assistance to owners of historic property in planning
                rehabilitation projects.
                Program 136b: Provide information to property owners on loan and grant funds
                and tax incentives.
                Program 136c: Provide local incentives, such as the Brisbane Star awards, to
                maintain historic places.
Policy 137      Conserve pre-historic resources in accordance with State and Federal
                requirements.
                Program 137a: Consider amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to require
                resource surveys in conjunction with land use development applications and to
                establish procedures in the event of discovery to protect Native American
                Cultural Resources consistent with the standardized procedures given in
                Appendix K of CEQA.
                                               - 157 -
- 158 
IX.6 DOMESTIC WATER
The recent drought has called attention to the finite nature of the domestic water supply and the
need to incorporate conservation measures into the daily life of the community.
Policy 133       Encourage conservation of domestic water.
                 Program 138a. Require the use of water conserving fixtures in new construction
                 and remodeling projects
                 Program 138b: Encourage the use of water conserving landscape and irrigation
                 systems.
                 Program 138c: Utilize, if safe and appropriate, recycled water for landscape
                 irrigation and dust control.
                 Program 138d. Provide public information on water conservation practices.
                 Program 138e: As a part of the land use planning process, consider how water
                 conserving features are incorporated into project design.
IX.7 ENERGY
Energy conservation policies are given below. They focus on non-renewable resources,
electricity, gas and petroleum products and emphasize the various regulations and technologies
that apply to energy conservation.
Policy 139       Promote the conservation of non-renewable energy resources.
Policy 140       Encourage energy-efficient building design and site planning.
                 Program 140a: Continue to administer building codes that contain State
                 requirements for energy conservation.
                 Program 140b: As a part of the review of land use applications for subdivisions,
                 specific plans and new non-residential and multi-family projects, encourage the
                 design and siting of structures and the use of landscape materials in terms of
                 utilizing natural resources for heating and cooling.
Policy 141       Encourage the installation of energy-efficient appliances.
                                                 - 159 -
                 Program 141a: Cooperate with PG&E in promoting energy conservation by
                 providing information and referral on energy-efficient appliances and heating
                 and cooling systems.
Policy 142       Continue to support vehicle trip-reduction programs to conserve non-
                 renewable fuels. (See Chapters VI and X for additional trip reduction
                 policies.)
IX.8 SOLID WASTE
Recycling of solid waste provides two important benefits: recycling extends the life of
remaining landfills and reduces the demand on natural resources. The City has participated with
other cities in San Mateo County in developing a plan to reduce the waste stream,(1) which will
be implemented in this General Plan period.
Policy 143       Maximize opportunities to recycle solid waste.
                 Program 143a: Continue to participate in joint planning and collection programs
                 with other agencies, such as those required by AB 939, to manage solid waste in
                 order to maximize reclamation and reuse of the resources contained in the solid
                 waste stream and reduce the impacts on landfills.
                 Program 143b: In negotiating franchise agreements with scavenger companies,
                 require that they provide recycling incentives to both residential and business
                 customers.
                 Program143c: In negotiating franchise agreements with scavenger companies,
                 require a curb-side collection of large items several times a year. Coordinate with
                 non-profit agencies so that opportunities for reuse are provided.
                 Program 143d: Purchase goods containing recycled materials for City use.
                 Program 143e: In the review of land use development applications, consider
                 design factors pertaining to the storage and disposal of recycling materials.
                 Program 143f: Consult with refuse disposal contractors or other recycling
                 services on applicable land use development applications regarding the adequacy
                 of the proposed measures.
                 Program 143g: Stay informed about new programs and technologies.
                                                - 160 -
Program 143h: Provide public information about the benefits of recycling and
encourage participation by residents and businesses.
                              - 161 -
                                    FOOTNOTES
1. See the elements of the County of San Mateo Integrated Waste Management Plan for
   detailed program descriptions, especially the Source Reduction and Recycling and
   Household Hazardous Waste Elements adopted by the City of Brisbane.
                                         - 162 -
                     CHAPTER VIII
 RECREATION AND COMMUNITY
                     SERVICES
GOALS:
Brisbane will be a place where...
                      Recreational opportunities and facilities
                      allow residents and businesses to join
                      together for play, health and learning;
                      Academic, recreational and artistic
                      education and guidance of the young is
                      valued;
                      Residents and businesses share resources
                      and assist one another; and
                      Residents and families with special needs
                      are supported.
                              RECREATION COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                                        Chapter Index
                                                                                                                             Page
Recreation/Educational Facilities .........................................................................…………..126
       Recreational Facilities ......................................................................………………...126
       Educational Facilities .......................................................................………………...129
Recreational & Community Programs .........................................................……………….. 130
       Programs and Events ………………...........................................................................130
       Pre-School and School-Age Activities ..........................................................………. 131
       Seniors' Activities ........................................................................................…….….. 132
       Teen Activities .............................................................................................……….. 132
       Marina Activities ………………............................................................................... 133
Special Needs .........................................................................................................……….... 133
       Childcare ………………............................................................................................ 134
       Residents with Mobility and Self-Care Limitations,
       the Frail Elderly and the Disabled ................................................................….……. 135
                                                               - 125 -

                                           CHAPTER VIII
               RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                                          "Some call Brisbane ‘The City That Grew
                                                          Out of the Depression.’ But many of us call
                                                          it, ‘The City With A Heart.’ We've had a lot
                                                          of dissension here, but to me it reminds me
                                                          of a big family. In most big families, the
                                                          brothers and sisters argue, but when the
                                                          chips are down, they have a heart."
                                                                                  Dorothy Radoff
                                                                                  City Historian
                                                                         A Spirit of Independence(1)
Recreation and Community Services are very important to the Brisbane Community. It is
through interaction and participation in recreational programs, community events and volunteer
activities that members of the community get to know each other and share a common purpose.
By providing and assisting other providers to offer quality programs, by encouraging and
supporting volunteer activities and by meeting special needs, the City establishes an environment
that expresses concern for the well-being, education and safety of its citizens.
This chapter has several components: It examines the community's needs for recreational and
educational facilities; it establishes policies to provide such facilities; and it identifies special
needs that must be addressed, including those of seniors and youth.
VIII.1 RECREATIONAL /EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
Recreational Facilities
The City, although surrounded by vast open space for outdoor recreation, owns very few
facilities where active recreation can take place. In fact, the playground and adjacent tennis
court at Kids 'n Things Children's Center, the Marina and its fitness course and fishing piers,
Firth Park and the Brisbane Community Center are the City's only holdings.(2) Under a joint use
agreement with the Brisbane School District, the City is allowed to use the District's youth
baseball and multipurpose playing fields and junior high school gymnasium. The City also rents
land for a softball field at Sierra Point. As part of the Northeast Ridge conditions of approval,
funds have been deposited for new recreational facilities, although operation of the facilities will
be dependent on the City's ability to budget for annual operating costs. The challenge during this
General Plan period will be to maintain and improve existing facilities and to maximize
opportunities to add new facilities.
                                                  - 126 -

As a part of the General Plan alternatives survey, respondents were asked to state their
preferences for public facilities that could be donated to the community. Figure VIII-A
illustrates the voter responses. The top choices were a high school, a community park and a
community center. Some progress has already been made toward obtaining a community park
and a community center, both of which are generally considered "passive" recreational facilities,
available for classes or gatherings rather than for basketball or team efforts. A public community
center has been approved on the Northeast Ridge, the development of a community park at the
Old County Road site is currently underway and a fund has been established for a swimming
pool. A City Council subcommittee is studying the City's facility needs and potential locations.
                                                - 127 -
Policy 94   Facilitate a public process to set priorities and establish the ability to operate
            active and passive recreational facilities.
Policy 95   Provide recreational facilities that accommodate community activities, meet
            national standards, are accessible in accordance with State and National
            standards, and contain the necessary components for multiple uses and
            community enjoyment.
            Program 95a: Prepare a list of public facilities available for community uses, the
            hours they are open to the public, and the requirements for use. Periodically
            update and distribute the facility list throughout the community.
Policy 96   Condition, as appropriate, new developments to construct, maintain or
            provide for new recreational facilities, amenities and opportunities.
Policy 96.1 Consider adopting a policy to require a percentage set aside for art as part of
            any development project.
Policy 97   Encourage the development of private sector recreational facilities, such as
            commercial playing fields, bowling alleys, health clubs, performing arts
            facilities and theaters.
Policy 98   Maximize the extended use of existing public facilities for year-round and
            evening activities.
Policy 99   For all recreational facilities, consider the inclusion of restrooms, drinking
            fountains, pay phones, security lighting, adequate parking, storage, facilities
            for trash recycling and, where appropriate, food preparation and/or
            vending/concession facilities.
Policy 100  Investigate opportunities for joint public-private development of commercial
            recreational facilities.
            Program 100a: Develop a needs analysis for recreational facilities including a
            study of various means of funding the acquisition, as well as the operation and
            maintenance of the facilities.
            Program 100b: Consider a recreation impact fee program for all new
            development.
            Program 100c: Encourage new commercial development and renovation to
            include shower and locker room facilities in order to promote employees' physical
            fitness, encourage use of public and private recreational opportunities in the
            community, and reduce dependence on the automobile for transportation..
                                           - 128 -
               Program 100d: Discuss with the Boys and Girls Club, YMCA, YWCA or other
               non-profit youth agency the feasibility of a youth activity center to serve Brisbane
               and other neighboring cities.
Educational Facilities
Brisbane has two neighborhood schools: Brisbane Elementary School, built in the 1930s, serves
532 school children from kindergarten to fifth grade and Lipman Middle School serves 180 sixth
to eighth grade students from both Brisbane Elementary and Panorama Elementary, located in
Daly City. The local schools are strongly supported by volunteers, service clubs, parents groups
(the Brisbane/Lipman School Community Club), the Brisbane Educational Support Team
(B.E.S.T.) and the general population. When students graduate from Lipman, they attend - one
of the high schools in the Jefferson Union High School District or go to private schools. The
distance to and lack of community identification with these schools often makes the transition to
high school difficult. The General Plan alternatives survey results showed a high school in
Brisbane to be of the highest priority to respondents. Also, post-secondary educational facilities
like UCSF on the vacant Baylands were supported by 64% of those surveyed.
Policy 101     Maintain the neighborhood school concept for all children, from
               kindergarten through high school in Brisbane.
Policy 102     Encourage development of post-secondary educational facilities in Brisbane.
Policy 103     Work collaboratively with the Brisbane School District to provide
               neighborhood schooling and comprehensive services for children and their
               families and the general public.
               Program103a: Establish a City Council subcommittee to work jointly with the
               Brisbane Elementary School District and the Jefferson High School District and
               other entities to determine the feasibility of and make recommendations regarding
               a high school in Brisbane.
               Program 103b: Establish a City Council subcommittee to promote and encourage
               educational facilities to locate in Brisbane.
               Program103c: Develop a program to require impact and mitigation fees from
               developers, as appropriate, for constructing and/or operating a local high school.
                                               - 129 -
                Program 103d: Continue and expand joint use of facilities with the Brisbane
                School District and encourage and assist the District, as feasible, in upgrading
                the conditions of school grounds and multi-use spaces.
                Program 103e: Consider a Joint Powers Agreement or other appropriate
                arrangement with the Brisbane School District, in order to develop, maintain and
                program recreational facilities.
                Program 103f: Develop and implement with the Brisbane School District a
                program for year-round and evening use of public recreational facilities.
VIII.2 RECREATIONAL AND COMMUNITY PROGRAMS
The City of Brisbane has taken a leadership role in providing recreational and community
programming. However, as discussed above, the facilities currently available are very limited.
The General Plan alternatives survey showed that citizens desired more active recreation, such as
a pool, playing fields, golf course and community theatre. However, these choices for active
recreation, as reflected in the survey, were secondary to the desire for a high school, community
park and community center.
Existing recreational and community programming has evolved with collaborative and
responsive input from residents, the School District and businesses. Programs for children and
seniors are a priority, as are community-wide events which bring the residents and families
together in celebration.
Programs and Events
Policy 104      Provide all businesses and residents, especially youth and seniors, with a
                variety of enjoyable social, leisure, recreational, cultural and artistic
                opportunities that are accessible, affordable, safe, uncrowded and physically
                attractive.
Policy 105      Consider public needs in the creation and design of recreational, artistic,
                cultural, environmental, educational and civic programs.
Policy 106      Assist children in determining where their interests and talents lie.
Policy 107      Provide children with environments in which they can be successful and
                recognized.
Policy 108      Develop programs which nurture self esteem, inspire academic excellence,
                encourage physical and emotional growth and unleash creativity.
                                               - 130 -
             Program 108a: Conduct an annual public hearing on recreational, artistic,
             cultural, environmental, educational and civic programming in order to obtain
             public input.
             Program 108b: Provide adults with the opportunity for active recreation and
             team sports competition through the adult sport leagues.
             Program 108c: Organize special events, including fun runs, volleyball and tennis
             tournaments.
             Program 108d: Provide special interest classes, workshops and seminars, such as
             nutrition, exercise, dance, health, etc.
             Program 108e: Coordinate, plan, organize and supervise special community
             events.
             Program 108f: Publish, in conjunction with the City Council, a quarterly
             newsletter of City services, information and events.
Pre-School and School-Age Activities
Policy 109   Collaborate with the Brisbane School District in developing elementary and
             junior high age recreation programs which encourage strong and vital
             physical conditioning, teach sports, provide opportunities for league
             competition, inspire artistic creativity, provide opportunities for
             performances and exhibits, and enrich cultural experiences and encourage
             civic awareness and service.
             Program 109a: Provide a comprehensive recreation program for preschool and
             school-age youth, which includes sports instruction, recreational activities, and
             social and artistic classes.
             Program 109b: Provide school-age youth with special activities during school
             vacations, holidays, and other breaks which provide for artistic, physical,
             academic and social growth.
             Program 109c: Consider providing youth special interest programs, including
             artists in residence, sports coaching and education enrichment.
             Program 109d. Continue to support the pre-school age childcare programs and
             the school-age before and after school care programs at Brisbane Elementary
             School.
                                             - 131 -
                Program 109e: Work with the School District to develop additional
                transportation for students who participate in after school programs so that all
                students have the opportunity to participate.
Seniors' Activities
Senior Citizens in Brisbane are a valuable community resource, and they are respected for their
knowledge, history and community contributions. The 1990 Census shows that 9.4% of all
persons living in Brisbane are 65 years and older, and another 11.9% are 62-65 years old. Many
seniors live in one-person households, which make up one-third of all households in Brisbane.
Of these, 22% include a member - over the age of 65.(3)
Policy 110      Include seniors in the on-going development and delivery of specialized
                programs.
                Program 110a: Sponsor a periodic recreation and social needs survey of senior
                citizens to investigate the range of needs and interests in the senior community.
                Program 110b: Organize social and cultural outings and provide transportation
                far senior citizens.
                Program 110c: Provide a local referral program that provides information on
                educational, economic, recreational, nutritional and social opportunities for
                seniors and work with service clubs, churches, and the community to
                collaboratively provide specific services, assistance and support.
                Program 110d: Provide financial and physical (meeting space and
                transportation) assistance to promote the continued independent operation of the
                Brisbane Senior Club.
                Program 110e: Encourage and offer programs that foster opportunities for
                intergenerational, cultural and ethnic exchanges between seniors and children.
                Program 110f: Investigate the development of a facility that provides dedicated
                time for expanded senior programming.
                Program 110g: Provide recreational programs that appeal to a wide range of
                interests for Brisbane seniors.
                                                - 132 -
Teen Activities
Teens between the ages of 12 and 19 are recognized as this community's young adults and
comprise 5.9% of Brisbane's population.
Policy 111      Develop and offer artistic, cultural, recreational and social programs to meet
                the special needs of teens.
Policy 112      Provide recreational and social opportunities for Brisbane teens to meet
                teens from surrounding communities.
                Program 112a: Consider the creation of a Youth Advisory Council composed of a
                representative cross-section of teenagers.
                Program 112b: Provide a local information and referral program for teens
                regarding after school and summer employment, crisis counseling, educational,
                recreational, artistic and social opportunities, and work with service clubs,
                churches and the community to provide assistance, guidance and support.
                Program 112c: Provide a variety of paid and volunteer after school and summer
                job opportunities for teens.
                Program 112d: Investigate and develop a facility that provides dedicated time for
                teen programming.
                Program 112e: Consider amendments to the requirements for qualifications to
                serve as a Parks, Beaches and Recreation Commissioner to allow teens to apply
                far appointment to the Commission.
Marina Activities
Policy 113      Enhance and promote the recreational opportunities of the Marina facilities
                and the shoreline.
                Program 113a: Consider new recreational and educational programs to
                encourage and enhance opportunities for residents to more fully utilize the
                amenities of the Marina and shoreline.
VIII.3 SPECIAL NEEDS
Brisbane retains the most important characteristic of a small town: its willingness to help a
neighbor in need. While in larger cities the government performs this service, in Brisbane, many
residents see themselves as primarily responsible. In keeping with this
                                                - 133 -
spirit, the City government views its role as a partner with volunteers in the community offering
its organization and leadership so that the needs of children, teens, and seniors can be
collaboratively addressed.
Policy 114       Promote and encourage volunteer efforts of neighbors, friends, families,
                 churches, and services clubs to serve the needs of the community.
                 Program 114a: Serve as a liaison to service clubs, churches, families, etc.,
                 regarding events, services or conflict resolution and by facilitating ongoing
                 forums for the planning and coordination of community events and activities
                 Program 114b: Collaborate with community service organizations when
                 appropriate, such as by co-sponsoring events, to enhance the service they provide
                 to residents.
Childcare
In 1990, 20% of all residents in Brisbane were under the age of 18. Brisbane wishes to be a
community which promotes children's well-being and recognizes their special needs. The spirit
of Brisbane has always nurtured and supported its youth. The community's commitment is
reflected in the old African proverb, "It takes an entire village to raise a child."
More than two-thirds of the women and three-fourths of the men in Brisbane are in the labor
force. Of the children who live with one or both parents, it is estimated that 65% have no parent
at home during the work day. For children under 6 years of age, this statistic is 57%. It is
estimated that 12.8% of the children under 18 years of age in Brisbane are living below the
poverty level. These statistics indicate that many children are without needed resources,
supervision or guidance. Clearly, the City, businesses, schools, churches, service clubs and other
organizations need to be committed to providing childcare alternatives for children when their
parent or parents are at work.
Policy 115       Encourage the efficient use of school facilities and grounds for before and
                 after school and vacation programs to serve the school-age population, pre-
                 school programming and the community at large.
                 Program 115a: Investigate available programs that provide opportunities for
                 affordable childcare for low-income families and provide this information to the
                 public.
                 Program 115b: Provide information to assist childcare providers to establish
                 facilities and obtain licenses.
                                                 - 134 -
                Program 115c: Investigate provisions for drop-in, after-school recreation
                opportunities for youth.
                Program 115d: Establish a local information and referral service for parents
                seeking licensed childcare information.
                Program 115e: Work with the School District to promote the use of school impact
                fees for childcare facilities/services.
Residents with Mobility and Self Care Limitations,
the Frail Elderly and the Disabled
As stated above in the section entitled "Senior Activities," the 1990 Census shows that 9.4% of
all persons living in Brisbane are 65 years and older, and another 11.9% are between 62 and 65
years old. Many seniors live in one-person households, which make up one-third of all
households in Brisbane. Of these, 22% are over the age of 65. Thus, the proportion of persons
over 65 years of age among those living alone is twice that of the proportion of persons over 65
years of age among the entire population. While the majority of people below the poverty level
were between 18 and 64 years of age, there was a disproportionate number of 65-74 year olds
below the poverty level compared to the general population. The Census data also shows that
approximately 11% of persons ages 16-64 years have mobility/self care limitations.
Approximately 40% of those age 65 years old or older have mobility/self-care limitations.
Policy 116      Recognize the special needs of the frail elderly, the disabled and their
                caregivers by promoting activities that foster independence, support and
                understanding.
Policy 117      Develop recreational, social, nutritional, security, cultural and artistic
                programs, in consultation with the frail elderly and the disabled, which
                promote independent living.
                Program 117a: Provide local information and referral for the frail elderly and
                the disabled that assists them in accessing County and community services for
                food, shelter, transportation, personal assistance, and nutritional or other special
                needs.
                Program 117b: Work jointly with volunteers, service clubs, churches, families
                and the community to collaborate on ways to provide services, assistance and
                support to those with special needs.
                Program 117c: Provide local information and referrals that support the families
                and caregivers of the frail elderly and the disabled.
                                                 - 135 -
Program 117d: Provide opportunities for intergenerational and able/disabled
activities and exchanges.
Program 117e: Expand police programs to check on the welfare of the frail
elderly and the disabled
Program 117f: Develop programs to enhance safety and security for those with
special needs.
                           - 136 -
                                     FOOTNOTES
1. H1-1, p. 46
2. See OS-1 for an inventory of recreational/open space resources, including ownership of
   such resources in the planning area.
3. See Housing Element for information on housing needs and programs for seniors.
                                          137
                           CHAPTER VII
                       OPEN SPACE
GOALS:
The City of Brisbane will be a place...
                           Where open space lands have been set
                           aside to protect the natural environment;
                           Where outdoor areas provide recreational
                           open space and educational opportunities;
                           Where open space and natural areas
                           provide respite to both residents and
                           businesses; and
                           Where residents reciprocate by respecting
                           and maintaining the land and the waters
                           for future generations.
                                      OPEN SPACE
                                      Chapter Index
                                                                   Page
Existing Parks, Aquatic and Open Space Resources ……………………………….………. 111
Open Space, Aquatic Areas and the Natural Environment ………………………………… 115
       Future Parks and Open Space Resources ……………………………………………117
       The Open Space Plan ………………………………………………………………. 118
                                           - 110 -

                                          CHAPTER VII
                                         OPEN SPACE
Government Code Section 65560(b) defines "open space land" as "any parcel or area of land or
water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use.. and which is
designated on a local, regional, or State open space plan as any of the following: (1) open space
for the preservation of natural resources...; (2) open space used for the managed production of
resources...; (3) open space for outdoor recreation...; and (4) open space for public health and
safety." For the purposes of the 1994 Brisbane General Plan, the land use designation "Open
Space" is reserved for lands that are essentially unimproved and dedicated or proposed to be
dedicated to the public for outdoor recreation and for the preservation of biotic communities.
Aquatic areas that are in whole or part in private ownership, such as the Brisbane Lagoon, are
not designated Open Space, but are given an aquatic designation denoting the unique nature of
each resource. Areas of land that are essentially unimproved and which are in private ownership
are called "open areas." These areas are not designated on the land use maps, and are addressed
by the policies in Chapter V of this Plan.
VII.1 EXISTING PARKS, AQUATIC AND OPEN SPACE RESOURCES
A comprehensive survey of existing and planned parks and open space was undertaken by a joint
committee of the Parks, Beaches and Recreation and Planning Commissions. They evaluated
the type and amount of parks and open space available to Brisbane residents against the
standards of the National Recreation and Parks Association. They found that, although the
NRPA standards were useful in gauging the amount of parkland considered appropriate for a
residential population, several of the definitions did not comfortably apply to the configuration
of Brisbane and therefore needed to be amended. They also found that the NRPA standards did
not address parks and open space needs of a non-residential population.
The background report on Existing and Planned Parks, Recreation, Historic & Cultural
Resources, OS-1, updated and republished in March 1994, reflects the work of the Commissions.
The report concludes that in most categories, Brisbane currently meets or exceeds NPRA
standards for parks and open space for residential populations based on acreage per 1,000
population. The following Table 6 summarizes this analysis. However, the public desires
additional open space.
The policies in this chapter and in Chapter VIII of this Plan address maintaining and enhancing
parks, open space and aquatic areas over the ten-year General Plan period and increasing the
amount of parks and dedicated open space to continue to meet the needs of the community.
                                                - 111 -
                           1994 GENERAL PLAN PARKS STANDARDS
A. MINI/NEIGHBORHOOD/LINEAR PARKS
Mini Park--a small-scale outdoor area for limited public or private park and recreation uses.
                                 Total Acreage                      Ratio
                          1994   1.0+/- acres                       0.3+/- acres per 1,000
                      Existing:                                     existing residential
                                 Marina par course/                 population
                                 picnic area; Community
                                 Center Park; Plug
                                 Preserve; Joy
                                 Condominiums yard area
                     Existing +  1.25+/- acres                      0.3+/- acres per 1,000
                       Planned                                      projected residential
                           with Northeast Ridge                     population
                     Northeast Neighborhood III
                        Ridge: recreation area
Neighborhood Park--a public area of at least 0.5 acre for a range of recreational activities, such
as field games, court and playground games, crafts or picnicking, including school/park
facilities.
                                 Total Acreage                      Ratio
                          1994 22.5+/- acres                        7.6+/- acres per 1,000
                      Existing: Marsili Field; Lipman               existing residential
                                 School/courts; Kids &              population
                                 Things/court; Brisbane
                                 Elementary; Firth Park
                     Existing + 23.2 +/- acres                      5.5+/- acres per 1,000
                       Planned Northeast Ridge                      projected residential
                           with Neighborhood 1-South                population
                     Northeast recreation area
                        Ridge:
Linear Park -- A long, narrow area used for one or more varying modes of recreational travel,
such as hiking, biking or horseback riding, including built or natural corridors, such as utility
rights of way fire roads and canyons.
                                 Total Acreage                      Ratio
                          1994 7.4+/- acres                         2.5 acres per 1,000
                      Existing: Sierra Point public                 existing residential
                                 access trail;                      population
                                 Bicentennial Walkways
COMBINED STANDARD FOR                             Minimum of 10.5 acres per 1,000
MINI/                                             residential population,
NEIGHBORHOOD/                                     representing continuation of the
LINEAR PARKS:                                     1994 existing level of service.
                                                  - 112 -
B. COMMUNITY PARKS
Community Park--a public area of at least 2 acres in size serving the residential and business
communities, such as outdoor community gathering places or multi-use recreational complexes.
                                                  Total Acreage            Ratio
                                 1994 Existing:   0 acres                  0 acres per 1,000
                                                                           residential
                                                                           population
                                     Existing +   8.5+/- acres             2.0 acres per 1,000
                                  Planned with                             projected
                                     Northeast    Community Park           residential
                                        Ridge:    (Old County Road);       population
                                                  Northeast Ridge
                                                  school/park site
STANDARD FOR COMMUNITY                            Minimum of 8 acres per 1,000 residential
PARKS:                                            population, representing the top of the
                                                  range of the NRPA standard.
C. SPECIAL RECREATIONAL USE
Special Recreational Use--A structure for specialized or single
purpose recreational activities.
                                 1994 Existing:   5 structures
                                                  Sierra Point Fishing Pier;
                                                  Marina; Harbor Master building;
                                                  Kids & Things building;
                                                  Community Center building
STANDARD FOR SPECIAL                              To be determined by City facilities study.
RECREATIONAL USE:
                                                 - 113 -
D. CONSERVANCY
Conservancy -- An area of protected and managed natural /cultural resources.
                                               Total Acreage             Ratio
                              1994 Existing:   84.6+/- acres             28.7+/- acres per
                                                                         1,000 existing
                                               Owl and Buckeye           residential
                                               Canyons: Sierra           population
                                               Point Canyon;
                                               Costanos Canyon;
                                               Firth Canyon
                                   Existing +  220+/- acres              52 +/- acres per 1,000
                                Planned with                             existing residential
                            Northeast Ridge:   Northeast Ridge           population
                                               habitat
STANDARD FOR                                   66 acres per 1,000 residential population,
CONSERVANCY:                                   representing existing, Northeast Ridge
                                               dedication, and 40% conservation of the
                                               "Brisbane Acres" per the HCP.
                                              - 114 -
VII.2 OPEN SPACE, AQUATIC AREAS AND THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Brisbane's unique natural setting provides unparalleled access to open space and recreational
opportunities unique to the San Francisco Bay Area. As noted in Table 6, the majority of
existing open space in the General Plan planning area is composed of parks which are ecological
reserves and areas conserved for endangered species, including San Bruno Mountain State and
County Park, and Owl and Buckeye Canyons. Within the City Limits, Sierra Point, Firth and
Castanos Canyons preserve the San Bruno Mountain eco-system. The Bay, Brisbane Lagoon
and the Marsh in the Northwest Bayshore subarea are aquatic resources, each a special
environment. Brisbane's love of nature and pride of setting makes appropriate access to and
preservation of open space one of the highest priorities of General Plan policy.
The following policies reflect the community's strong interest in designating and preserving
open space during this General Plan period.
Policy 81      The City Shall conduct an on-going effort to identify sites or portions of sites
               having particular value as open space, wildlife habitat, wetlands, or other
               environmental qualities that should be preserved and protected. In such
               cases, the City shall explore the feasibility of acquisition of these areas by the
               City or by other public or private agencies that are engaged in the ownership
               and preservation of open space, and, when legally possible, imposing a
               requirement that such areas be dedicated by the owner to the public for open
               space purposes.
Policy 81.1    Work to preserve open space lands to protect the natural environment and
               to provide outdoor educational and recreational opportunities consistent
               with the sensitivity of the resource.
Policy 82      Encourage the preservation, conservation and restoration of open space to
               retain existing biotic communities, including rare and endangered species
               habitat, wetlands, watercourses and woodlands.
               Program 82a: Educate the public of the continued threat of invasive species
               through the Brisbane Star.
Policy 83      Maintain the visual beauty of the Mountain, the ridgelines, hilltops, wildlife
               and plant habitat including the Brisbane Acres.
               Program 83a: In the official actions of the City, including resolutions and
               ordinances, recognize the importance of maintaining and preserving the natural
               eco-system and beauty of San Bruno Mountain.
               Program 83b: Comply with the provisions of the Habitat Conservation Plan to
               protect endangered species habitat.
                                              - 115 -
          Program 83c: Cooperate with public and private groups involved in rare plant
          protection, habitat restoration and maintenance of mountain eco-systems to
          preserve open space on San Bruno Mountain.
          Program 83d: Provide an annual report to the City Council on Federal, State
          and private opportunities for open space acquisition on San Bruno Mountain and
          elsewhere in the City.
Policy 84 Strengthen and broaden the public's commitment and knowledge regarding
          San Bruno Mountain and its wildlife and habitat.
          Program 84a: Cooperate with the County and State to enhance San Bruno
          Mountain Park and adjacent lands in Brisbane by joint public information
          programs about the Mountain and by encouraging supervised volunteers in
          protection and preservation efforts.
          Program 84b: Through public school programs, encourage and promote San
          Bruno Mountain as an educational resource.
          Program 84c: Lobby and work with environmental and conservation groups, and
          State, County and Federal agencies to ensure the preservation and maintenance
          of San Bruno Mountain State and County Park.
          Program 84d. Through the Recreation Program, provide educational and
          volunteer programs to adults and youth regarding San Bruno Mountain.
          Program 84e: Provide information on the natural ecology of the Canyons
          through publications and presentations, and encourage citizens to respect the
          fragility of these eco-systems.
          Program 84f: Provide an annual report to the City Council and the community of
          all activities pertaining to the acquisition, preservation and appreciation of San
          Bruno Mountain, including information from the HCP manager.
Policy 85 Encourage the preservation and conservation of aquatic resources in
          Brisbane: the Lagoon, the Bayfront and the Marsh.
          Program 85a: Seek opportunities to utilize aquatic areas for recreational and
          educational activities consistent with the sensitivity of the resource.
          Program 85b: Develop provisions in the Zoning Ordinance, including setback
          requirements, to protect the natural ecology of aquatic resources.
          Program 85c: Provide information to citizens on the eco-systems of the Bay, the
          Lagoon and the Wetland Marsh and how citizens can participate in respecting
          and conserving these resources.
                                           - 116 -
               Program 85d Work with responsible agencies, property owners and
               environmental and conservation groups to ensure preservation of aquatic eco-
               systems
Policy 86      Provide access to natural areas consistent with the nature of the resource.
               Program 86a: Develop and maintain a network of trails and pathways
               throughout the City to provide appropriate access to open space and to link City
               trails with County and regional trail systems.
               Program 86b: Extend the trail system to include aquatic areas and provide
               access to public transportation systems.
               Program 86c: Examine the potential to extend a pedestrian and bicycle trail
               between Sierra Point and the Candlestick Recreation Area along the Bay to the
               east of Highway 101 in cooperation with regional efforts to obtain the same
               objective.
VII.3 FUTURE PARKS AND OPEN SPACE RESOURCES
The following policies address the provision of parks and open space during the General Plan
ten-year time frame. See Chapter VIII for policies and programs on recreational programs and
facilities.
Policy 87      Maintain parks and open space to serve the community equivalent to or
               greater than the acreage/population standards set by the National
               Recreation and Parks Association.
               Program 87a: Use the standards in Table 6 as guidelines for the provision of
               parks and open space for the community
Policy 87.1    Publicly dedicated open space both in and around the City shall be
               preserved. The City shall therefore discourage and oppose any attempted
               conversion of such dedicated open space to urban uses, and shall not
               authorize or approve the relinquishment, abandonment or release of any
               open space dedication unless there is a finding of a compelling and
               overriding public interest and public benefit to be served thereby.
Policy 88      Develop parks to maximize passive recreational opportunities.
               Program 88a: Encourage local businesses, citizens, and public and/or private
               landowners to participate in the planning, acquisition, development, maintenance
               and use of park facilities.
               Program 88b: Continue to work with citizens to plan and develop a community
               park on the Old County Road site.
               Program 88c: Require impact fees or exactions as contributions to the
               acquisition, development and maintenance of passive open space, park and
                                             - 117 -
                recreation facilities in conjunction with the mitigation requirements for
                development projects.
Policy 89       Work with local employers to preserve open space and to develop outdoor
                open areas that would benefit employees as well as residents during and
                after the work day.
                Program 89a: Examine the potential for obtaining funding, including open space,
                park, and recreational impact fees, to provide benefits for the non-resident
                population. Consider joint development of facilities.
VII.4 THE OPEN SPACE PLAN
Government Code Section 66564 requires the City to prepare an Open Space Plan that contains
an action program consisting of specific programs the City intends to pursue in implementing
the Plan. The required goal of the plan is the comprehensive, long-range preservation and
conservation of open space lands within the jurisdiction. Under the definition of Open Space in
the 1994 Brisbane General Plan, ownership by a public agency is an integral part of long-term
preservation efforts.
The economic climate at the time of the preparation of this General Plan makes it very difficult
for public agencies to acquire open space. Cities throughout the State are losing revenues,
reducing staff and cutting back on critical services. The same is true of other agencies. There
have been no new programs to fund open space acquisition developed at the State or Federal
level. The only hope for grant funding comes from citizen initiatives. Any open space plan
must take into account the lack of predictable funding for land acquisition.
To address this difficult issue and to assist in drafting the Open Space Plan contained in this
chapter, several questions pertaining to open space acquisition were included in the General Plan
alternatives survey. Respondents were asked to give their views on whether the City should
acquire most of the private undeveloped lands in Brisbane for open space or whether the City
should allow owners to develop these lands if public benefits, including open space, would be
forthcoming. Figure VII-A illustrates the response: 58% of respondents chose development with
public benefits. Respondents were then asked to state their preferences for these public benefits.
The response is illustrated in Figure VII-B: open space is among the top five priorities.
                                                 - 118 -
- 119 
To test the strength of local commitment to open space acquisition, respondents were asked
whether and to what extent they would be willing to contribute to acquire open space. A full
75% of respondents said they would be willing to contribute some amount of funds annually.
This is considered an exceptional response in the current economic situation. This is illustrated
in Figure VII-C.
Respondents were also asked to identify their highest and second highest priority for open space
acquisition for public use. Lands around the Lagoon and the Brisbane Acres were chosen by the
greatest number of respondents.
                                             - 120 -
The following policies are based on these responses. They establish an "opportunistic" strategy
for open space acquisition. The policies commit the City to maximize opportunities for open
space preservation, to establish priorities and designate responsibilities, and to seize
opportunities for the preservation of open space whenever they arise.
Policy 90      On an ongoing basis, aggressively seek opportunities to preserve open space.
Policy 91      Explore the widest range of options for preserving open space lands,
               including acquisition, dedication, and exactions on development projects.
               Program 91a: On an ongoing basis, explore and pursue funding sources for
               acquisition of open space lands with habitat, recreational or other natural
               resource value.
               Program 91b: In conjunction with all new development and the redevelopment of
               existing uses, where appropriate, require dedication of lands with habitat or
               other natural resource value to remain as open space and/or in-lieu fees for open
               space acquisition.
Policy 92      Follow the priorities indicated by citizens in the General Plan survey for the
               acquisition of open space for preservation of natural areas and recreational
               potential.
Policy 93      Establish an implementation program for open space acquisition.
               Program 93:. Consider legally available means of funding open space
               acquisition, such as taxing, assessment districts and other funding mechanisms
               Program 93b: Establish an open space fund to consolidate in-lieu fees,
               donations, and grants so as to be ready to acquire open space as funds are
               sufficient and opportunities arise.
               Program 93c: Encourage volunteer efforts in supporting open space acquisition,
               through such activities as initiating legislation, fund-raising and generating
               philanthropic dedications.
               Program 93d: Provide an annual report to the City Council on the state of the
               open space resources in the community, the amount and type of open space land,
               the needs for operating and maintaining existing lands, and new acquisitions and
               funding sources.
                                               - 121 -
Program 93e: Review and establish open space priorities annually as part of the
budget and Capital Improvement program development process.
Program 93f: As apart of the open space acquisition plan, provide updated
information on County, State and Federal open space plans and programs.
Program 93g: In setting priorities and programs for open space acquisition,
review proposals for conformance with the County, State and Federal plans
Program 93h: For reference and assistance in establishing open space priorities,
prepare a comprehensive map of vacant lands in the planning area and update
the map annually.
Program 93i: Investigate establishing or joining special open space acquisition
districts.
Program 93j: Investigate the possible benefits and disadvantages of an expansion
of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area into the eastern and northern
peninsula of San Mateo County.
Program 93k: Consider establishing an environmental commission of local
citizens to help advise the City Council on open space acquisitions and
environmental matters in general.
Program 931: On an annual basis, send out a letter to all property owners of
potential open space, to see if they would like to donate it to the public.
                                - 122 -
The following Table 7 establishes a timeline and responsible party for each of the policies in the
Open Space Plan.
                                               Table 7
                          Open Space Plan Implementation Programs
Policy/ Product                  Responsibility            Review/Approval         Timeline
Program
#90      Seek opportunities to All City Departments,                               Ongoing
         preserve open space Citizens & conserva-
         and natural areas.      tion groups
#91      Explore options.        All City Departments,                             Ongoing
                                 Citizens & conserva
                                 tion groups
#91a     Pursue funding          All City Departments,                             Ongoing
         sources.                Citizens & conserva-
                                 tion groups
#91b     Require dedications     Planning Department       City Council            Ongoing
         and/or in-lieu fees.                              Planning Commission
#92      Follow priorities in    All Ciry Departments      City Council            Ongoing
         General Plan Survey.                              Planning Commission
#93      Establish implemen-     Planning Dept,            City Council            1994-95
         tation program for      Parks & Recreation Dept., Planning Commission
         acquisition.            Public Works Dept.,
                                 Finance Dept.
#93a     Consider means of       Finance Department        City Council            Ongoing
         funding.
#93b     Establish open space Finance Department           City council            1994
         fund.
#93c     Encourage volunteer All City Departments,                                 Ongoing
         efforts to support open Citizens & conserva-
         space acquisition,      tion groups
#93d     Provide annual report Planning Dept,              City Council            Annual
         to City Council.        Parks & Recreation Dept.,
                                 Public Works Dept.,
                                 Finance Dept.
#93e     Establish open space Planning Dept,               City Council            Annual
         priorities.             Parks & Recreation Dept., Planning Commission
                                 Public Works Dept.,       Parks, Beaches &
                                                           Recreation
                                                - 123 -
Table 7: Open Space Plan Implementation Programs
Page 2
#93f   Provide information on  Planning Dept,            City Council        Annual
       plans & programs of     Parks & Recreation Dept., Planning Commission
       other agencies.         Public Works Dept.,       Parks, Beaches &
                                                         Recreation
#93g   Review for              All City Departments      City Council        Annual
       conformance with                                  Planning Commission
       agency plans.                                     Parks, Beaches &
                                                         Recreation
#93h   Prepare and maintain    Planning Department       City Council        Consider in the
       map of vacant lands.                                                  1995-96 Budget
#93i   Investigate             Planning Department       City Council        Consider in the
       establishing or joining                                               1995-96 Budget
       open-space acquisition
       district.
#93j   Investigate expansion   Planning Department       City Council        Ongoing
       of Golden Gate
       Recreation Area.
#93k   Consider establishing   Planning Department       City Council        1994-1995
       emironmentaI
       commission.
#93l   Letter to property      Planning Department       City Council        Annual
       owners re: donations.
                                              - 124 -
                    CHAPTER V
                  LAND USE
GOALS:
The City of Brisbane will...
           Preserve the Mountain for its own sake and
           as the symbol of the unique character and
           identity of the City;
           Incorporate and reflect the natural
           environment as an integral part of land use;
           Celebrate diversity as essential to the physical
           character of the City;
           Incorporate a mix of land uses to best serve
           its citizens; and
           Design infrastructure and public facilities to
           be efficient, cost-effective and to contribute to
           the cohesion and character of the
           community.
                                                           LAND USE
                                                        Chapter Index
                                                                                                                           Page
History of Land Use and Subdivision .............................................……………….................... 56
Land Use History.........................................………………………............................................ 56
Subdivision Patterns.………………………................................................................................ 58
The 1994 General Plan Land Use Map and Land Use Designations .......................................... 60
       The 1994 General Plan Land Use Map ..................... ..................……………………... 60
       Land Use Designations...............................................................................…………..... 60
       Overview ………………………………………………………………………...…….. 67
Density and Intensity Standards ............................................................................…………….. 68
       Population Density..........................................………………......................................... 68
       Building Intensity..................................................................………………................... 68
Land Use Alternatives .............................................................................………………............ 70
       Crocker Park ........................……………….................................................................... 70
       Northwest Bayshore ......................……………….......................................................... 71
       The Baylands ...................................………………........................................................ 72
       The Quarry ...............................………………............................................................... 75
Land Use Policies .....................................……………............................................................... 81
       General Principles ...........................………………........................................................ 81
       Bay and Mountain Setting................………………........................................................ 82
       Nature and Character of Development ............…...……………………......................... 83
       Open Areas..........................................………..…........................................................... 86
       Streets ...................................................…..………......................................................... 89
       Subdivision Pattern ................................………….......................................................... 90
                                                                 - 54 -

                                          CHAPTER V
                                           LAND USE
                                                       Question: In your opinion, what is the most
                                                       important problem that Brisbane residents
                                                       will have to face and try to solve over the
                                                       next ten years?
                                                       Respondents: "Development of lands
                                                                       currently vacant, to make
                                                                       certain they contribute and
                                                                       not diminish the quality of
                                                                       life."
                                                                       "Managing growth to keep
                                                                       our independence."
                                                                       "The Mountain. Save it."
                                                       General Plan Issues Questionnaire (GP-5)
Citizens who know and love the City will often explain that to understand Brisbane it is
necessary to read the oral histories. A look to the past makes it clear that the City was
incorporated as a defense against development that would have destroyed San Bruno Mountain
and the quality of life of the community that had become established there. The passion for self-
determination remains one of the most essential values of this community.
This update of the General Plan provides an opportunity to reaffirm that Brisbane will control its
destiny. If development is to occur, this community will set the standards. And the basis for
these standards are the land uses and policies in the General Plan.
A General Plan usually includes an illustration of the general location of land uses on a map.
Map I is the Land Use Map for the 1994 Brisbane General Plan. As described in the section on
Land Use Alternatives, the uses that were chosen for the Land Use Map are those that the
community considers most beneficial to its welfare. The land use policies and programs that
describe these uses establish how the designations on the map express themselves in the day-to-
day environment. The policies in this section for the most part apply on a city-wide basis. Land
use policies and programs specific to each of the subareas are found in Chapter XII.
This Land Use chapter begins with a look at the history of the land use and subdivision patterns
in the planning area. It goes on to describe the alternative land use scenarios considered in the
                                               - 55 -
environmental analysis for the General Plan. The chapter closes with the General Plan's land use
policies.
V.1 HISTORY OF LAND USE AND SUBDIVISION
Land uses in Brisbane are well-established in many subareas of the City. In others, remainders
of prior uses provide either opportunities or constraints to contemporary uses of the land. Land
subdivision patterns in Brisbane have varied from one subarea to the next, depending on land
use, topography, property ownership, and zoning regulations affecting lot sizes. The following
is a brief chronological history of land use in the City, followed by an overview of the City's
subdivision patterns.
Land Use History
Although the earliest recorded land use in the area that is now the City of Brisbane was ranching,
archaeological remains indicate that this land was once a home to the Costanoan Tribe of Native
Americans. The Guadalupe Valley, within which Central Brisbane, Crocker Park and the
Northeast Ridge are now located, was part of the 1838 Mexican land grant known as Rancho
Canada de Guadalupe la Visitacion y Rodeo Viego. Charles Crocker purchased most of this
land grant in 1884 and called it Visitacion Ranch. In 1895, a section of the ranch was leased as a
quarry, which operates to this day.
In the early 1900s, a small amount of urban development could be found in the area of Bayshore
Boulevard and Geneva Avenue, in what is now the vicinity of the Northwest Bayshore subarea.
The 7-Mile House, a bar and grill established in the 1890s and still operating today, served
travelers along Bayshore Boulevard, which was one of the main thoroughfares connecting San
Francisco with points south. A gas manufacturing plant, which evolved into what is now the
Pacific Gas & Electric Company's Martin Service Center and Substation, operated from 1905 to
1916 in the area of Bayshore and Geneva, now a part of Daly City. Across Bayshore Boulevard
on what is now known as the Baylands subarea, the Southern Pacific Railroad maintenance and
switching yard was built atop rubble from the 1906 San Francisco Earthquake that was used to
fill a portion of the Bay. The use of the yard began to decline in the 1960s and was mostly idle
when Southern Pacific sold the yard and surrounding land and structures in 1989 to Tuntex. The
land had featured a number of substantial industrial structures only a few of which remain,
including the Roundhouse, one of the few of its kind still standing.
Residential development in what is now Brisbane also began to appear early in the century. The
area of the Guadalupe Valley that is now Central Brisbane experienced a small amount of
residential construction between 1908 and 1929. The most notable of the early residences in
what was then known as the "City of Visitacion" is the Allemand Hotel, currently an apartment
building at the comer of San Bruno Avenue and Mariposa Street. In 1929 the name of the
settlement was changed to Brisbane. In the 1930s, during the Depression, the residential area
boomed due to its affordability, with a commercial core developing along Visitacion Avenue.
This residential area has continued to grow to the present and, to a limited degree, has extended
into the lowest lying portions of the largely vacant Brisbane Acres.
                                                 - 56 -
The 1930s also saw an intensification of garbage dumping into the Bay in the portion of the
Baylands subarea east of the Southern Pacific railroad tracks. Starting from the north, dumping
continued southward until it was finally stopped in the 1960s at the edge of what is now the
Brisbane Lagoon. The Norcal/Sanitary Fill Company complex of refuse transport and recycling
facilities, located in the Beatty Subarea at the Brisbane-San Francisco border, is an active
successor to this past use. Since the 1940s, a variety of uses has developed atop the oldest part
of the landfill, including lumber yards and warehouse buildings.
Although Bayshore Boulevard was a major thoroughfare connecting San Francisco with points
south until Highway 101 was constructed in 1954, only limited development occurred along its
frontages. In the 1940s, a small amount of residential development occurred along the west side
of southern Bayshore Boulevard in the subarea now known as Southwest Bayshore. In the
decades that followed, some commercial uses, such as retail, service and warehousing,
intermixed with the residential uses, including a mobile home park.
The 1960s saw a flurry of industrial development, which continued into the early 1980s. In
1959, construction of Crocker Park began on the grazing lands of the floor of the Guadalupe
Valley and adjacent wetlands, just north of Central Brisbane; the final phase of construction in
Crocker Park was completed in the early 1980s, and Crocker Park was annexed to the City in
1983. In the 1960s, VWR Scientific first occupied a large office/warehouse building on the
east side of southern Bayshore Boulevard; a second office/warehouse complex was added in the
Southeast Bayshore subarea in 1981. First subdivided in 1969, the Brisbane Industrial Park,
consisting mostly of metal buildings for warehouse, office and manufacturing uses, was
constructed along Industrial Way in what is now called the Northeast Bayshore subarea. The
late 1960s also saw the development on the Baylands of the Southern Pacific Pipelines Brisbane
Terminal, located on the leveled portion of Visitacion Point, with a privately constructed
extension of Tunnel Avenue including an overcrossing connecting to Bayshore Boulevard.
Commonly referred to as the "Tank Farm," the facility and adjacent buildings provide fuel
distribution services for the Peninsula.
Office and commercial development increased in the 1980s. Construction of the Brisbane
Village shopping center began in 1979 at the entrance to Central Brisbane. This single structure
shopping center contains approximately 20 storefronts and office spaces occupied mostly by
retail businesses and professional offices. East of Highway 101 at Sierra Point, the Koll Center
Office Park and the Brisbane Marina were constructed during the 1980s on a peninsula of
engineered landfill that was begun by the San Francisco Scavenger Companies in the mid 1960s
and completed by 1972.
                                                 - 57 -
In 1989, a multi-phased residential project, including open space for conserved habitat, was
approved for the Northeast Ridge of San Bruno Mountain. Preliminary grading began in 1992,
but no structures have been built. Also in 1989, the Wildlife Conservation Board, a division of
the State Department of Fish and Game, purchased Owl and Buckeye Canyons as an ecological
reserve. They remain essentially in their natural state. Brisbane citizens, staff and local
environmental organizations worked with the Trust for Public Land to accomplish this
acquisition, which added to the permanent open space established by the creation of San Bruno
Mountain State and County Regional Park in the late 1970s.
History of Subdivision Patterns
The following describes the history of the subdivision of land in Brisbane by subarea.
Following adoption of the 1994 General Plan, zoning and subdivision regulations will be
reviewed to determine if amendments should be made to conform to General Plan policy.
Sierra Point. The Sierra Point subarea underwent a gradual process of subdivision between
1981 and 1987, which resulted in the current pattern of typically 5 to 10 acre parcels. This
pattern is consistent with the 1 acre minimum parcel size requirement which has been in effect
since 1984. The area is subject to a development agreement.
Southeast Bayshore. The Southeast Bayshore subarea was subdivided in 1979 into two parcels,
one 4 acres in size and the other 11 acres. This is consistent with the 10,000 sq. ft. minimum
parcel size requirement in effect since at least 1969.
Southwest Bayshore. The steep hillsides of the Southwest Bayshore subarea were first sold off as
typically 11,900 sq. ft. unrecorded lots in the 1930s. Each of the original lots fronted on what
was then known as the Bayshore Highway, hence their name, the "Highway Lots." Subsequent
lot subdivisions reduced some of these lots to areas as small as approximately 3,000 sq. ft.
Regulations, which date back at least to 1969, established a 7,500 sq. ft. minimum lot size in the
subarea.
Brisbane Acres. The Brisbane Acres subarea originated as an unrecorded subdivision in the
1930s. As the name implies, unrecorded lots were typically an acre in size. Subsequent land
transfers by deed description resulted in individual ownerships, some with areas of less than
5,000 sq. ft. In 1980, regulations were adopted that set a 20,000 sq. ft. minimum lot size. Parcel
maps for three parcels of at least 20,000 sq. ft. have been recorded, adding to the eight parcels
for which maps were recorded prior to 1980. The rest of the lands in the subarea remain
unrecorded to this day.
Central Brisbane. In 1908, the American Realty Company subdivided the area that is now
Central Brisbane into small residential lots. These lots were typically 25 feet wide and 100 feet
deep, but in many instances lot dimensions were adjusted to fit the subarea's bowl-like terrain.
Many of the lots were subsequently developed in pairs, some as three or more lots combined,
and a few as one and a half lots. The current regulations requiring 5,000 sq. ft.
                                                - 58 -
minimum lot size for residential districts and 2,500 sq. ft. minimum for non-residential date back
at least as far as the City's original Zoning Ordinance, adopted in 1969.
Owl and Buckeye Canons. The Owl and Buckeye Canyons subarea consists of four parcels of
land sold by the owners of the Quarry to the California Department of Fish and Game in 1989.
The Quarry. The Quarry subarea is divided into four parcels ranging in size from approximately
1.5 to 135 acres.
Crocker Park. The Crocker Park subarea was subdivided in three phases of the Park's
development, recorded in 1959, 1965 and 1968. The subdivision of North Hill Drive followed in
1980. Subsequent parcel splits and mergers have resulted in lots ranging in size from 0.56 to
13.23 acres. Current regulations require a 10,000 sq. ft. minimum lot size.
Northeast Ridge. The Northeast Ridge remained unsubdivided until it was recorded as a single
parcel in 1975. The vesting tentative subdivision map for the planned development approved in
1989 divides the subarea into single-family residential lots (an average of 7,400 sq. ft. each),
clusters of condominiums and townhouses (totaling approximately 39 acres), and large tracts of
open space.
Northwest Bayshore. The existing irregular pattern of large parcels in the Northwest Bayshore
subarea can be traced back to subdivision maps recorded as early as 1915. Since 1980,
regulations have not included a minimum lot size for most of the subarea, anticipating that any
subdivision would be part of an approved planned development.
Northeast Bayshore. The Northeast Bayshore subarea was subdivided in 1969 as the Brisbane
Industrial Park. Its lot sizes ranged from 0.23 to 5.663 acres, although subsequent
consolidations of ownership have increased the average building site size. A 10,000 sq. ft.
minimum lot size requirement has been in effect since at least 1969.
The Baylands. The Baylands subarea is largely unsubdivided, a vestige of the once extensive
holdings of the Southern Pacific Transportation Company. Major portions of these holdings
located in Brisbane are now owned by Tuntex Properties Inc. (Brisbane). There are small
parcels in other ownerships scattered about the subarea, ranging from approximately 5,000 sq. ft.
to 230,000 sq. ft. in size. Most of the subarea has a minimum site area requirement to be
established by specific plan per regulations adopted in 1991.
The Beatty Subarea. The Beatty Subarea is a haphazard collection of parcels, reflecting a varied
history of ownerships. Parcel sizes are generally from 0.176 to 7.043 acres. Within this subarea,
minimum site area is established by specific plan per regulations adopted in 1991.
                                                - 59 -
V.2      THE 1994 GENERAL PLAN LAND USE MAP AND LAND USE
DESIGNATIONS
The 1994 General Plan Land Use Map
Map I, the land use map for the 1994 General Plan, illustrates the general location of the land use
designations given to both public and private properties within the General Plan planning area.
For purposes of clarity, the Map has been divided into the 13 subareas described earlier in this
text. The land use designations used in the map are described below.
Land Use Designations
The descriptions of the General Plan land use designations that follow are broadly drafted, as
befits the intent of a General Plan. Specificity of land use by district is the province of the City's
Zoning Ordinance. After adoption of a General Plan, the zoning map and zoning district
regulations are analyzed to determine whether changes are necessary to conform to the adopted
General Plan land use designations and policies.
Commercial/Retail/Office Designations
Neighborhood Commercial/Retail/Office (NCRO) designates a subarea devoted to a range of
local retail and service uses, including shops, restaurants, medical, professional and
administrative offices and other uses of the same general character. Public and semipublic
facilities may be located under this designation. Residential uses may be permitted conditionally
in implementing zoning districts. A portion of Central Brisbane is designated NCRO in the
1994 General Plan.
Subregional/Commercial/Retail/Office(SCRO) designates a subarea devoted to subregional retail
uses, personal services, restaurants and offices. Public and semi-public facilities and educational
institutions may be located under this designation. Commercial recreation, residential uses,
warehouse and distribution facilities, research and development, and light industrial uses may be
permitted conditionally in implementing zoning districts. The Southwest Bayshore subarea is
designated SCRO in the 1994 General Plan. Also see the Planned Development designations.
Sierra Point Commercial/Retail/Office (SPCRO) represents a subarea devoted to commercial
enterprises, encompassing a wide range of uses, as outlined in the Development Agreement for
Sierra Point. Such uses may include, but not be limited to, retail uses, personal services,
medical, professional and administrative offices, corporate headquarters, hotels, conference
centers and cultural facilities, commercial recreation, restaurants, and other uses of a commercial
character. Public and semi-public facilities and educational institutions may be located under
this designation.
                                                - 60 -
- 61 
6
Heavy Commercial (HC) provides for bulk sales, offices, meeting halls, vehicle storage and
equipment maintenance. It also allows outside storage of vehicles and equipment. No
materials storage, other than that associated with bulk sales and no processing of materials are
permitted. Subareas designated Heavy Commercial are required to have an adopted specific
plan to guide development in the area. The Beatty subarea is designated HC in the 1994
General Plan.
Marsh/Lagoon/Bayfront (M/L/B) are aquatic areas designated by type.
The following subareas contain designated aquatic areas:
               Northeast Bayshore: Marsh
               Baylands: Lagoon, Bayfront
               Beatty: Bayfront
               Sierra Point: Bayfront
Open Space (OS) designates properties that have been purchased, given or offered for
dedication to a public agency for open space use or conservation purposes and are essentially
unimproved by urban structures. The following subareas contain open space designations:
        Central Brisbane: Sierra Point, Costanos and Firth Canyons
        Northeast Ridge: Conserved Habitat
        Owl and Buckeye Canyons: Ecological Preserve
        Northwest Bayshore: Conserved Habitat (to be mapped with specific plan)
        Quarry: Conserved Habitat
        Southwest Bayshore: Remainder of the Bayshore Boulevard right-of-way
Planned Development (PD ) designates subareas that are primarily vacant and that present
unique development constraints. Subareas designated PD may be combined with other land
use designations and/or site specific uses may be included in this Plan to guide the
development of implementing zoning district regulations. Subareas designated PD require a
specific plan and environmental impact report prior to any development of the property. A
minimum of 25% of the surface land of any subarea designated Planned Development shall be
in open space and/or open area.
There are three subareas designated PD in the 1994 General Plan:
        Northwest Bayshore: Planned Development-Subregional Commercial/Retail/Office
        The Baylands: Planned Development - Trade Commercial
        The Quarry: Planned Development - Trade Commercial
                                              - 63 -
Public Facilities and Parks (PFP) are outdoor spaces and buildings owned or leased by public
agencies, including City parks, police and fire stations, schools and libraries. This designation
does not include infrastructure.
The following subareas contain Public Facilities and Parks:
         Sierra Point: Marina, Fishing Pier, Linear Park
         Central Brisbane: Community Park, Brisbane Elementary School and grounds, Lipman
                  Intermediate School and grounds, Firth Park, San Bruno Avenue Fire Station
                  Site, Community Center, Library and Park, Bicentennial and other Walkways,
                  Plug Preserve
         Northeast Ridge: School/ Park Site
         Baylands: Bayshore Boulevard Fire Station, Park and Ride Lot, Fisherman's Park
Residential (R) includes single- and multi-family areas and planned residential developments.
The subareas designated residential and the range of residential densities in the 1994 General
Plan are:
                          Brisbane Acres:                               0 - 2 units per acre
                          Central Brisbane:                             2 1/2 - 14 units per acre and
                                                                        15 - 30 units per acre
                          Northeast Ridge:                              6.23 units per acre
For the Northeast Ridge, a planned residential development, the density represents an average of
the 97 single family residential units, 214 condominiums and 268 townhouses approved on 93
acres.
Trade Commercial (TC) represents a mix of commercial uses including warehouses, distribution
facilities, offices, retail uses, restaurants, commercial recreation, personal services, as well as
light industrial, research and development, and uses of a similar character. Public and semi-
public facilities and educational institutions may be located under this designation. Repair and
maintenance services, such as auto body repair shops, may be conditionally permitted in the
implementing zoning districts. In such districts, certain individual or groups of uses may
predominate, thus distinguishing the districts one from the other. In the 1994 General Plan
Crocker Park, Northeast Bayshore and Southeast Bayshore are designated TC. Also see Planned
Development designations.
Figure V-A illustrates the land use designations in the 1980 General Plan as amended in 1991.
Figure V-B illustrates the general location of existing land uses at the time of the preparation of
the 1994 General Plan.
                                                  - 64 -
- 65 
6
Overview
The 1994 General Plan changes several of the land use designations from the 1980 General Plan
to be more comprehensive as well as more expressive of their intent. In many instances the uses
described in these designations remain essentially unchanged from the prior plan.
Comparing the land use designations in the 1980 General Plan as amended and the 1994 General
Plan, the following subareas experience no change in the following land use designations:
Brisbane Acres                                              Residential 0-2 units/acre
Central Brisbane                                            Residential 2 1/2 - 14 units/acre
                                                            15 - 30 units/acre
Owl and Buckeye Canyons                                     Open Space
Although new land use designations are given to the following subareas, these designations
represent essentially no change in general use from the 1980 Plan:
Central Brisbane                                            Neighborhood Commercial/
                                                            Retail/Office, Open Space
Southeast Bayshore                                          Trade Commercial
Southwest Bayshore                                          Subregional
                                                            Commercial/Retail/Office, Open
                                                            Space
Northeast Bayshore                                          Trade Commercial
Beatty                                                      Heavy Commercial, Bayfront
Sierra Point                                                Sierra Point/Commercial/Retail
                                                            Office, Bayfront
Northeast Ridge                                             Residential: 6.23 units per acre
New land use designations and/or uses have been given to the following subareas:
Crocker Park                                                Trade Commercial
                                              - 67 -
Northwest Bayshore                                            Planned Development - Subregional
                                                              Commercial/Retail/Office, Marsh,
                                                              Open Space (to be mapped at a later
                                                              lime)
The Baylands                                                  Planned Development -
                                                              Trade Commercial, Lagoon,
                                                              Bayfront
The Quarry                                                    Planned Development - Trade
                                                              Commercial, Open Space
V.3      DENSITY AND INTENSITY STANDARDS
The Government Code requires that a General Plan include an indication of density and intensity
of use for the land use designations in the Plan. The language of the Code reads:
         GC 65302(a): The land use element shall include a statement of the standards of
         population density and building intensity recommended for the various districts and other
         territory covered by the plan.
These standards represent overall policy objectives that are implemented through the zoning
district regulations. General Plan standards represent broad ranges, whereas zoning regulations
establish specific development standards, such as height limits, setbacks, coverage and site area,
that must fall within the General Plan range. After adoption of a General Plan, the zoning
districts are reviewed and amended, as necessary, to bring them into consistency and best reflect
the policy direction of the Plan.
Population Density
The populations that can be expected in an area on a predictable, daily basis for the land use
designations in this Plan are represented in Table 5. For the residential designations in the
General Plan, population is given in terms of number of residents and for nonresidential
designations, by number of employees. The residential density is based on the number of
housing units per acre and the average household size identified in the 1990 Census.(1) For non-
residential land use designations, the number of employees per 1,000 square feet of floor area is
used. These numbers represent common standards employed for economic analysis.(2) Because
the 1994 General Plan land use designations contain a range of uses, employee population
density is expressed in ranges.
Building Intensity
The range of building intensity for the various residential land use designations in the 1994
General Plan is listed in Table 5. The intensity is expressed in terms of units per acre.
                                               - 68 -
Building intensity for non-residential designations is expressed in a floor area ratio (FAR)
formula. The formula relates the square footage within a building to the acreage upon which it
sits. A floor area ratio is a very general indicator which must be further defined in zoning
district regulations before any development can occur.
Based on the direction provided by Brisbane citizens through the community surveys described
in Chapter 1, existing building intensity standards were retained for most of the subareas of the
City. For subareas 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 11 and 13 in Table 5 following, the floor area ratios represent
what is permitted under the regulations and Development Agreements in place at the time of
preparation of the 1994 General Plan.
Subareas 7, 10 and 12 are designated Planned Development because each of these subareas
require extensive site investigation and planning before the most beneficial development patterns
can be determined. The policies in Chapter XII require, for each of these subareas, a specific
plan and environmental impact report before any development can occur. Until these studies are
completed and new information evaluated that can be used to refine the FAR standards, the
FARs given in Table 5 represent standards that are comparable to those of subareas with similar
uses and environmental constraints.
Specific plans for the Baylands shall distinguish between the areas north and south of the
Bayshore Basin drainage channel as shown in Table 5 and further described below:
Policy 11:       Development south of the Bayshore Basin drainage channel shall maintain a
                 low profile, permitting low or mid-rise buildings, not to exceed six stories in
                 height, in order to preserve the existing views of San Francisco and San
                 Francisco Bay as seen from Central Brisbane, and to maximize the amount
                 of landscape and open space or open area in this portion of the subarea.
It should be noted that the intent of the FARs given for the Baylands in Table 5 is to
accommodate diversity in the height and intensity of structures in order to encourage interesting,
flexible and variable development. In no event shall the FARs shown in Table 5 be interpreted
as permitting the maximum intensities to be established throughout the subarea. The City will
expect specific plans to emphasize intensities well below those figures. See Program 330b for
further direction addressing the design of buildings and building groups in the Baylands.
                                                 - 69 -
V.4 LAND USE ALTERNATIVES
A number of land use alternatives were considered in choosing the land use designations shown
in Map I, the 1994 General Plan land use map for each of the 13 subareas that comprise the
planning area for the City's General Plan. These alternatives, which were the subject of
environmental analysis in the General Plan EIR, were established by means of the following
process:
The range of land use alternatives of interest to the community were identified by means of a
series of communications with Brisbane voters and businesses through public participation in
surveys and workshops. Perspectives on appropriate land uses were obtained first through a
mail survey of registered voters that took place in April 1992 and then at "Have Your Say Day"
in May 1992. For several subareas, where consensus on land use was not clear from the
information already received, an interview survey administered in February 1993 provided the
opportunity to ask each respondent for an opinion on a number of land use options. For each
potential use, the respondent was asked to indicate whether he/she would "tend to support" or
"tend to oppose" it and to identify the uses that would be the first and second priority for these
lands. The data from the interviews, mail surveys and workshop records were then used to
establish the land use alternatives to be analyzed for environmental impacts according to the
following methodology: All land uses supported by 60% or more of the respondents to the voter
interview survey were included in Alternative ; all land uses supported by 50-60% of the
respondents to the voter survey were included in Alternative 11; and all land uses supported by
40-50% of the respondents to the voter survey, and for which substantial interest was exhibited
in the mail survey and at "Have Your Say Day," were included in Alternative III. When any
major land use contained diverse components, these were identified in the respective alternative.
Table 4 illustrates the range of alternatives by subarea that were considered by the City.
Subareas that were already developed or where conditions have remained essentially unchanged
have retained land use designations and uses that are the same as or similar to those in the prior
General Plan.
For four subareas a broad range of alternatives were considered.
Crocker Park
The 1980 General Plan land use designation for this subarea was Industrial. Specific policies
were not established and the types of uses anticipated under an Industrial designation were not
identified in the Plan, but references are made in the text to "light industrial" and "warehousing
and distribution centers." The assumption was that light industrial uses would be generally
beneficial and provide revenues to the City.
                                                - 70 -
Crocker Park was annexed to the City in July 1983 and proved to be a generator of revenues.
However, the source is sales tax rather than property tax and is commonly associated with a
distribution point as a "point of sale" rather than resulting from a manufacturing activity.
The Background Report on Crocker Park (LEA-3) identified the following types of land uses
operating within the Park in March 1992: 38% warehousing, storage, transportation,
distribution; 20% contractors, construction trades, repair and maintenance services; 14%
professional, administrative, headquarters offices; 10% manufacturing.
Both the business and voter surveys conducted in preparation for the General Plan update
identified an interest in a greater mix of uses in Crocker Park than currently exists, especially
uses that could provide services to the residents and businesses in Brisbane, including retail
sales, personal services, factory outlets, restaurants and health clubs. Although there are
structures on all but one of the parcels in Crocker Park, the alternatives analysis focused on
encouraging a mixture that includes a greater number of retail, commercial, and manufacturing
uses in the subarea.
The new land use designation for the district, Trade Commercial, provides for a greater mix of
uses, especially retail uses, restaurants, commercial recreation and personal services.
Manufacturing and research and development uses, which have the potential to generate
industrial impacts in terms of noise and hazardous materials, could be permitted in the zoning
district as conditional uses.
Northwest Bayshore
The Northwest Bayshore subarea is composed of several large parcels. Four were designated
Commercial/Retail/Office in the 1980 General Plan. The fifth parcel, which contains a PG&E
substation, was designated Industrial. Portions of each of these parcels fall within the
jurisdiction of the San Bruno Mountain Area Habitat Conservation Plan.
There was not much policy direction for the Northwest Bayshore subarea in the 1980 General
Plan. Under the general heading "Industrial and Commercial," policy #3 referred to the area as
follows: "Undeveloped lands west of the Southern Pacific Switch yard (Franciscan Heights)
should be developed for retail and office uses." In the subarea descriptions the land was called
"Northwest Industrial" and was included with the Southern Pacific Railroad yards. The text
raised an issue of "the possibility of establishing a non-contiguous residential neighborhood
away from Central Brisbane" in terms of "creating new and extended service requirements and
in changing the traditional pattern of a compact, contiguous residential community." It also
stated that public sentiment at that time favored a "revenue-producing development."
The parcel at the corner of Bayshore Boulevard and Guadalupe Canyon Parkway was considered
as a part of the Northeast Ridge Development application. Under the 1982 Specific Plan, the
following uses were given as permitted there: professional offices, restaurants, coffee shops,
financial services, health or fitness clubs or spas and special dwelling groups, such as senior
citizen housing.
                                                 - 71 -
The alternatives considered for this largely vacant subarea were based on the following
combinations of open space and specific urban land uses, which were identified as desirable by
voters in recent surveys (open space in all alternatives would consist primarily, but not
exclusively, of lands under the jurisdiction of the Habitat Conservation Plan):
Alternative I
Retail Commercial
Restaurants
Marsh/Open Space
Alternative II
Commercial Recreation (includes riding stables)
Single-Family Housing
Marsh/Open Space
Alternative III
Research & Development/Storage & Distribution
Marsh/Open Space
After consideration of available data, information in the General Plan EIR and public testimony,
it was determined that all the uses considered in the alternatives would be retained for this
subarea under the Planned Development - Subregional Commercial/Retail/Office land use
designation, except that residential uses would only be appropriate as a component of a mixed-
use project, when combined with or accessory to retail, office or other non-residential uses.
The Baylands
The 1980 General Plan was amended in May 1991 to remove the land use designation Industrial
from this subarea. The Industrial designation was a major factor in the largely vacant Baylands
becoming a targeted location for hazardous waste collection and treatment facilities in the
County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. The Baylands Amendment established a
Commercial Mixed-Use land use designation for the subarea and listed the following uses as
potentially appropriate if approved following a specific plan and environmental analysis: retail
sales, offices, residential uses, bulk sales, open space, recreational facilities, statuary, public and
quasi-public facilities, services and utilities, commercial services, hotels, research and
development, and educational institutions.
The density/intensity of the area was represented in terms of the maximum impact of a
combination of factors, including trip generation, water use, wastewater generation and
stormwater flow. However, since the actual holding capacity of the land was unknown, a
specific plan and environmental review was required before any development project could be
considered.
                                                  - 72 -
Under all the alternatives considered for the largely vacant Baylands subarea, the existing
Commercial Mixed-Use designation was renamed Planned Development-Trade Commercial and
various mixtures of specific uses identified in recent voter and business surveys were considered.
The following alternative land use scenarios were considered for future development of the
Baylands:
Alternative I
Small Stores & Shops
Offices
Bulk Sales
LagoonlBayfront Recreational Facilities
               (no golf course)
Statuary
Public & Semi-Public Facilities
Commercial Services
Educational Institutions
               like    UCSF
                       administrative offices
                       research laboratories
                       supply storage & distribution
                       medical treatment facilities
                       bookstores
Biotechnology Center
               high-tech. manufacturing
Restaurants
Alternative II
Medium Size Shopping Center
Offices
Bulk Sales
Lagoon/Bayfront Recreational Facilities
               golf course
Statuary
Public & Semi-Public Facilities
Commercial Services
Hotels/Resorts
Research & Development
Educational Institutions
        like   UCSF
               administrative offices
                                                - 73 -
                research laboratories
                supply storage & distribution
                medical treatment facilities
                bookstores
Biotechnology Center
        high-tech. manufacturing
Restaurants
Alternative III
Major Shopping Center
Offices
Bulk Sales
Lagoon/Bayfront
Recreational Facilities
        golf course
Statuary
Public & Semi-Public Facilities
Commercial Services
Hotels/Resorts
Research & Development
Educational Institutions
        like    UCSF
                administrative offices
                research laboratories
                supply storage & distribution
                medical treatment facilities
                bookstores
Biotechnology Center
        high-tech. manufacturing
Restaurants
After consideration of available data, information in the General Plan EIR and public testimony,
it was determined that all uses considered in the alternatives would be retained under the
Planned Development-Trade Commercial land use designation and that the uses would be
further refined as the zoning districts are formulated and specific plans are submitted for the
Baylands.
Leaving alternatives for further analysis does not mean approval at this time or in the future.
Much more extensive analysis and environmental review will be undertaken before any specific
uses are even considered for approval or disapproval. All of that will be conducted in
conjunction with an open and public process.
                                                - 74 -
The Quarry
The 1980 General Plan did not provide policies for the Quarry except in regard to rerouting truck
traffic away from Old County Road. The 1980 General Plan map included just a part of the
Quarry lands, which was designated as Open Space with adjacent Owl and Buckeye Canyons.
In 1990, American Rock and Asphalt entered into a Quarry Property Agreement with the City
that provided for the Quarry to file a series of development applications, including one for
annexation to the City, that would, if approved, result in the development of some urban use and
some dedication of Open Space after the cessation of quarrying activities. The County of San
Mateo is currently considering applications for a new mining permit and reclamation plan for the
property. An EIR is underway for that project. Another EIR will be necessary in conjunction
with applications made to the City.
The Quarry Property Agreement proposes a future use on the site similar to an extension of
Crocker Park and the dedication of the unmined lands as Open Space. A substantial amount of
environmental review will be necessary in conjunction with the evaluation of the applications
filed under the Quarry Property Agreement. In addition, based on the decrease in the level of
quarrying activity in recent months, it does not seem likely that during the ten year planning
period the active quarry site will reach the configuration required prior to the development of
urban uses. In light of the foregoing, it should be emphasized that the General Plan land use
alternatives are broad general designations.
The following alternatives were considered for the Quarry and reflect combinations of Open
Space and urban land uses identified as desirable in voter surveys and at "Have Your Say Day":
Alternative I
Health Care Facilities
Educational Facilities
Open Space
Alternative II
Commercial Recreation
Open Space
Alternative III
Trade Commercial
Research & Development
Single Family Housing
Open Space
                                                 - 75 -
After consideration of available data, information in the General Plan EIR and public testimony,
it was determined that the following mix of uses would guide the development of zoning district
regulations under the Planned Development-Trade Commercial designation for the Quarry
subarea:
                        Open Space
                        Long-term Health Care Facilities
                        Educational Facilities
                        Commercial Recreation
                        Trade Commercial
                        Research and Development
and that single-family housing should not be included in any zoning district due to safety and
environmental sensitivities. The need to further examine the environmental characteristics of
this subarea prior to the establishment of trade commercial uses is set forth in the following
policy:
Policy 11.1     Require the highest level of environmental analysis of the Quarry subarea to
                disclose the characteristics of the land and its suitability to accommodate
                new uses.
                                                - 76 -
                                                            TABLE 4
                       LAND USE DESIGNATIONS - ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BY SUBAREA
            SUBAREA       1980 GENERAL, PLAN             1994 PLAN                1994 PLAN                  1994 PLAN
                               AS AMENDED             ALTERNATIVE I            ALTERNATIVE Il            ALTERNATIVE III
1. Sierra Point       Commercial/Retail/Office Sierra Point             Sierra Point              Sierra Point
                      Open Space               Commercial/Retail/Office Cornmercial/Retail/Office Commercial/Retail/Office
                                               Bayfront                 Bayfront                  Bayfront
2. Southeast Bayshore Industrial               Trade Commercial         Trade Commercial          Trade Commercial
3. Southwest Bayshore Commercial/Retail/Office Subregional              Subregional               Subregional
                                               Commercial/Retail/Office Commercial/Retail/Office  Commercial/Retail/Office
                                               Open Space               Open Space                Open Space
4. Brisbane Acres     Residential 0-2 du/acre  Residential 0-2 du/acre  Residential 0-2 du/acre   Residential 0-2 du/acre
5. Central Brisbane   Residential 2 1/2 - 14 & Residential 2 1/2 - l4 & Residential 2 1/2 - 14 &  Residential 2 1/2 - 14 &
                      15 - 30 du/acre          15 - 30 du/acre          15 - 30 du/acre           15 - 30 du/acre
                      Commercial/Retail/Office Neighborhood             Neighborhood              Neighborhood
                                               Commercial/Retail/Office Commercial/Retail/Office  Commercial/Retail/Office
                                               Open Space               Open Space                Open Space
6. Owl and Buckeye    Open Space               Open Space               Open Space                Open Space
                                                               - 77 -
TABLE 4: LAND USE DESIGNATIONS - ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BY SUBAREA
Page 2
7. Quarry                         Open Space                Planned Development -    Planned Development -    Planned Development -
                                                            Health Care Facilities   Commercial Recreation    Trade Commercial
                                                            Educational Facilities   Open Space               Research and Development
                                                            Open Space                                        Single-Family Housing
                                                                                                              Open Space
8. Crocker Park                   Industrial                Trade Commercial         Trade Commercial         Trade Commercial
9. Northeast Ridge                Residential - 0-S du/acre Residential 6.23 du/acre Residential 6.23 du/acre Residential 6.23 du/acre
                                                            Open Space               Open Space               Open Space
10. Northwest Bayshore            Commercial/Retail/Office  Planned Development -    Planned Development -    Planned Development -
                                  Industrial                Retail Commercial        Commercial Recreation    Research & Development/
                                                            Restaurants              Single-family housing    Storage & Distribution
                                                            Marsh/Open Space         Marsh/Open Space         Marsh/Open Space
11. Northeast Bayshore            Industrial                Trade Commercial         Trade Commercial         Trade Commercial
12. Baylands                      Mixed Use Commercial      Planned Development -    Planned Development -    Planned Development -
                                                            Trade Commercial*        Trade Commercial*        Trade Commercial*
                                                            Lagoon Bayfront          Lagoon Bayfront          Lagoon Bayfront
13. Beatty                        Heavy Commercial          Heavy Commercial         Heavy Commercial         Heavy Commercial
                                                            Bayfront                 Bayfront                 Bayfront
* See page 73 for detail of uses.
                                                                            - 78 -
                                                                    TABLE 5
                      1994 GENERAL PLAN: LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND DENSITY/INTENSITY BY SUBAREA
                                                                              NUMBER OF UNITS/
                                                                                                    MINIMUM OPEN SPACE/
SUBAREA                      LAND USE DESIGNATION      POPULATION DENSITY     MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA
                                                                                                    OPEN AREA
                                                                              RATIO
                             Sierra Point              1.66 - 3.22 E/1,000
l. Sierra Point                                                               4.8 FAR               Development Agreement
                             Cornmercial/Retail/Office 1.65 per hotel room
                             Bayfront                  0                      0                     100%
2. Southeast Bayshore        Trade Commercial          1.23 - 3.22 E/1,000    2.0 FAR               Per Zoning Requirements
                             Subregional
3. Southwest Bayshore                                  1.66 - 3.22 E/1,000    2.8 FAR               Per Zoning Requirements
                             Commercial/Retail/Office
                             Open Space                0                      0                     0
                                                                                                    40% per HCP
4. Brisbane Acres            Residential               0 - 4.48 ppa           0 - 2 units/acre
                                                                                                    + per Zoning Requirements
5. Central Brisbane          Residential               5.6 - 31.36 ppa        2 1/2 - 14 units/acre Per Zoning Requirements
                                                       33.6 - 67.2 ppa        15 - 30 units/acre    Per Zoning Requirements
                             Neighborhood Commercial/
                                                       1.66 - 3.22 E/1,000    2.4 FAR               Per Zoning Requirements
                             Retail/Office
                             n Space                   0                      0                     100°/a
6. Owl and Buckeye Canons    p n Space                 0                      0                     100%
                             Planned Development -
7. The Quarry                                          1.23 - 3.22 E/1,000    2.0 FAR               25% minimum
                             Trade Commercial
                             Open Space                0                      0                     100%
                                                                       - 79 -

TABLE 5: 1994 GENERAL PLAN: LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND DENSITY/INTENSITY BY SUBAREA
Page 2
8. Crocker Park                       Trade Commercial                     1.23 - 3.22 E/1,000        2.0 FAR                      Per Zoning Requirements
9. Northeast Ridge                    Residential                          13.95 ppa                  6 .23 units/acre*            Per Development Plans
                                      Open Space                           0                          0                            100°/a
                                      Planned Development -
10. Northwest Bayshore                Subregional Commercial I             1.66 - 3.22 E/1,000        2.8 FAR                      25% minimum
                                      Retail / Office
                                      Marsh                                0                          0                            100%
                                      Open Space                           0                          0                            100%
11. Northeast Bayshore                Trade Commercial                     1.23 - 3.22 E/1,000        2.0 FAR                      Per Zoning Requirements
                                                                                                      south of channel** 0-2.4 FAR
                                      Planned Development -
12. Baylands                                                               1.23 - 3.22 E/1,000                                     25% minimum
                                      Trade Commercial
                                                                                                      north of channel** 0-4.8 FAR
                                      Bay-front                            0                          0                            100%
                                      Lagoon                               0                          0                            100%
13. Beatty                            Heavy Commercial                     0 - 1.23 E/1,000           0 - 1.0 FAR                  Per Specific Plan
                                      Bayfront                             0                          0                            100%
ppa = persons per gross acre
E/1,000 = employees per 1,000 s.f.
* 97 single family, 268 townhouses and 214 stacked flats approved by Resolution #89-63, Nov. 6, 1989.
** See Policy 11, page 69.
                                                                                           - 80 -

V.5 LAND USE POLICIES
                                             Question: What do you like most about living in
                                             Brisbane:
                                             Respondent: "I like the "touch of country in the
                                             City" atmosphere. I like the naturalness of the
                                             canyons in which we live--seeing the beauty of the
                                             Mountain at all hours...The quietness of Brisbane,
                                             its peace, are beautiful. The community is close,
                                             vital and neighborly. Care and concern about the
                                             type of development, building codes and quality of
                                             life is important ... Let's uphold a strong standard,
                                             high quality of life."
                                             General Plan Issues Questionnaire (GP-5)
The combination of land uses, topography, natural features, subdivision patterns, streets,
buildings, landscape, open areas and open spaces makes up Brisbane's physical character. The
following pages contain policies and programs pertaining to both the mix of land uses and the
physical character of the community. Policies are grouped under six headings: General
Principles, Bay and Mountain Setting, Nature and Character of Development, Open Space and
Open Areas, Streets, and Subdivision Patterns.
General Principles
Policy 12      Establish a mix of land uses that best serves the needs of the community.
               Program 12a: When evaluating land uses, consider whether a use would result in
               adverse impacts on existing and proposed land uses nearby, and whether those
               impacts can be mitigated.
Policy 13      Integrate physical, social, environmental and financial elements of the
               community for the benefit of current and future residents.
Policy 14      Establish a mix of uses with a diversified economic base to maintain and
               increase tax revenues and contribute to the City's ability to provide services.
Policy 15      Adopt development standards which protect and enhance the quality of life
               in Brisbane.
                                              - 81 -
            Program 15a: When drafting development standards, consider preserving a sense
            of openness in the design of structures and sites and the access to sky and
            sunlight for both new construction and renovation projects.
Policy 15.1 Enhance communications and information sharing with adjacent
            jurisdictions at early stages of project development in order to address issues
            of mutual concern.
Bay and Mountain Setting
Policy 16   Acknowledge the mountain setting and the proximity to the Bay as central
            factors in forming the physical character of the City.
            Program 16a: In making land use decisions, consider the proximity of open space
            on San Bruno Mountain and public views of and access to the Bay as issues to be
            addressed.
Policy 17   Preserve the ridgelines and hilltops in their open state.
            Program 17a: Prohibit land use changes that would result in development that
            would break the natural ridgeline.
            Program 17b: Adopt hillside development standards that protect against
            ridgeline development through regulation of the siting of structures, location of
            access, landscape requirements and other pertinent factors.
Policy 18   Respect the topography of the Mountain in design and construction.
            Program 18a: In conjunction with land use development applications, encourage
            options that minimize grading and transformation of the landform and fit
            comfortably with the topography.
Policy 19   In the context of respecting private property rights, make every effort to
            preserve and enhance public views of the Mountain and the Bay.
            Program 19a: Identify and map vistas and view corridors of community-wide
            value to be preserved and enhanced.
            Program 19b: Consider amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for site
            plan review to assure that identified vistas and public view corridors remain
            accessible for public enjoyment. The review should evaluate building placement,
            height and bulk.
                                            - 82 -
                 Program 19c: In reevaluating the tree protection ordinance and landscaping
                 requirements, consider the trade off between desirability of foliage versus the
                 preservation of views and access to sunlight.
Nature and Character of Development
The diversity of structures in Brisbane is central to the existing physical character of the City. It
is a reflection of a City that developed lot by lot, of many different hands building to meet
individual needs over the years. It is in the nature of cities that structures are built, changed,
demolished and rebuilt as the years go by, and that demographic changes, economic factors,
safety standards and personal preference affect the size, scale and appearance of development, as
well as building codes and zoning standards.
The following policies emphasize Brisbane's desire to retain and continue to encourage diversity
and individual expression as changes occur in the built environment, while encouraging quality
construction and the upgrading and on-going maintenance of existing structures.
Policy 20        Retain diversity of development and individual expression in residential and
                 commercial development, especially in Central Brisbane.
                 Program 20a: Review the R and C-2 District regulations to ascertain if
                 amendments would help preserve the diversity of existing development.
                 Program 20b: Consider amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to prohibit
                 issuance of a building permit for a single family dwelling on a lot of record when
                 the design is essentially the same as that on any immediately adjacent lot.
Policy 21        Respect Brisbane's vernacular architectural heritage.
Policy 22        Provide clear performance standards in the Municipal Code for the physical
                 character of all land use developments on private property.
                 Program 22a: Consider amendments to the Zoning Ordinance which contain
                 clear and defined standards to protect creativity and diversity in design while
                 addressing issues of height, scale, mass and articulation.
                 Program 22b: Review existing height limits in existing land use districts to
                 determine whether current regulations result in structures appropriate in height
                 and scale to the physical character of the City.
                 Program 22c: Review the residential parking requirements in the Zoning
                 Ordinance to determine their effect on the height, mass and scale of structures
                 and grading implications and whether amendments to the Code should be
                 considered.
                                                 - 83 -
          Program 22d Establish height limits for new zoning districts, taking into
          consideration the geology and topography of the area, as well as impacts to
          adjacent uses.
          Program 22e: Establish clear and defined performance standards in the Zoning
          Ordinance for buildings and signs visible from the hillsides of Central Brisbane.
          Standards should address light and glare, the treatment of roofs and the
          screening of mechanical equipment.
          Program 22f: Consider amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to establish
          standards for protecting the character of the existing residential Central
          Brisbane subarea, including attention to scale, juxtapositions, views, natural
          topography and ecological protection.
          Program 22g: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to prohibit tall smokestacks and
          industrial towers.
          Program 22h: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require that large parking lots be
          broken up by landscaped areas and parkway strips.
Policy 23 Encourage the maintenance and upgrading of structures and sites that have
          played important roles in the City's history.
          Program 23a: Provide courtesy inspections of historic structures and sites to
          advise owners of needed corrections and repairs.
          Program 23b: Provide information to owners of historic structures regarding
          State tax incentives for rehabilitation.
          Program 23c: Seek official designation of historical structures and sites and
          pursue all means of ensuring their permanent preservation.
Policy 24 Encourage the maintenance and upgrading of residential and nonresidential
          structures to improve safety and appearance.
          Program 24a: Prevent blight and deterioration by providing public information
          and enforcing health and safety codes.
                                          - 84 -
               Program 24b: Seek funding sources, such as low-interest loans and grants for
               rehabilitation of existing structures, and encourage property owners to take
               advantage of such programs.
The physical character of the community is an essential part of the "glue" that holds the
community together. Knowing neighbors and merchants, meeting residents as a part of daily
business, and attending community events at regular locations all contribute to the sense of
community and all are directly affected by the arrangement of the physical
environment.
Policy 25      Encourage interaction and involvement among neighbors on a day-today
               basis and foster a sense of security in the community through the design and
               location of private development and public improvements.
               Program 25a: Establish the Central Brisbane subarea as the "town center" and
               the hub of civic activities.
               Program 25b: As outer areas develop, assure connections and compatibility with
               the existing community.
Policy 26      Locate and design commercial recreational facilities and services so as to
               encourage use by a broad spectrum of Brisbane residents and businesses.
               Program 26x: Consider access for vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians in
               conjunction with the siting of commercial services and recreational facilities.
               Program 26b: Require all commercial services and public facilities to he
               accessible to persons with disabilities in accordance with State and Federal
               regulations.
Policy 27      Provide centrally located public facilities for public services and community
               events so as to maximize use by Brisbane residents and businesses.
               Program 27a: As a part of the City's Capital Improvement Planning, consider the
               need far and appropriate location of public facilities, such as a City Hall,
               Community Center, Recreation Center and Police Station.
               Program 27b: Improve the Old County Road site as a central gathering point for
               community events.
               Program 27c: Continue to maintain and upgrade the Community Center.
                                                - 85 -
                Program 27d: In coordination with the School District, continue shared
                community use of District facilities
                Program 27e: Determine the best civic use for the Old Fire Station site on San
                Bruno Avenue.
Open Areas
The developed community consists of a pattern of built structures and open areas. Open areas
are defined below:
Open areas are parcels of land or portions thereof, primarily in private ownership, that serve to
soften the impacts of urban development and otherwise provide primarily green areas and a
feeling of "openness" to the development pattern. Open areas include, but are not limited to,
setbacks and easements that are landscaped or characterized by native vegetation, gardens and
landscaped vegetation. Open areas might also include golf courses, private parks and recreation
areas within private developments. An open area may consist of a combination of hardscape and
landscape, typical of plazas, sculpture gardens and gathering places. Streets, sidewalks, parking
lots and similar improvements, although not covered by structures, do not qualify as open areas.
The policies in this section address only these open areas. (For the definition of Open Space see
page 111 and for policies on Open Space and Aquatic Areas, refer to Chapter VII.) Table 5.1
provides examples of the various types of open areas that could be provided in accordance with
General Plan policy. To the extent that the development pattern is governed by code
requirements that establish parameters for design and placement of improvements, the provision
of open areas stems directly from City regulations. Most requirements for open areas will be
formulated as part of the zoning regulations. It should be noted that in this chapter, the policy
for subareas designated Planned Development establishes a minimum of 25% of the surface
land, not including aquatic areas, to be preserved as either open space or open areas.
The following policies and programs speak to the provision of open areas in Brisbane's
development pattern and the intent to preserve a sense of openness and avoid the feeling of
increasing density.
Policy 28       The establishment of open areas within private developments shall be
utilized as a means of preserving unique environmental features on the site or avoiding the
appearance of excessive bulk or concentration of structures.
Policy 28.1 Preserve open areas at the perimeter of the City to maintain Brisbane as
separate and distinct from nearby communities.
                                               - 86 -
Policy 29      Retain sufficient open areas between structures to meet safety requirements,
               protect privacy and provide opportunities for landscaping.
               Program 29a: Review the setback, lot coverage and landscape requirements in
               the Zoning Ordinance to assure adequate open areas in the development pattern.
               Program 29b: Adopt new zoning regulations, as necessary, with specific
               qualifying requirements for open areas and square footage and for percentage
               minimum standards for all development districts.
               Program 29c: In all multi-structure development proposals, consider the pattern
               of open areas as an integral part of the development concept.
                                          TABLE 5.1
                                      Typical Open Areas
beach                                                              open natural areas
berry farms                                                        outdoor employee break area
bird sanctuary                                                     parcourse
bocci ball courts                                                  parkway strips
botanical gardens                                                  parks
community garden                                                   petting zoos
firebreaks                                                         picnic grounds
fish ponds                                                         playgrounds
gardens                                                            playing fields
golf course                                                        plazas
grassy amphitheaters                                               sculpture gardens
horse corrals and open arenas                                      tea gardens
horseshoe courts                                                   topiary
landscaped areas outside the setbacks                              tot lots
landscaped creeks and streams                                      tree farms
landscaped paths, trails                                           unimproved steep slopes
landscaped patios                                                  wading pools
landscaped setbacks                                                water elements
landscaped swimming pools                                          water fountains
large landscaped medians                                           wetland areas
native plant exhibition areas                                      wildlife areas
nursery yard
                                              - 87 -
Policy 30 Retain sufficient distances between development and designated open space
          and natural areas to enhance and respect the amenity and value of the
          resource.
          Program 30a: Establish minimum setback requirements from the Brisbane
          Lagoon, Levinson Marsh, and other designated aquatic areas consistent with
          good planning and conservation practices in consultation with the California
          Department of Fish and Game.
Policy 31 Combine the benefits of open areas with the establishment of safety buffers
          and conservation areas.
          Program 31a: Consider a setback requirement to achieve separation from areas
          of wildland fire hazard.
          Program 31b: Consider hillside development standards that retain steep slopes
          as open areas.
Policy 32 Respect the historic pattern of open areas in Central Brisbane and retain
          this character in conjunction with the rehabilitation of existing structures
          when consistent with good planning and safety practices.
          Program 32a: Review the Zoning Ordinance for opportunities to retain certain
          parking and setback nonconformities that contribute to the historic pattern of
          open areas in Central Brisbane.
          Program 32b: Review the parking and setback requirements in the Zoning
          Ordinance to ascertain how the requirements affect the pattern of open areas and
          whether amendments to the Code could provide more open areas and landscape
          along the street right-of-way.
          Program 32c: Underground utilities in conjunction with all new development.
          Program 32d: If economically feasible, underground utilities in conjunction with
          street reconstruction.
Policy 33 Keep open areas and opportunities for landscaping along arterial and
          collector streets by establishing setbacks from the right-of-way.
          Program 33a: Examine district regulations to ascertain whether amendments to
          the Code are necessary to provide adequate setbacks to establish open areas
          along the right-of-way.
                                         - 88 -
Streets
Streets serve to bridge the various parts of the community. They are important both in their
function and in their physical expression. In Brisbane, residential streets have a unique character
based on their relationship to the topography and their historical development. Likewise, some
streets serving non-residential areas still reflect their origins as early highways and haul roads.
In cities, with the passage of years, streets require repair and reconstruction as well as
modification to meet current safety standards. As vacant lands develop, new streets may be
constructed. The following policies address the desired physical character of both new and
existing streets in Brisbane (see the chapters on Transportation and Circulation, and Community
Health and Safety for additional policies on streets):
Policy 34        In conjunction with safety improvements to existing streets, retain the
                 historic character of the City to the greatest extent feasible.
                 Program 34a: If safety standards are met, retain and enhance unique features
                 such as rock escarpments, retaining walls, "gateways" (such as the entry to
                 Crocker Park) and historic, aged trees.
Policy 35        Design new streets to be attractive and comfortable for pedestrians and
                 bicyclists, and to safely accommodate vehicular traffic. Street configuration,
                 landscape and signage should all be considered as they contribute to
                 community character.
                 Program 35a: Require landscaping along all major arterial streets.
                 Program 35b: Construct landscaped medians where appropriate in arterial
                 streets.
                 Program 35c: Use drought resistant, water-conserving non-invasive plant
                 materials that reflect local character.
                 Program 35d: Continue to implement a street tree planting and management
                 program and improve it as appropriate.
                 Program 35e: Improve the program for street and directional signs
                 Program 35f.- Prohibit new commercial billboard sites and seek to remove those
                 currently in place.
                                                 - 89 -
             Program 35g: Provide standards in the Municipal Code to assure that abutting
             properties have adequate separation from travelways and protection from noise
             and other traffic impacts
             Program 35h: Consider funding methods, such as landscape assessment districts,
             to install and maintain improvements within rights-of-way.
             Program 35i: Work with appropriate State and County agencies, private
             organizations, service clubs and property owners to maintain an attractive
             appearance of major thoroughfares
             Program 35j: Encourage environmental groups, local service clubs, individuals
             and local businesses to "adopt a street" to support litter removal and encourage
             volunteer beautification projects along streets and remaining rights-of-way
             Program 35k: Discourage wind channelization when approving new streets.
Subdivision Pattern
Policy 36    Establish subdivision standards that acknowledge the constraints of
             topography and the ability to serve parcels with infrastructure to City
             standards.
             Program 36a: Develop a list with supporting documentation of these constraints,
             including fiscal, geophysical, ecological, etc.
Policy 37    On an ongoing basis, bring unrecorded subdivisions into compliance with the
             Subdivision Map Act and City standards.
             Program 37a: Require that unrecorded lots be surveyed and a parcel map
             recorded before permitting new improvements to be constructed or existing
             improvements intensified on the property.
                                             - 90 -
                                  FOOTNOTES
1. See Housing Element and background reports GP-2 and GP-3 for further detail.
2. See background report EC-2 for more information on employee density factors.
                                       - 91 -
                       CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY
 GOALS:
 Brisbane will be a place where...
                       The community is aware of the potential
                       for natural and man-made disaster and has
                       made sound preparations;
                       The City acts to prevent the loss of life and
                       property and damage to the environment by
                       addressing potential hazards in the use of
                       the land;
                       Fire and police services actively prevent
                       problems and stand ready to respond to
                       community needs;
                       The residents and businesses feel safe and
                       can freely attend to their daily lives; and
                       There is peace and quiet.
                            COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY
                                                  Chapter Index
                                                                                                                    Page
Emergency Preparedness ........................................................................................…166
Seismic Safety ............................................................................................………….167
        Structural Improvements.................................................................……….... 168
        Public Awareness ............................................................................………... 168
Slope Stability ...........................................................................................…………. 169
        Development Requirements.............................................................………... 169
Flood Hazard .............................................................................................…………. 176
Fire Hazard ................................................................................................…………. 179
        Systems and Materials ...........................................................................……. 181
        Codes and Enforcement ………................................................................….. 181
        Levels of Service ……………………………………….…………………… 182
        Public Education ......................................................................................…... 182
Personal and Property Safety ......................................................................………... 183
        Law Enforcement ............................................................................………... 184
        Public Education ...........................................................................…………. 184
        Community-Oriented Policing ..........................................................………. 185
Hazardous Materials ..................................................................................……….... 185
Land Contamination and Remediation ...................................................................... 187
Noise ........................................................................................................…………. 192
        Transportation Noise ………………………………………………….……195
        Land Use ......................................................................................…………. 196
        Enforcement .................................................................................…………. 197
        Local Standards .........................................................................................… 197
        Other Standards .....................................................................................…… 197
Air Quality …………................................................................................................ 198
        Working with the BAAQMD ...........................................................………. 199
        Mobile Sources ..............................................................................……….... 199

       Stationary Sources.........................................................................……….... 201
       Public Action and Information ........................................................………. 202
Water Supply and Quality..........................................................................………... 203
Sanitary Sewer and Storm Drains ..............................................................………... 204
       Sanitary Sewer ...............................................................................………... 204
       Storm Drains .................................................................................……….... 206
                                              - 163 -

                                             CHAPTER X
                         COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY
State law requires that a General Plan address the protection of the community from the risks of
natural hazards. This chapter addresses this requirement and speaks as well to the man-made
hazards that are a part of urban life. The underlying assumption of preparing safety policy is that
the City can reduce hazards if the probability of hazardous conditions is known in advance and
plans for dealing with such conditions have been prepared.
The chapter is divided into 12 sections: 1) Emergency Preparedness, 2) Seismic Safety, 3) Slope
Stability, 4) Flood Hazard, 5) Fire Hazard, 6) Personal and Property Safety, 7) Hazardous
Materials, 8) Land Contamination and Reclamation, 9) Noise, 10) Air Quality 11) Water Supply
and Quality and 12) Sanitary Sewer and Storm Drain. Throughout the chapter are figures that
illustrate the matters discussed in the text. The figures are either from or based upon the
information in the technical background reports. It should be noted that the figures give
generalized information from published sources of various agencies. For the environmental
sensitivities identified on the figures, project applications would be required to produce finer
scale, site-specific data.
There are three important distinctions that inform the issues addressed in this chapter. The first
is that in many instances the City does not have the authority to regulate a potential hazard or to
enforce violations because City authority has been preempted by the County or a State or Federal
agency. Such preemption exists with regard to gas pipelines, electrical transmission lines, the
tank farm, landfill sites, etc. In such instances, the City's policy direction emphasizes cooperation
and close communication with the responsible agencies. The second point is that a major aspect
of the City's ability to address hazards lies with the adequate provision of services, including
equipment, personnel and infrastructure. The City's ability to discharge its responsibilities rests
directly upon its financial well being, and so the policies in this chapter relate directly to those in
Chapter IV. Finally, it is important to acknowledge that if new development occurs, the need for
City infrastructure and safety services will increase. Without additional sources of revenues,
new development has the potential of reducing existing service levels or burdening the existing
community with new charges. This is an important issue for General Plan policy. That is why it
was addressed as part of the General Plan alternatives survey. Respondents were asked their
opinion about who should pay to provide infrastructure to undeveloped areas. Voters strongly
responded that it should be the responsibility of the developers and property owners. (See Figure
X-A.)
Policy: 144      Recognize that there are facilities in the City the safety of which is regulated
                 by County, State or Federal agencies.
                                                 - 164 -
           Program 144a: Actively consult with these governmental agencies regarding the
           location and safety requirements in conjunction with the processing of any land
           use development permit or City project.
           Program 144b: Verify annually with responsible agencies the status of regulated
           facilities in Brisbane and any new safety requirements that have been imposed
           and cooperate with those agencies to ensure the earliest possible installation of
           any new safety equipment required.
Policy 145 Recognize the need to ensure adequate revenues to provide safety services.
           Program 145a: As apart of the City's annual budget process and Capital
           Improvements Planning, evaluate the City's ability to provide infrastructure and
           safety services and review fees and charges to assure adequate revenues.
Policy 146 Require that developers and property owners in undeveloped areas who wish
           to build on their land provide infrastructure at their own expense, including
           water, sewer, storm drains and paved streets to City standards.
Policy 147 Develop impact fee programs so that new development contributes to safety
           services in order to maintain current service levels.
                                          - 165 -
X.1 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Emergency preparedness is critical for the well-being of Brisbane. Even though it is a small city,
Brisbane's location in the San Francisco Bay Area puts it at risk for potential disasters, such as
airplane crashes, major fires and hazardous materials incidents, in addition to earthquakes,
landslides and floods. With limited access points and the physical barriers created by the Bay
and the Mountain, it is necessary for the City to think carefully and plan well for the safety of its
citizens.
Brisbane has developed an Emergency Management Plan(l) , which is regularly updated. The
Plan provides procedures and establishes responsibilities for managing any disaster. It provides
directions on evacuating the City, providing shelter and basic necessities, and on emergency
communications and field responses. The Emergency Management Plan works in concert with a
number of multi-agency mutual aid plans and with local volunteer efforts.
An emergency operations center has been built into the new Fire Station on Bayshore Boulevard,
and regular training sessions and drills are conducted at the center using the Plan. Field
exercises are also held to maintain a state of readiness. (Refer to Safety background report (SA-
1) for more information.)
The following policies address Emergency Preparedness:
Policy 148      Maintain the Emergency Management Plan as the central planning and
                management tool for disaster response.
                Program 148a: Update the Plan as necessary and appropriate and train staff and
                volunteers.
                Program 148b: Update and refine the City's evacuation plan, as necessary.(2)
                Program 148c: Maintain the operations center in a state of readiness for an
                emergency response
                Program 148d. Be prepared to supplement City-owned equipment with that
                available from the private sector.
                Program 148e: Periodically hold exercises, including evacuation drills, using the
                instructions in the Plan.
                Program 148f: Utilize the Community Emergency Volunteers to provide
                community support and to assist emergency personnel during a disaster.
                Program 148g: Purchase and maintain necessary emergency equipment.
                                                - 166 -
                Program 148h: Provide periodic information to citizens about the Plan.
                Program 148i: Develop materials and hold meetings to train and advise on
                emergency preparations that individuals, families and businesses can make
                toward their personal safety.
                Program 148j: Develop disaster plans for all City facilities, for example, the
                Community Center and City Hall.
                Program 148k. Encourage public preparedness through the dissemination of
                literature and by presenting CPR and first aid classes.
                Program 1481: Encourage community members to participate in the Police and
                Fire Reserves.
                Program 148m: Work with the Brisbane School District to plan far the provision
                of emergency services to District facilities in Brisbane.
                Program 148n: Coordinate with the evacuation plans of surrounding cities
                affecting U. S. 101 and Bayshore Boulevard to ensure traffic flow through
                Brisbane in times of emergency.
X.2 SEISMIC SAFETY
Earthquakes originate as shock waves generated by movement along an active fault. Primary
seismic hazards are ground-shaking and ground-rupture along the surface traces of the fault.
Secondary hazards result from the interaction of ground-shaking with existing soil and bedrock
conditions, and include liquefaction, settlement, landslides, tsunamis and seiches.
The Technical Studies background report on geologic setting and hazards (NR-1) notes that only
a few earthquakes, all of very low magnitude, have had epicenters within the planning area. No
Alquist-Priolo special study zones have been identified. Seismic hazard to Brisbane stems
primarily from three active faults that threaten the Bay Area as a whole.
A severe Bay Area seismic event can produce damage in Brisbane. The Technical Studies
background report maps the City for potential ground-shaking intensity, landslide and debris
flow, liquefaction and tsunami susceptibility. (See Figures X-B - X-F.) A community can
prepare for a seismic event in several ways by:
-       making improvements to existing structures and facilities to withstand seismic forces;
-       constructing new structures and facilities to current seismic codes;
-       avoiding construction in hazard areas or installing mitigations if these areas cannot be
        avoided;
-       developing a Disaster Preparedness Plan;
                                               - 167 -
-      providing public information and preparing its citizens for the eventuality of an
       earthquake.
The policies below address these approaches:
Structural Improvements
Policy 149     Construct new buildings and retrofit existing ones to withstand seismic
               forces.
               Program 149a: Require that all new construction meet current codes for seismic
               stability.
               Program 149b: Consider a requirement, in conjunction with both residential and
               non-residential rehabilitation or reconstruction, that some portion of the
               improvements be devoted to improving seismic safety.
               Program 149c: Provide information to citizens on the necessity for seismic
               retrofit and on typical methods of upgrading existing structures.
               Program 149d: Continue to implement the City's Ordinance 354 regarding
               unreinforced masonry and pre-1973 tilt-up structures.
               Program 149e: Require soils reports and engineering recommendations for
               structural stability in conjunction with building permit applications in areas
               which have been identified as prone to seismically-induced landslides or
               subsidence in seismic events.
Public Awareness
Policy 150     Encourage citizens to become educated about and take an active role in
               earthquake preparedness.
               Program 150a: Develop programs to increase public awareness of seismic
               hazards and to educate the community on procedures that can help to minimize
               injury and property loss before, during, and after an earthquake.
Policy 151     Address the specific impacts and potential responses to seismic events
               through the City's Emergency Management Plan.
See Section X.1 on Emergency Preparedness for additional policies on seismic hazard.
                                               - 168 -
X.3 SLOPE STABILITY
Slope, the steepness of the land, is a fundamental factor in many hazards. Combined with
considerations of geology, soils, vegetation and drainage, slope determines potential for
landslides, debris flow and erosion.
Seismically-induced landslides are deep-seated failures involving bedrock. Often these
landslides are slow-moving, allowing time for evacuation of endangered structures or engineered
mitigation in advance of development. Debris flows are rapid movements of soil and colluvium
overlaying bedrock which occur rapidly and without warning.
Recent investigations have shown that the General Plan planning area is rated as having low
susceptibility to landslides. However the slopes of San Bruno Mountain are prone to debris flow
and much of the soil in the planning area is subject to erosion. The Technical Studies
background report (NR-1) provides greater detail on the characteristics of slope stability and
soils and maps levels of susceptibility to landslides, debris flows (See Figures X-C, X-D and X-
E) and erosion (refer to NR-1, pp. 11-8, 11-9).
The following policies address issues of slope stability:
Development Requirements
Policy 152      Consider issues of slope stability in conjunction with development
                applications.
                Program 152a: Require soil and geologic investigations in areas identified as
                prone to slope instability. Consider both on-site and off-site impacts.
                Program 152b: Unless adequate mitigating measures are undertaken, prohibit
                land alteration, including any grading and structural development, in identified
                areas of slope instability.
                Program 152c: Require topographical and soils information for all projects on
                slopes identified over 20%. (See Figure X-G.)
                Program 152d: Certificates of compliance shall be conditioned upon a
                comprehensive and detailed slope analysis.
                Program 152e: Encourage placement of structures away from areas identified as
                prone to slope failure or erosion unless effective mitigation measures are
                proposed as apart of the project design.
                                               - 169 -
17
17
17
17
17
17
                Program 152f: Require erosion control programs and revegetation on all
                disturbed slopes.
                Program 152g: Strictly enforce the provisions of the City's Grading Ordinance.
X.4 FLOOD HAZARD
Areas subject to flooding are located on fill deposits overlying historic tidal marshes. The
Technical Studies background report maps these tidal marshes as well as the boundary of the
historic shoreline. (See Figures X-B and X-H.) The flooding occurs at what were the mouths of
two intermittent streams, each emptying into estuaries. Current flooding problems result from
inadequate drainage in these areas. Also illustrated in Figure X-H is land within the 100 year
flood boundary as mapped by FEMA. On this map areas of localized roadway flooding during
heavy rains and/or high tides are shown. Areas subject to flooding may change as a result of
development projects and the installation of public improvements.
                                               - 176 -
17
The following policies address issues of flood hazard:
Policy 153    Require the construction of new improvements and the upgrade of existing
              stormwater infrastructure to mitigate flood hazard. (See Policy 130.2.)
              Program 153a: Construct improvements to the GVMID storm drainage system to
              accommodate stormwater from the Northeast Ridge and increase the overall
              capacity of the drainage system, as required in the conditions of approval for the
              Northeast Ridge Development Project.
              Program 153b: Work with Daly City and affected property owners to design
              improvements to alleviate flooding on the section of Bayshore Boulevard between
              Geneva Avenue and Main Streets.
              Program 153c: In conjunction with design of infrastructure to serve the Baylands,
              require that the property owner address the issue of flooding around the open
              drainage channel that flows west to east across the property.
Policy 154    Keep information on flood areas and storm drain infrastructure updated and
              available to the public.
              Program 154a: Apply to FEMA to update the FIRM maps to remove raised areas
              fixed by virtue of drainage improvements that are no longer within the 100 year
              flood boundary. Distribute updated maps to the public.
              Program 154b: On a regular basis, update the City's storm drain base maps to
              include new facilities and information.
Policy 155    Pay special attention to the condition and maintenance of storm drain
              facilities to avoid flooding.
              Program 155a: Schedule regular maintenance to remove silt and debris from
              storm drain facilities.
              Program 155b: As apart of Capital Improvements Planning, replace and repair,
              as economically feasible, storm drain facilities as needed to prevent flooding.
              Program 155c: Study the drainage basins to determine responsibility for siltation
              of storm drain facilities. Consider methods of assessing maintenance costs to
              responsible properties.
                                              - 178 -
X.5 FIRE HAZARD
Much of the residential area in Brisbane nestles up to steep slopes containing grass, brush and
woodland vegetation. This vegetation is subject to periodic fires caused by arson or by accident.
The California Department of Forestry considers three primary factors to determine the severity
of wildland fire hazard: fuel loading, fire weather and slope.
The Technical Studies background report maps these factors. (See Figure X-I.) Although
specific locations are mapped as moderate-to-high, the overall wildland fire hazard in Brisbane is
generally considered moderate due to the weather pattern of moist winds and fog, which result in
increased plant moisture content.
In the developed areas of the City, there is a fire hazard of a different nature. Residential
structures are built close together and on extreme elevation differences. Some structures have
limited or difficult access, which impacts the ability of firefighters to effectively attack interior
fires. In addition to residential structures, the City contains industrial warehouses and
manufacturing facilities, which use or store hazardous chemicals. There is bulk storage of
flammable liquids and gases, and there are non-residential buildings that are considered high-rise
or have other unusual features of construction. Each condition presents a specific set of
circumstances that must be considered in addressing the fire hazard.
Of special concern to the residential area are the long narrow hillside roads that provide difficult
access and limited turn-around opportunities for fire vehicles. Areas of special concern are
mapped in the Technical Studies background report. (See Figure X-L) Policies on road widths
and safety improvements to improve access for public safety vehicles and facilitate evacuation
are found in the chapter on Transportation and Circulation. That chapter also addresses the
issues raised by on-street parking that results in insufficient clearance for emergency vehicles.
Policies regarding responses to incidents involving hazardous materials are also found in Section
X.7.
                                                 - 179 -
- 180 
The following policies establish the City's approach to fire hazard in the General Plan period:
Systems and Materials
Policy 156    Take advantage of technology to require built-in fire safety systems using
              appropriate materials and technology.
              Program 156a: Consider adopting additional requirements for built-in safety
              systems, such as fire sprinklers and sensors or alarms, in all new construction.
              Program 156b: Consider adopting requirements for built-in safety systems in
              conjunction with building improvements.
              Program 156c: Continue requirements for fire-resistant roofing materials for all
              new buildings and for re-roofing of existing buildings.
              Program 156d: Encourage residential fire-sprinkler installation in conjunction
              with residential improvements along the urban wildland interface.
              Program 156e: Underground utilities throughout the City, as economically
              feasible. Require undergrounding of all utilities for all new development and the
              undergrounding of service drops where existing service is in place.
              Program 156f: Consider the adoption of landscaping standards for structures at
              the urban wildland interface to reduce fuel loading between the structures and the
              property line.
              Program 156g: On an ongoing basis, provide information to citizens on
              landscaping materials and maintenance practices that contribute to fire safety.
Codes and Enforcement
Policy 157    Administer and enforce health and safety codes related to fire safety on an
              on-going basis.
              Program 157a: Continue to notify property owners of hazardous conditions on
              their properties and enforce abatement of these conditions.
                                              - 181 -
             Program 157b: Enforce the provisions of the Uniform Building Code and the
             Uniform Fire Code and the Zoning Ordinance to address access, exiting,
             setbacks, materials and other design factors that contribute to fire safety.
             Program 157c: Cooperate with the California Department of Forestry in the
             implementation of the Bates Bill, AB 33 7, to map areas of Very High Fire Hazard
             Severity Zones, and to adopt the maps required by the legislation.
             Levels of Service
Policy 158   Provide a level of fire protection proportional to the size, risks and service
             demands of the community within budgetary constraints.
             Program 158a: 1n conjunction with development applications, evaluate fire
             service requirements, response times and levels of risk. Require impact fees and
             exactions to maintain the level of service and to provide for any special
             equipment needs.
             Program 158b: Coordinate with other agencies to maintain existing access roads
             to the Mountain.
             Program 158c: Continue to participate in the automatic and mutual aid greater
             alarm and other reciprocal response plans to provide the availability of adequate
             fire suppression capacity.
Public Education
Policy 159   Continue to provide public education in the areas of fire hazards, prevention
             and response.
             Program 159a: Provide training and information to citizens on fire safety and
             evacuation plans through community meetings and informational materials
             Program 159b: Encourage businesses to prepare pre-emergency plans and to
             train their employees on emergency response procedures and evacuation.
                                            - 182 -
X.6 PERSONAL AND PROPERTY SAFETY
                                                Question:     What do you like most about living
                                                              in Brisbane?
                                                Respondents: "The safety of a small secluded
                                                              town."
                                                              "Most of my neighbors are pleasant
                                                              and friendly and I don't worry about
                                                              crime."
                                                              "I feel safe. Often I walk around in
                                                              the dark from visiting, etc. and I'm
                                                              not afraid."
                                                              "I like the feeling of safety here and
                                                              the community feeling which makes
                                                              Brisbane a great place for raising
                                                              young children."
                                                              General Plan Survey Transcript (4)
Brisbane is fortunate to be a safe community, one with a comparatively low crime rate. In part,
this is because the residential community is somewhat isolated, with few access points. In part, it
is because of the close-knit nature of the community and its awareness of its surroundings. In
part, it is due to the City's focus on prevention.
For the Brisbane Police Department, prevention programs have had two main components:
police presence and community involvement. The availability of officers, neighborhood patrols
and quick response times have characterized safety services. In recent years community-oriented
policing has been a significant part of the prevention philosophy.
Community partnerships that promote education and crime prevention and foster close ties
between the Police Department and the Community have included the Neighborhood Contact
Program and the use of the Peninsula Conflict Resolution Center's Community Mediation
Program to promote non-arrest interventions. Both of these approaches seek to resolve problems
before they become issues of public safety.
A major focus of the Police Department has been the youth of the community. Department
Officers work closely with the Brisbane School District, providing drug education programs and
actively supporting the Police Activities League that works with the Recreation Department to
provide constructive activities for the young people in the community.
                                                - 183 -
In the next ten years, the focus on community and youth will remain a key component of City
policy on personal and property safety.
Law Enforcement
Policy 160      Provide a level of police protection of persons and property proportional to
                the size and law enforcement needs of the community within budgetary
                constraints.
                Program 160a: In conjunction with land use development applications, evaluate
                police service requirements and response times. Require impact fees and
                exactions to maintain the level of service.
                Program 160b: Continue to develop ongoing and accurate means of assessing the
                community's law enforcement needs and evaluating Police Department
                performance in addressing these needs.
Policy 161      Participate in mutual aid and other reciprocal response plans to support
                established response times and provide adequate police protection.
Policy 162      Continue to ensure that all police personnel receive appropriate and up-to-
                date job-related training.
Policy 163      Continue to ensure a three minute emergency response average and a ten
                minute average response to other calls for service.
Public Education
Policy 164      On an on-going basis, provide training and information to citizens that
                fosters crime prevention and promotes respect for community values.
                Program 164a: Continue to provide drug education and other programs that
                encourage constructive activities and positive values for the City's youth.
                Program 164b: Continue to develop public education programs in response to the
                needs and interests expressed by community members through the Neighborhood
                Contact Program or other community outreach programs.
                                               - 184 -
Community-Oriented Policing
Policy 165      To the fullest extent possible, involve the community in the process of
                identifying and solving problems that relate to personal and property safety
                in Brisbane.
                Program 165a: Continue to provide training to police personnel in the
                community-oriented, problem-solving approach to policing.
                Program 165b: Continue and consider expanding foot patrols as part of officers'
                daily activity and investigate feasibility of use of bicycles.
                Program 165c: Where appropriate, continue to encourage non-arrest
                interventions, such as mediation, that promote community-based problem solving.
                Program 165d: Develop a system of evaluation and rewards for police personnel
                that reflects community development and problem-solving accomplishments in
                addition to more traditional law enforcement achievements.
                Program 165e: Continue to develop community partnerships between the Police
                Department and other community groups and organizations to address the causes
                of crime, fear, and other issues regarding the welfare of the community.
                Program 165f: Continue to work with community organizations to develop an
                awareness of the problems in the community as well as the services provided by
                the City to address these problems.
                Program 165g: Establish a permanent police facility that is inviting and
                accessible to the community.
X.7 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
A hazardous material has a significant potential to cause harm to human health or the
environment. The hazards posed may vary substantially depending upon chemical composition,
physical state, concentration and exposure of the substance to humans and the environment.
Since the late 1970s, many Federal and State regulations have been instituted to address the
storage, disposal and transport of hazardous materials. Most of these laws preempt the authority
of local government, although in some instances a local government may act as the enforcement
agency. For example, the State has adopted lists of hazardous materials and thresholds to
establish hazard, adopted best management practices and established agencies that grant
hazardous materials permits. The Safety Background Report (SA-1, pages 19-25) gives further
information on applicable laws and responsible agencies, and describes when and how the City
becomes involved in hazardous materials management.
                                                - 185 -
One of the City's major responsibilities regarding hazardous materials is set forth in State
Assembly Bill AB 2185. This law requires that businesses that have or use hazardous materials
exceeding established minimum quantities must file a Hazardous Materials Management Plan
with a designated local agency. The plan must disclose the types, quantities, processes and
locations of materials on the site, identify the hazards posed and processes used, and specify a
safety plan. Regulations for storing and otherwise managing hazardous materials are found in
California's Uniform Fire Code. As the local agency administering hazardous material safety
plans, the Brisbane Fire Department administers State reporting requirements and, in
conjunction, enforces the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code. The Fire Department inspects
the site, verifies the information in the plan, and requires changes in storage and materials
handling whenever necessary to ensure safety. In the event of a hazardous materials release or
related hazard, the Fire Department will contact appropriate agencies, such as the County
Department of Environmental Health, the State Department of Toxic Substance Control, and the
State Office of Emergency Services, and cooperate with them to address the situation.
Hazardous materials are not only found in business and industry. In every household there are
paints, cleaners, solvents, pesticides or other similar materials that contain hazardous substances.
The proper handling and disposal of these materials is important to the safety of Brisbane
households.
This section establishes the City of Brisbane's policies regarding hazardous materials.
Policy 166       Protect the community's health, safety, welfare, natural resources and
                 property through regulation of the handling and storage of hazardous
                 materials, with specific focus on prevention of accidents.
                 Program 166a: Work closely with County, State and Federal agencies in the
                 regulation of hazardous materials.
                 Program 166b: Continue administration of Hazardous Materials Management
                 Plans through the Brisbane Fire Department.
Policy 166.1 Require disclosure, in a risk analysis, of all hazardous materials to be utilized
                 in research and development and biotechnical research, the assumptions that
                 were used, and methods of safe handling and disposal. The City has a
                 concern with and may exclude research and development and biotechnical
                 research uses which involve high use or generation of hazardous materials
                 and/or do not address public safety in handling and disposal to the City's
                 satisfaction.
                                                 - 186 -
                Program 1661a: In connection with any application for a proposed specific plan
                or land use development project involving biotechnical research activities,
                determine the nature and extent of any regulations that should be adopted to
                protect the public health and safety before any such specific plan or land use
                development application is approved
Policy 167      Provide information on hazardous materials and non-hazardous substitutes
                to residents and businesses.
Policy 168      Encourage the County of San Mateo to establish a safe collection station for
                hazardous wastes from households and small businesses that is convenient
                and accessible to Brisbane citizens, as addressed in the Household Hazardous
                Waste Element of the Integrated Waste Management Plan.
Policy 169      Strongly encourage Federal and State agencies to accelerate efforts to
                evaluate human health impacts from, and to establish legally enforceable
                standards for hazardous materials.
Policy 170      Participate, to the greatest extent feasible, in decision making regarding the
                location of hazardous waste treatment, collection and transfer stations
                proposed by adjacent jurisdictions to minimize risk and assure safety.
Policy 171      investigate any existing and proposed use of Brisbane's circulation system to
                transport hazardous waste in regard to safety.
X.8 LAND CONTAMINATION AND REMEDIATION
One of the areas of greatest change in both public awareness and legislative requirements in the
last 13 years is that of land contamination and remediation. During this time period, there has
been an increasing awareness that lands contaminated with hazardous materials have the
potential to pose risks to public health and safety. Hazardous materials are injurious substances,
such as pesticides, herbicides, toxic metals and chemicals, liquefied natural gas, explosives,
volatile chemicals, and nuclear fuels. Present and future generations bear a tremendous burden
resulting from the illegal and/or unregulated use and disposal of hazardous materials in the past.
In general, the owners and operators of an assessed parcel can be required by law to remedy
conditions of the parcel relating to releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances. The
federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980,
sometimes referred to as CERCLA or Superfund Act, is the most well known and widely
applicable of these laws. The California laws with regard to hazardous substances are also
stringent and similar. Under many of these laws, the owner or operator is obligated to remedy a
hazardous substance condition of property, whether or not the owner or operator has anything to
do with creating or handling the hazardous substances. There have been attempts to direct public
funds to remediation efforts, but there are insufficient public funds to remediate identified sites,
and the number of such sites is increasing as testing continues.
                                                - 187 -
There are two primary agencies with authority to issue orders regulating the remediation of
contaminated land and water: the Cal-EPA Department of Toxic Substances Control and the
Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Figure X-J illustrates the three areas of land identified in Brisbane as contaminated by industrial
materials for which orders have been issued and which are currently undergoing the remedial
action process under the authority of the Department of Toxic Substances Control and the Water
Quality Control Board. In addition, as of March 1994, 13 sites contaminated by leaking
underground storage tanks were undergoing remediation under the regulatory authority of the
San Mateo County Environmental Health Division.
There are also lands in the City that have a history of deposited materials, including municipal
solid waste, rubble, and other related materials. Figure X-K illustrates these areas. There are a
multitude of permits, agencies and testing requirements for development on solid waste landfill
sites. Primary regulatory authority rests with the State Integrated Waste Management Board.
The San Mateo County Environmental Health Division is the Local Enforcement Agency for the
California Integrated Waste Management Board and is responsible for the enforcement of the
State Minimum Standards for Solid Waste Handling and Disposal, the issuance of Solid Waste
Facility Permits and final approvals for closure and post-closure development of landfills in San
Mateo County. The Water Quality Control Board and the Department of Toxics Substances
Control have regulatory authority as well. Although the City of Brisbane lacks power to be
involved directly in the State-supervised clean-up and abatement process, the City retains the
power to regulate the use of this land through zoning, subdivision and other municipal
regulations. The City of Brisbane retains ultimate authority over land use for all properties
within its jurisdiction. For both the remediation of contaminated lands and landfill development,
there is a complex and fast-growing body of specialized technical rules and regulations under the
control of these regulatory and permitting agencies. New methods of remediation are constantly
being developed and included in remediation orders imposed by the agencies. The policies in
this section reflect the necessity for the City to communicate well and work closely with these
agencies so as to benefit from their knowledge and best understand how to plan for Brisbane's
future.
                                                 - 188 -
- 189 
- 190 
Policy 172 Establish that it is of the highest priority that contaminated lands in
           Brisbane be remediated.
           Program 172a: Communicate this priority to responsible State and Federal
           agencies and encourage these agencies to establish remediation plans and
           programs.
           Program 172b: Seek to direct State and Federal funds to remediate contaminated
           lands in Brisbane.
           Program 172c: Require private property owners to remediate contaminated lands
           consistent with State and Federal requirements.
           Program 172d: Continue to maintain good communications and working
           relationships with the Cal-EPA Department of Toxic Substances Control, the
           Water Quality Control Board and other agencies regulating remedial actions.
Policy 173 The City shall not grant approval of a development project on a
           contaminated site unless a plan for remediation of the site has first been
           approved and adopted by all Federal, State and local agencies having
           jurisdiction over the remediation plan.
Policy174  Include the remediation requirements of Federal, State and local agencies in
           the process of making determinations on land use designations and
           development applications.
           Program 174a: Take into account risk assessments and other technical studies
           prepared by governmental agencies when making land use determinations for
           contaminated lands.
           Program 174b: Condition all final approval of development projects on full
           compliance with all orders, remediation programs and mitigation measures
           imposed by regulatory agencies.
           Program 174c: Require applicants to provide for analysis by environmental
           engineers, toxicologists or other technical specialists deemed necessary by the
           City to process development applications and complete environmental review for
           projects on contaminated lands.
Policy 175 Assure that any development otherwise permitted on lands filled with
           municipal waste is safe by implementing the following programs.
                                          - 191 -
                Program 175a: Exchange information with the California Integrated Waste
                Management Board, San Mateo County Environmental Health Division and other
                responsible agencies regarding the requirements for safe and successful landfill
                development, utilizing the experience of Sierra Point.
                Program 175b: Require evidence that scientific testing and verification has taken
                place to the satisfaction of regulatory agencies.
                Program 175c: Encourage property owners of filled lands to complete all testing
                and related requirements of the Federal, State and local agencies well in advance
                of requesting land use permits from the City.
X.9 NOISE
In March 1992, a report was prepared for the City evaluating current noise levels in the planning
area (NO-1). After taking readings at various locations, noise contours were delineated on the
City base map illustrating the areas affected by continuous, on-going noise. A simplified version
of that map is included as Figure X-L which illustrates the CNEL 65dB noise corridors caused
by traffic. The CNEL 65dB measurement represents a noise level at which noise insulation
features are generally required.
The Figure illustrates that the noisiest areas in the City are those immediately adjacent to major
traffic corridors, especially those that accommodate a substantial amount of truck traffic, and that
Highway 101 generates a moderate-to-high steady noise impact continually along its corridor.
Figure X-L also shows where uses especially sensitive to noise, such as residential uses, are
affected by these noise corridors..
                                                - 192 -
- 193 
The Noise background report (NO-1) also speaks to the effects of single-event noise on the
community. Since the Brisbane residential community is especially quiet, it is most impacted by
flyover activity from San Francisco International Airport, especially in the early morning and
evening hours.
In March 1993, as a part of the General Plan alternatives survey, citizens were asked the
following question:
The existing General Plan calls for the reduction of noise in the City to acceptable levels. Here
is a list of specific types of noise. In your opinion, what type of noise would you most like to see
reduced.
Of 684 voter respondents, 73.39% picked airplane noise, followed by automobile/motorcycle at
12.57%. Construction noise, other residential noises, industrial noises and dogs each elicited
under 5% of the voter responses. Businesses responded similarly. (See Figure X-M.)
                                                 - 194 -
The survey results substantiate that the source of the noise most disruptive to the community is
airplane overflights, which is not within Brisbane's jurisdiction to regulate.
Overflight noise has been a long-standing source of irritation for residents and businesses. To
the extent that City actions can lessen noise impacts, policies to that end are included in this
document. Many policies speak to requirements for insulating structures and equipment,
constructing noise barriers and similar measures that can be implemented within the City's health
and safety authority. Other policies speak to political and legislative actions that can be taken by
City officials and citizens to attempt to protect the community from airplane overflights and
other impacts of regional uses. Both approaches are important in this General Plan period.
Consistent with the Government Code, the City of Brisbane's intent in the Noise Element is that
the community be protected from exposure to excessive noise.
Policy 176      Minimize the intrusion of unwarranted and intrusive noise on community
                life.
                Program 176a: Discourage new sources that generate excessive noise.
Transportation Noise
Policy 177      Maintain ongoing communication with County, State and Federal agencies in
                an effort to reduce noise impacts from regional uses.
Policy 178      Establish the reduction of overflights as the highest priority for noise control.
                Program 178a: Investigate obtaining from San Francisco Airport and/or Federal
                Aviation Administration better monitoring information on overflight noise impacts
                on the community, including single-event noise.
                Program 178b: Provide information to citizens on overflight impacts, airport
                operations and how to contact officials and agencies responsible for decisions
                that could result in overflights.
                Program 178c: Cooperate with other jurisdictions affected by aviation noise to
                insist that noise impacts are considered when decisions are made regarding
                airport operations.
                Program 178d: Communicate to local, State and Federal officials the City's
                position regarding the unwarranted impacts of overflights on the community.
                                                - 195 -
Policy 179      Require the incorporation, when feasible, of new road or landscaping
                features that buffer traffic noise impacts on adjacent areas.
Policy 180      Establish and enforce truck routes and times of operation for haul routes to
                minimize impacts on residential areas.
Policy 181      Support efforts to establish stricter noise emission standards for vehicle
                design.
Policy 182      Support efforts to reduce vehicle trips and keep smooth traffic flow to the
                extent that the number of trips and stop-and-start traffic contribute to traffic
                noise.
Policy 183      Coordinate land uses and construction conditions to minimize noise impacts
                of the Caltrain corridor and major highway arterials on adjacent land uses.
Land Use
Policy 184      In conjunction with development applications and other land use decisions,
                consider the potential for noise generation from, as well as noise impacts on,
                the project or area.
                Program 184a: Use the State Guidelines for land use compatibility to determine
                noise impacted uses.
                Program 184b: Require acoustical studies for development applications in areas
                identified as noise impacted and potential noise generators.
                Program 184c: For such projects, require a noise attenuation or a mitigation
                program to be submitted as a part of the project design.
Policy 185      Provide citizens with general information on noise insulating construction
                techniques and encourage them to include such features as part of new
                construction and remodeling projects.
Techniques that can be used to mitigate or attenuate noise include incorporating sound insulation
in construction, designing buildings to place sensitive areas and structural openings away from
noise sources, utilizing the shielding effects of topography, setbacks, landscape and natural
features, shielding with structural barriers, designing appropriate placement of mechanical
equipment, using acoustic shielding of equipment, and placing noise generating activities within
structures or in isolated locations.
                                                - 196 -
Enforcement
Policy 186   For noises that most directly affect neighbors, such as barking dogs and
             electronic equipment, communicate the need for citizens to be sensitive to the
             needs of others and utilize the Peninsula Conflict Resolution Center's
             Mediation Program as an integral part of the local enforcement procedure.
             Program 186a: Maintain an alternative dispute resolution program to allow
             neighbors to resolve issues in the first instance, if possible.
Policy 187   Enforce noise standards.
Local Standards
Policy 188   Periodically review Municipal Code noise standards for commercial and
             industrial operations.
Policy 189   In the Municipal Code, continue to restrict noise-producing construction
             activities to daytime hours of operation.
             Program 189a: Continue to incorporate regulations in the Municipal Code to
             provide a framework to enforce noise standards and impose penalties far
             violations.
             Program 189b: Periodically review the Municipal Code to update regulations
             based on new information and new technologies.
             Program 189c: Periodically hold training sessions for City personnel to provide
             noise information and review enforcement procedures.
             Program 189d: Provide information to citizens on how noise can be controlled
             and about City regulations and enforcement procedures.
Other Standards
             Program 189e: Cooperate with other agencies with authority to monitor and
             regulate noise, such as the Department of Transportation and OSHA, in order to
             reduce noise impacts on individuals, neighborhoods and businesses.
                                            - 197 -
X.10 AIR QUALITY
Air quality affects the health and welfare of every Brisbane resident and business. Although the
City's natural setting between the Mountain and the Bay, as well as the prevailing winds, bless it
with high quality air resources, local and regional emissions, which contribute a range of
pollutants to the air, degrade Brisbane's air quality and affect the City's health, welfare and
natural environment.
Since 1979, Federal, State and regional governments have prepared and adopted a substantial
body of plans and regulations pertaining to air quality. This regulatory framework is described in
the City's Air Quality technical background report (NR-2). The report also includes information
on emissions standards, regulation of direct (point) sources of pollutants and the numerous
programs adopted to affect transportation related impacts.
The Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) is the agency primarily responsible
for both monitoring and enforcing air quality standards. BAAQMD collects data from a number
of monitoring stations in the Bay Area to determine compliance with State and Federal standards
and to prepare air pollutant concentration maps. BAAQMD also identifies "hot spots," where
pollutants are especially concentrated and generate site specific public health issues.
In general, mobile sources (vehicles on roads and highways and airplanes) are the most
significant producers of air pollution in San Mateo County. Stationary sources, although they
generate much less pollution than mobile sources, are also significant because they can result in
"hot spots" and are responsible for odor complaints. In addition, stationary sources, such as the
quarry operation, generate suspended particulates, which, according to recent studies, may have
serious implications for public health.
The City of Brisbane, as part of the Bay Area, is impacted by regional air quality degradation.
Because there are major traffic corridors that traverse the City - Bayshore Boulevard and
Highway 101 - the City is also impacted by the emissions generated by the traffic on these
corridors. There are a number of businesses in the City that are required to have permits from
the BAAQMD because of use of materials or practices they use at the site. The Air Quality
background report contains information on these point sources, including the standards of
emissions that pertain to the materials used and a complaint history. (See NR-2.)
The policies in this section regarding air quality fall into four major categories: 1) working with
the BAAQMD; 2) mobile sources; 3) stationary sources; and 4) public action and information.
                                                - 198 -
Working with the BAAQMD
Policy 190   Cooperate with the Bay Area Air Quality Management District to facilitate
             the monitoring and enforcement of air quality standards.
             Program 190a: To the extent that the City is knowledgeable, inform the BAAQMD
             of point source violations of air quality standards and poor management
             practices and request that they proceed with strict enforcement.
             Program 190b: Refer to the BAAQMD all applications for land use permits that
             need permit review by that agency, including but not limited to gasoline stations,
             dry cleaning plants, print shops and auto body shops.
             Program 190c: Encourage the Bay Area Air Quality Management District to
             establish an air quality monitoring station in Brisbane.
Policy 191   Develop a working relationship with the BAAQMD to assist the City with the
             development and implementation of air quality improvement programs.
             Program 191a: Request the BAAQMD to provide the City, on a periodic basis,
             with updated information on air quality conditions, emissions sources, public
             health risks, and air quality regulations to assist the City in decision-making.
Policy 192   Encourage the BAAQMD to develop programs to increase local
             understanding of air quality and impact mitigation techniques.
             Program 192a: Encourage the BAAQMD to publish and distribute information
             and conduct training sessions on low-emission construction and industrial
             practices, air quality impact assessment methods, and effective mitigation
             controls.
Mobile Sources
Policy 193   As a part of land use development analysis, consider the impacts on air
             resources that will be generated by a project through mobile sources.
             Program 193a: Consider the design of roadways, transit facilities, bikeways and
             pedestrian access in all subdivisions, specific plans and other land use proposals
             to evaluate whether and to what extent the design addresses air quality issues.
                                             - 199 -
           Program 193b: In conjunction with land use development applications and CEQA
           review, evaluate whether a proposal may have a significant effect on air quality
           because of mobile emissions. Require environmental impact analysis and
           mitigation plans and monitoring, as appropriate.
           Program 193c: Discourage drive-up service windows and similar uses that
           generally result in vehicle idling.
Policy 194 Attempt to minimize dependence on automobile travel by encouraging
           transit, bicycle and pedestrian alternatives and incorporating alternatives to
           the automobile in land use planning and project design.
           Program 194a: Provide park-and-ride facilities to facilitate use of transit.
           Program 194b: Provide bicycle and pedestrian access to all areas of the City to
           provide alternatives to automobile use.
           Program 194c: Require all new development to include design principles that are
           transit oriented and otherwise reduce dependence on the automobile.
Policy 195 Express support for Federal and State programs to improve emissions
           control devices, reformulate gasoline, develop fuel efficient vehicles, and
           other technological advances that could serve to reduce mobile emissions.
Policy 196 Support efforts to control fuel emissions and excessive idling of airplanes at
           San Francisco International Airport.
Policy 197 Continue to improve existing roadways to reduce congestion in order to
           reduce emissions generated by "stop-and-go" driving.
           Program 197a: Use traffic management systems, such as signage and timed
           signals, to facilitate traffic flow and reduce congestion.
Policy 198 Actively participate in and support the development and implementation of
           transportation system management plans (TSMs) and transportation
           demand management measures (TDMs).
           Program 198a: Support the implementation of transportation demand
           management measures by private businesses, such as transit and carpool
           subsidies, preferential carpool/vanpool parking, flexible work schedules and ride
           matching services.
                                             - 200 -
             Program 198b: Encourage the installation of bicycle lockers, changing rooms
             and showers, guaranteed ride home, the provision of on-site support services in
             private businesses and other measures to reduce vehicular trips by employees.
             Program 198c: Consider providing incentives as apart of land use development
             permit approvals for the use of TSM and TDM measures.
Policy 199   Encourage County and regional transportation agencies to improve transit
             and transportation systems in ways that reduce mobile source emissions.
             Program 199a: Support efforts to improve efficiency and reduce emissions in the
             CalTrain system.
Stationary Sources
Policy 200   Express support for State and Federal programs to develop filter control
             devices, vapor recovery systems, leakless valves, reformulated surface
             coatings and solvents and other technological advances that could serve to
             reduce stationary emissions.
Policy 201   Encourage households and businesses to properly manage materials that
             affect air quality and replace these materials with safer alternatives
             whenever possible.
             Program 201a: Provide information on the effects on air quality from inefficient
             burning in old fireplaces and encourage citizens to clean fireplaces regularly.
Policy 202   Incorporate emissions control practices into City ordinances as appropriate.
             Program 202a: Strictly enforce the City's Grading Ordinance provisions for dust
             control.
             Program 202b: Require that demolition and construction projects conform to the
             BAAQMD recommended dust control measures.
             Program 202c: On a periodic basis, review the City's ordinance requirements to
             assure conformance with BAAQMD standards.
Policy 203   Consider issues of stationary emissions in land use planning and project
             review.
                                            - 201 -
              Program 203a: As part of land use planning, establish buffer zones between
              sensitive receptors and significant emissions sources, including uses that cause
              offensive odors or dust.
              Program 203b: In conjunction with any surface mining, oil and gas operation or
              industrial development land use permit, place strict conditions for compliance
              with best management practices for control of dust, odors and other emissions
              that have air quality impacts.
Public Action and Information
Policy 204    Cooperate with County, State and regional agencies to involve the public in
              planning for and implementing air quality improvement programs.
              Program 204a: Working with the BAAOMD and regional transportation
              agencies, develop and provide information to citizens on the air quality impacts of
              automobile emissions and encourage citizens to reduce automobile trips for the
              benefit of the community.
              Program 204b: With the assistance of the BAAQMD and environmental groups,
              provide information to citizens on the air emissions impacts of materials such as
              paints, solvents and spray cans, and encourage citizens to substitute safer
              materials.
              Program 204c: Inform citizens, through water bill inserts and other publications,
              of how to contact the BAAQMD to file complaints regarding air quality violations
              and encourage citizen involvement in enforcement of air quality regulations.
Policy 205    Cooperate with the County of San Mateo and the Congestion Management
              Agency in the development of air resources policies and programs to ensure
              consistency between local activities and regional efforts to achieve Federal
              and State air quality standards.
                                             - 202 -
X.11 WATER SUPPLY AND QUALITY
Water for domestic use and for fire protection is supplied to Brisbane by the San Francisco
Water Department, with the supply guaranteed by contractual agreement. The water originates in
the Sierra Nevada Mountains and is collected and transported to the Peninsula through the Hetch
Hetchy aqueduct system. Water quality is generally excellent. The water is distributed to users
through the City of Brisbane and the Guadalupe Valley Municipal Improvement District
(GVMID).(5)
In general, existing water systems are considered adequate to provide for domestic, commercial
and industrial consumer requirements. The Brisbane water system is currently comprised of
three pressure zones, and pressure is generally adequate for fire flow purposes, except for certain
locations on Paul Avenue, Thomas Avenue and Harold Road. Fire protection service is also
adequate except in the current GVMID service area where an additional 1,490,000 gallons of
storage are needed to service Crocker Park to current standards. Pipe friction tests indicate that
the older cast iron pipe in the Brisbane water system is in poor condition and possibly nearing
the end of its useful life. The GVMID system is in fair condition.
Future development in Brisbane, if permitted, will require the expansion of water utilities. The
elevation of areas proposed for new services relates directly to the cost and practicality of
providing water flows and the pressure required for domestic purposes and fire protection.
The focus of General Plan policies for water supply in the next ten years is threefold: upgrading
existing infrastructure, meeting current fire protection requirements and installing new
infrastructure. Policies on water conservation are found in Chapter IX, Conservation. Also see
Chapter VI, Transportation and Circulation.
Policy 206      Upgrade and maintain the existing water distribution system.
                Program 206a: As a part of the annual budget and Capital Improvements
                Program, schedule ongoing replacement and maintenance of the existing system.
                Program 206b: On an ongoing basis, review water connection and service rates
                to assure sufficient revenues to provide for maintenance and upgrading of the
                system.
                Program 206c: Take advantage of opportunities to apply special funds, such as
                grants, to the upgrade of the existing system.
Policy 207      Establish pressure zone(s) for water improvements and prohibit private on-
                site water tanks.
                                                - 203 -
Policy 208      If new development occurs, require infrastructure to be installed to City
                standards.
                Program 208x: In conjunction with land use development
                applications for vacant lands, require studies to estimate the needs
                for domestic water and fire protection and require infrastructure to
                be designed and installed, at the developer's expense, to the
                satisfaction of the City.
Policy 209      Require, as feasible, all trunk water lines to be installed in
                dedicated public streets.
Policy 210      Developers and property owners who wish to build on their land
                in undeveloped areas where infrastructure does not currently
                exist shall provide the infrastructure for water distribution, fire
                protection and water connections to the City's service at their
                own expense.
Policy 211      On an ongoing basis, review requirements for fire protection.
                Program 211a: Require additional water storage for fire protection
                to be provided to service Crocker Park and the Quarry in
                conjunction with any redevelopment of Quarry lands.
                Program 211b: Consider requirements far additional protective
                devices, such as residential sprinklers and alarms, for residences on
                Paul Avenue, Thomas Avenue and Harold Road.
X.12 SANITARY SEWER AND STORM DRAINS
The City of Brisbane has separate sanitary sewer and storm drain systems.
Sanitary Sewer
The City is served by two sanitary sewer districts: the City of Brisbane and the Bayshore
Sanitary District. The City's sewer service area boundary currently encompasses approximately
the southern half of the City's present corporate boundaries. The Bayshore Sanitary District,
which collects wastewater from its service area and pumps the flow to the City of San
Francisco's treatment plant, serves the northern part of the City, which is, for the most part,
vacant land.(6) The City sewer district has been developed and expanded over the years as vacant
lands have been developed. The single largest expansion was the annexation of the Guadalupe
Valley Municipal Improvement District facilities. Treatment for sewage generated within the
City of Brisbane's service area also takes place at the San Francisco Southeast Water Pollution
Control plant on Jerrold Avenue under a contractual agreement with San Francisco that
guarantees a capacity in excess of current City needs.
                                               - 204 -
The City's existing system consists of a network of gravity mains along with a number of lift
stations that push sewage uphill from low areas. None of the City's existing trunk lines are
deficient; however the system is aging.(7)
The major sewer problem facing Brisbane's residents concerns private lateral lines, which, due to
the topography and history of development in Central Brisbane, may cross one or more private
properties before connecting to the City's trunk line. These laterals are aging and are often
difficult to access for replacement or maintenance. Maintenance agreements between private
parties may not have been recorded or may have been misplaced over the years. Often access
easements were not recorded, but were considered agreements between friends. With the
passage of years and the transfer of properties, this history has resulted in considerable stress on
the community, and the City is often asked to help resolve conflicts between private property
owners regarding lateral maintenance or replacement.
In the interest of improving the safety of the existing system under this General Plan, the policies
in this chapter speak to both the City's system and private lines.
Policy 212      Monitor the City's sanitary sewer trunk lines in Central Brisbane and the
                lines in Crocker Park for signs of failure and to identify areas in need of
                repair.
                Program 212a: As a part of the annual budget and Capital Improvements
                Program, schedule ongoing replacement and maintenance of the trunk line
                system, as needed.
                Program 212b: On an ongoing basis, review sewer connection and service rates
                to assure sufficient revenues to provide for the maintenance and replacement of
                the system.
                Program 212c: Take advantage of opportunities to apply special funds, such as
                grants, to improvements of the existing system.
Policy 213      If new development occurs, require trunk and lateral lines to be installed to
                City standards.
                Program 213a: In conjunction with land use development applications for vacant
                lands, require studies to determine capacity and design requirements for sanitary
                sewer services and require infrastructure design and installation to the
                satisfaction of the City at developer's expense.
Policy 214      Require, as feasible, that all sanitary sewer lines be installed within dedicated
                public streets.
                                                - 205 -
Policy 215      Sanitary sewer service to undeveloped areas where facilities do not currently
                exist shall be installed and connected to the City's system at the property
                owner or developer's expense.
Policy 216      If development occurs, extend City sanitary sewer service to currently
                undeveloped areas so that all new users within the City Limits are served by
                the City as legally permissible.
Policy 217      Continue to require removal of existing septic tanks and connection to the
                City's sanitary sewer system.
                Program 217a: Review the provisions in the Municipal Code to determine if
                amendments would make septic tank regulations easier to understand and
                enforce.
                Program 217b: Require immediate removal of any septic tank that requires
                pumping more than once per year.
                Program 217c: Require all existing septic tanks to be inspected and receive a
                permit from the County Department of Environmental Health.
Policy 218      Discourage more than one single-family property on any lateral sewer line. If
                infeasible, require recorded sewer access and maintenance agreements
                between all parties sharing the line.
Storm Drains
There are two major watersheds that affect the City of Brisbane: the 640.6 acre Visitacion Valley
Watershed which includes parts of Daly City; and the 1,322 acre Guadalupe Valley Watershed
which includes parts of unincorporated San Mateo County. Five smaller drainage basins are
located within the City. The major influences from outside the City are the stormwater that
comes from Daly City and the runoff from the American Rock and Asphalt Quarry.(8)
The major issue with the existing stormwater system is flooding in the areas described in Section
X.4, above. The existing brick arch sewer under Bayshore Boulevard, if cleaned of debris, may
be able to handle a five-year storm, but not more significant events. Two other restrictions in the
system are the 36 inch culvert on the PG&E property and the 36 inch storm drain on Bayshore
Boulevard north of Main Street.
Other areas identified as needing improvements are the inlets at the intersection of Industrial
Way and Bayshore Boulevard, the open channel from Bayshore Boulevard to the Brisbane
Lagoon that runs through the new Fire Station site, some storm drains in Valley Drive, and the
pipe at the intersection of Bayshore Boulevard and Valley Drive.
                                               - 206 -
In general, facilities that are concrete structures are in good condition, but metal pipes are
corroded and may be in need of replacement in the near future. In addition, in steeper terrain,
some pipes may be separating at the joints.
The impacts of undirected and uncollected stormwater pose significant problems on private
properties. Storm runoff, if uncollected, can cause severe erosion or landslides, especially on the
steep slopes in Central Brisbane. Likewise, if runoff ponds near structures and is not carried to
the City's system, severe property damage may occur.
The policies in this General Plan address drainage facilities on both public and private properties.
The policies address areas of the City that are built and those that are currently undeveloped.
Policy 219      Monitor the City's storm drain system for signs of siltation and flooding.
                Identify areas in need of maintenance, repair or replacement.
                Program 219a: As a part of the annual budget and Capital Improvements
                Program, schedule maintenance, repair and replacement as needed.
                Program 219b: Consider fee assessments to provide for the maintenance and
                repair of the system.
                Program 219c: Coordinate programs to control siltation with the Regional Water
                Quality Control Board, Daly City and San Mateo County.
Policy 220      Take advantage of special programs which may become available to make
                improvements to the system.
Policy 221      If new development occurs, require storm drain systems to be installed to
                City standards.
                Program 221a: In conjunction with land use development applications for vacant
                lands, require studies to determine design requirements to collect and remove
                stormwater from the property or reuse stormwater to benefit the public. Require
                facilities to be designed and installed to City standards, at developer's expense.
Policy 222      Require that all storm drain lines be installed within dedicated public streets.
Policy 223      Storm drains in undeveloped areas where facilities do not currently exist
                shall be installed at the property owner or developer's expense.
                                                 - 207 -
Policy 224 In conjunction with development applications that place substantial
           increased demands upon the existing system, require that the system be
           upgraded or replaced to the satisfaction of the City. Contributions from
           responsible parties should be proportional to the impact of their projects.
           Program 224a: Install stormwater system improvements to Valley Drive and
           Bayshore Boulevard as set forth in the Conditions of Approval for the Northeast
           Ridge Development Project.
Policy 225 Ensure that stormwater systems in Crocker Park and the Northeast Ridge
           meet City standards.
Policy 226 Undertake drainage studies to determine responsibility for siltation of the
           system and seek opportunities to assess the responsible parties for
           maintenance costs.
           Program 226a: Consider environmental sensitivities in conjunction with drainage
           studies.
Policy 227 Cooperate with Daly City, responsible property owners, and responsible
           agencies to develop plans to improve the storm facilities on Bayshore
           Boulevard to relieve flooding.
Policy 228 Establish requirements in the Municipal Code for the installation of
           stormwater collection systems on private properties.
           Program 228a: Require new construction and substantial renovation projects to
           provide roof gutters and leaders that direct stormwater through the curb to the
           City street so that the water can be collected in City facilities.
           Program 228b: Require drainage plans to be submitted in conjunction with land
           use development applications, including those for building permits, as applicable
           to the project.
           Program 228c: Provide public information on the safety aspects of dealing with
           stormwater and encourage homeowners and businesses to make necessary
           improvements and repairs.
           Program 228d: Comply with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System,
           as required.
                                           - 208 -
                                     FOOTNOTES
1. SA-1, p. 11
2. SA-1, p. 12
3. In addition to debris flows mapped by the U.S. Geological Survey in 1983, local
   incidents during the winter of 1982 were identified at the following locations: behind the
   building at 180 West Hill Place; from Harold Road to McLain Road at San Bruno
   Avenue; from Costanos Canyon to 405 Sierra Point Road; above Kings Road at San
   Mateo Lane; Sierra Point Canyon above Kings Road; from the Glen Parkway tank down
   Firth Canyon and through Firth Park to San Bruno Avenue; down Old Quarry Road to
   San Francisco Avenue; and numerous other locations on the Mountain. Source: Vince
   Marsili, City of Brisbane Public Works Department, 1994.
4. GP-5
5. The background report on Water (UT-3) contains a detailed description of the water
   systems and water quality in the planning area.
6. UT-2, Figure 2
7. A detailed description and analysis of the planning area's sewer system is contained in the
   Sewer System Evaluation background report (UT-2).
8. The Storm Drain background report contains detailed descriptions and analysis of the
   watersheds and storm water systems in the planning area.
                                         - 209 -
                                                       Adopted by City Council on September 17, 2015
                                                                                  Resolution 2015-38
                                           CHAPTER VI
                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
GOALS:
Circulation
The City of Brisbane will be a place…
       Where there is an established rational relationship between land use and circulation in
       place to guide the City into the future;
       Where all users of the transportation network can travel safely and comfortably throughout
       Brisbane;
       Where Complete Streets are integrated into the transportation network to provide for a
       balanced, connected, safe and convenient multi-modal network;
       Where reliable public transit services are promoted and expanded, creating viable
       transportation alternatives to the automobile;
       Where parking needs have been reasonably balanced to encourage walkable
       neighborhoods, economic vitality, safety and convenience; and
       Where the transportation network serves the needs of residents as well as commercial and
       industrial businesses.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 2 -
                                          VI CIRCULATION ELEMENT
This circulation element addresses how the City of Brisbane will maintain, enhance and expand its
circulation system to best meet the needs of its residents, business community, and visitors travelling to,
from or through Brisbane.
Key considerations in Brisbane’s circulation system planning are to recognize the land use context within
the various areas of the City and the existing geographic or physical constraints in those areas, while at
the same time recognizing opportunities for improvements and potential connections within the larger
regional circulation network that will best serve the community. These considerations are reflected in
Brisbane’s circulation element goals, as detailed on the previous page, as well as through the policies and
programs that follow.
In working to enhance both the local function of the circulation network and its regional connections,
Brisbane will continue in its collaborative efforts with other local and regional agencies and will continue
to seek various regional, state, and federal funding resources for projects which are of local and regional
concern.
Brisbane’s goals are consistent with the state and regional goals which are expressed through the Bay
Area’s Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) and the Association of Bay Area Governments’
(ABAG’s), “Plan Bay Area” and the intent of the California Complete Streets Act of 2008 (AB 1358,
Leno) , codified in Sections 65040.2 and 65302 of the Government Code.
This element is organized as follows:
           VI.1 Description of Circulation System
               o Streets and Highways
               o Transit Systems
           VI.2 Traffic Flow, Convenience and Access
               o Level of Service
               o North-South and East-West Corridors
               o Street Standards
           VI.3 Traffic safety
               o Local Residential Streets
               o Arterial Streets
               o Truck Routes
               o Street Signage
               o Improvements Funding
               VI.4 Complete Streets
               o Bicycles and Pedestrians
               o Transit
               VI.5 Transportation Management
               VI.6 Parking

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 3 -
               VI.7 Circulation and Land Use
               VI.8 Green Streets
               VI.9 Other Transportation Modes
Certain aspects of this element address broad policy issues while others are more detailed implementation
programs. Given the technical nature of transportation issues, engineering analysis and judgment are
integral to the implementation of the element. Where policies or programs refer to a City action, they
may include tasks or decisions involving City Council and potentially multiple City departments, and/or
professional engineering work under the responsible charge of the City Engineer. This is determined on a
case-by-case basis, by the City, consistent with state law regulating the work to be done by qualified,
licensed engineering professionals.
Figures C.1 and C.2 show the circulation system within the planning area, including the major
thoroughfares as well as the local street network. Figure C.3 illustrates changes to the circulation system
in the planning area.
VI.1 DESCRIPTION OF CIRCULATION SYSTEM
VI.1.1 STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
The San Francisco Bay and San Bruno Mountain are the major determinants of the geographic layout of
the street and highway system serving the planning area, with Highway 101 and Bayshore Boulevard
serving as the main transportation corridors to and through the City. The following provides a brief
outline of the major streets and highways. Streets or highways are assigned a functional classification,
based on a hierarchy of the function, which corresponds to vehicular travel movement capacity.
     1. Freeway or expressway: Freeways or expressways are limited access, high-speed travel-ways,
           which are included in the state and federal highway systems. They carry regional through traffic,
           and access is provided at interchanges, generally at intervals of one mile or greater. Brisbane has
           one freeway, U.S. Interstate Highway 101, along its eastern edge.
     2. Principal and minor arterials: Arterials are major streets that primarily serve through traffic and
           on a limited basis they may provide access to abutting properties. They are generally designed
           with 4 to 6 lanes and major intersections are usually signalized. Brisbane has both principal and
           minor arterials, with the minor arterials in Brisbane being only two lanes, except for the eastern
           portion of Valley Drive, which is four lanes.
     3. Major and Minor collectors: Collector streets connect arterial streets and local streets with
           reduced traffic volumes and generally narrower roadways than the arterials. They generally have
           two travel lanes, parking lanes, sidewalks, and street trees or planting strips.
     4. Local: Local streets provide access to individual abutting properties as their primary function.
           Local streets have no more than two travel lanes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         City/County Boundary (approx.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Alana
                                                                                                Gen                                                                                                                                                    Beatty Rd
                                                                                                    e    va A                                                                                                                                                                                              yW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rn e
                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ay
                                                                                                                   Ma
                                                                                                                      in        St
                                          Gua
                                              d            alup
                                                     El
                                                                e              Ca n
                                                       de
                                                             rb                       y on
                                          Bu                    e   rry                        Pkwy                                                                        Ind
                                            tte
                                               rw                         Ln                                                                                                   ust
                                                      ee
                                                         d                                                                                                                      rial
                             Lily Ct                          Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                             ste
                                 r Ct                                                                                                                                             Wa
                       enA             t
                  Gold              yC
                                err
                            leb
                       u ck                            pi
                                                     Lu
                                                                                                                            Ln
                     H
                                                    Ca                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                         er           tD
                                                            ne
                                                      lli
                                                                                                                     rb l
                                               n
                                          Elfi                                                                                     po
                                                            ppVly
                                                                                                                                         E ag
                                                                                                                  Wa
                                                               e
                                                                                                                                rS           le Ln                                                                                                             nel
                                                                   Ct
                                                                    Ct
                                             Ct
                                                                                                                             ke
We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tun
   st                                                                                                            R oc
                                                                                                                          ec
                                     r
                                                                                                                Wre k
        Hil                   ll D                                              Mission Blue Dr          n
           l Pl           i                                                                           Ta
                                                                                                                     Ch
                     st H                                                                                          n Ln
                  We                                                                                                                 Gold
                                                                                                          er                                                                                                                                                  A ve
                                                                                                        ag
                                                                                                                                          en              Cliff
                                                                                                             Ct
                                                                                                                                                        Swallow Ct
                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                       M                   Re k
                                                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T ra
                                                                                                                            Ha
                                                                                                                       t re l
                                                                                                        on
                                                                                Vall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca l
                                                                                                                   Ke s
                                                                                     e                    ar               Fox L n
                                                                                         yD                    ch
                                                                                           r                                rr ow
                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                   r    Spa
                                                                                                                         Ct
                                                   So                                                                        ll Dr
                                                      ut   hH                                                        North Hi                                                                                                             in
                                                                ill D
                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                           Cypress                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ay
                                                                                                                                  Valley Dr                  Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sh                                                               Lagoon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o     re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pa               Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                    rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln     Par    Ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k        dC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                             San Francisco Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                     St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Iny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          no
                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                 So la n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U.S. 1
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ma
                                                                                                                                                                        Pt R                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                          rip
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ma
                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                                                                    os
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ru
                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                       a  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pl u       nB
                                                                                                                                                                     Sierr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Santa
                                                                                                                                                 y Rd                                                i on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                           a                               Monterey St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sa                                  Tulare
                                                                                                                                                                                                   itac
                                                                                                                                               Trin                                                       Mendocino St
                                                                                                                                                   it                                                                                                       Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vi s
                                                                                                                                                                                 Mono
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sierra
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Klamath St                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Thomas
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Alvarado Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   oint Pk
                                                                                                                                                               Hum                                        San Benito Rd
                                                                                                                                                                   b           oldt
                                                                                                                                                                                    R        d                       Si                                                         Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       er                              y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ra                      Wa                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pt                               e                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd           ark       La
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kings Rd                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gl e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Marina Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                        City Boundary (approx.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pt   Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sierra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 reli
                                         Freeway
                                         Principal Arterial
                                         Minor Arterial                                                                                                    
                                         Major Collector
                                         Local                                                                                                                                                                   Feet                                           Figure C-1
                                         Private
                                                                                                                                 0                   500 1,000                                                2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Existing Street Classification
                                                                                                                            Valley Dr                            Ba
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                       re              Tu
                                                                                                         Pla                                                                                nn
                                                                                                             c                                                       ho
                                                                                                                                                                   ys                          el
                                                                                Pa                      rk
                                                                                   rk                  Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                                                                                        l       Av
                                                                                          La                                                                                         ou             e
                                                                                                ne                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                       ev
                                                                                                                                                                                            rd
                                                  So
                                                       lan
                                                             oS                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                            Old County Rd                                                               lTr
                                                                             San Francisco Ave                                                                                                                                              ai n
                                         Rd
                              o   ld t
                           mb
                                                                                           t
                      Hu
                                                                                         oS                                               um
                                                                  Ma
                                                                     ri p               Iny                                            Pl
                                                                         osa                                                                 as
                                                                                    St
                                         int R                                                                                                   St
                                              d
                                                             Mo
                                     a Po
                                                                                                                                                                                       Santa
                                                               nte                              Av
                                                                                                                                                                  Alvar
                                                                          rey                     e
                                                                                   St
                                  S i e rr                                                itac
                                                                                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                              ion                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                      ado S              Clara S
                                                       Me                                                                                            n
                                                          nd                             Vi s                                                     Sa
Trin
                                                                   o ci
                                                                          no
     ity R
                                                                               St                                                                     Br
           d                                                                                                                                               oA
                                                   Kl a                                                                                                  un
                                                          ma
                                                                  th S                                                                                     ve
                                                                         t
                                                        Mono St
               Rd
           gs
        Kin                                                                                           Alvarado St
                                             San Ben
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Thomas Ave
                                                     ito Rd                      Ave
                                                                      Visitacion
                                                                                                                   San Benito
                                                                                                                              Rd                                                                              Tulare St
                                                  Sie
                                                      rr     aP
                                                                   oin
                                                                          tR
                                                                               d
                                                                                                                       Hu                                                                                St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Joy
                                                                                                                            m                                                                    ke
                                                                                                                                bo                                              ay
                                                                                                                                     ld                                                        La
                                  Margaret
                                                                                                                                                                       P ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av e
                                                                                                                                        t   Rd                  Ros
                                                                                                                                                                      sW
                                                                                        Kings Rd                                                                           kW   ay
                       u
                    Pa                                                                                                                                           Gle
                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                     Ave
                      lA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                           ve                                                                                                                                                          oint R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ct
                                                                                                                                                                              P                           d
                                                                                                                                                                       Sierra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is R
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tR                o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Di                                                       y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               An n                                   Glad
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ld             eg
                                                                                                                                                                                                    bo
                                                                                                                                                                                               m              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s Av
                                                                                                                                                                                            Hu                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Harold Rd
                           Principal Arterial
                           Minor Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                    Figure C-2
                           Major Collector                                                                                                                  Existing Street Classification
                           Local                                                                                                                   Feet
                           Private
                                                                                                0     180        360                             720           Central Brisbane Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                         City/County Boundary (approx.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Alana                 New Freeway
                                                                                                Gen                                                                                                                                                    Beatty Rd                                                 Interchange
                                                                                                    e    va A                                                                                                                                                                                              yW     Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rn e
                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Geneva Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Proposed Extension
                                                                                                                   Ma
                                                                                                                      in        St
                                                                                                                                                               Multimodal Station
                                                                                                                                                                   Proposed
                                          Gua
                                              d            alup
                                                                e              Ca n                                                                                                    Various Baylands
                                                     El
                                                       de
                                                             rb                       y on                                                                                     New Proposed Street Improvements -
                                          Bu                    e   rry                        Pkwy                                                                        Ind
                                            tte
                                               rw
                                                      ee
                                                                          Ln                                                                                                   ust   Subject to Specific Plan
                                                         d                                                                                                                      rial
                             Lily Ct                          Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                             ste
                                 r Ct                                                                                                                                             Wa
                       enA             t
                  Gold              yC
                                err
                            leb
                       u ck                            pi
                                                     Lu
                                                                                                                            Ln
                     H
                                                    Ca                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                         er           tD
                                                            ne
                                                      lli
                                                                                                                     rb l
                                               n
                                          Elfi                                                                                     po
                                                            ppVly
                                                                                                                                         E ag
                                                                                                                  Wa
                                                               e
                                                                                                                                rS           le Ln                                                                                                             nel
                                                                   Ct
                                                                    Ct
                                             Ct
                                                                                                                             ke
We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tun
   st                                                                                                            R oc
                                                                                                                          ec
                                     r
                                                                                                                Wre k
        Hil                   ll D                                              Mission Blue Dr          n
           l Pl           i                                                                           Ta
                                                                                                                     Ch
                     st H                                                                                          n Ln
                  We                                                                                                                 Gold
                                                                                                          er                                                                                                                                                  A ve
                                                                                                        ag
                                                                                                                                          en              Cliff
                                                                                                             Ct
                                                                                                                                                        Swallow Ct
                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                       M                   Re k
                                                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T ra
                                                                                                                            Ha
                                                                                                                       t re l
                                                                                                        on
                                                                                Vall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca l
                                                                                                                   Ke s
                                                                                     e                    ar               Fox L n
                                                                                         yD                    ch
                                                                                           r                                rr ow
                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                   r    Spa
                                                                                                                         Ct
                                                   So                                                                        ll Dr
                                                      ut   hH                                                        North Hi                                                                                                             in
                                                                ill D
                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                           Cypress                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ay
                                                                                                                                  Valley Dr                  Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sh                                                               Lagoon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o     re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pa               Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                    rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln     Par    Ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k        dC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                             San Francisco Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                     St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Iny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          no
                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                 So la n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U.S. 1
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ma
                                                                                                                                                                        Pt R                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                          rip
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ma
                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                                                                    os
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ru
                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                       a  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pl u       nB
                                                                                                                                                                     Sierr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Santa
                                                                                                                                                 y Rd                                                i on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                           a                               Monterey St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sa                                  Tulare
                                                                                                                                                                                                   itac
                                                                                                                                               Trin                                                       Mendocino St
                                                                                                                                                   it                                                                                                       Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vi s
                                                                                                                                                                                 Mono
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sierra
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Klamath St                                      St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Thomas
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Alvarado Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       oint Pk
                                                                                                                                                               Hum                                        San Benito Rd
                                                                                                                                                                   b           oldt
                                                                                                                                                                                    R        d                       Si                                                         Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       er                              y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ra                      Wa                 St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pt                               e                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd           ark       La
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kings Rd                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gl e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Marina Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                        City Boundary (approx.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pt   Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sierra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     reli
                                         Freeway
                                         Principal Arterial
                                         Minor Arterial                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure C-3
                                         Major Collector                                                                                                                                                                                                           Proposed
                                         Local                                                                                                                                                                   Feet
                                                                                                                                 0                   500 1,000                                                2,000                                        Circulation Improvements
                                         Private
CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 7 -
The street classifications within Brisbane are generally described as follows:
U.S. Highway 101- Freeway/Expressway
The U.S. 101 freeway traverses the eastern edge of Brisbane and is the main corridor serving north-south
traffic along the San Francisco Peninsula between the Santa Clara Valley and San Jose to the south and
San Francisco to the north. Highway 101 on- and off-ramps within Brisbane are limited to those at Beatty
Avenue and the north and south ends of Sierra Point Parkway.
Principal Arterials
Bayshore Boulevard: Bayshore Boulevard is a decommissioned State Highway and is now a City owned
and maintained principal arterial. It effectively serves as the transportation spine for the community,
connecting Brisbane to San Francisco, Daly City, and South San Francisco. Together with its connecting
minor arterial streets, Bayshore Boulevard also provides linkages to and from Highway 101. As a result,
Bayshore Boulevard’s performance affects all traffic access and circulation through the City.
A principal challenge for Bayshore Boulevard is providing for safe access and egress for sites located
along its frontage while maintaining its function as a principal arterial. Another challenge has been
providing for safe and comfortable access for bicyclists and pedestrians. In 2008 and 2011, bikeways
were completed on both sides of Bayshore Boulevard, in part with funding obtained by the City through
the California Transportation Development Act. These bikeways include 6 foot wide striped bike
shoulders and rumble strips, which have enhanced their function within the regional bikeway network and
have helped address bicycle access and safety.
Questions for the future remain regarding the function and design of Bayshore Boulevard along its
different sections and how it may be changed over time to best meet the needs of the community, while
functioning as an arterial for traffic through, and in and out of the City.
Guadalupe Canyon Parkway & Geneva Avenue: Guadalupe Canyon Parkway and Geneva Avenue are
east-west principal arterials, both with their eastern terminus at Bayshore Boulevard, providing links to
Daly City. Short segments of Alana Way and Harney Way are within Brisbane and serve as principal
arterials connecting to Highway 101 from Beatty Ave. in Brisbane and Harney Way at Candlestick Point.
Geneva Avenue borders the northwest corner of the City and is within the jurisdiction of Daly City.
Upon development of the Baylands, an extension of Geneva Avenue will be constructed to serve as the
east-west arterial through the new development and provide an important connection to Highway 101
This would replace the current Highway 101 on- and off-ramp interchange at Alana Way and Harney
Way.
Minor Arterials
Visitacion and San Bruno Avenues connect with Old County Road in Central Brisbane and all three
streets serve as minor arterials for this area. Old County Road becomes Tunnel Avenue as it crosses over
Bayshore Boulevard, and connects with Beatty Avenue and Lagoon Way. Lagoon Way then connects
with Sierra Point Parkway. All of these are classified as minor arterials. Similarly, Valley Drive (eastern
portion), North Hill Drive and the eastern portion of Mission Blue Drive serve as minor arterials in the
Crocker Park and Northeast Ridge subareas.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 8 -
Tunnel Avenue provides an alternative to Bayshore Boulevard, while Sierra Point Parkway provides
access/egress for the Sierra Point subarea. The Tunnel Avenue railroad overpass was replaced in 2007 to
meet current seismic safety standards, to improve the geometry of the crossing, and to provide bike and
pedestrian lanes. This recent accomplishment has added significantly to the viability of Tunnel Avenue
as an alternative to Bayshore Boulevard. The remaining portions of Tunnel Avenue and its connecting
streets will also be further improved upon development of the Baylands.
Lagoon Way serves as the east-west connection between Central Brisbane and access to southbound
Highway 101, via Tunnel Avenue. Beatty Avenue likewise serves as a connection to and from the
northeast corner of the City, from Tunnel Avenue to access to north and southbound Highway 101.
The challenge facing Brisbane for minor arterial streets is to evaluate these on a case-by-case basis
relative to the goals, policies and programs, to define how they can be modified to enhance and provide
alternative modes of transportation and to secure funding sources to implement improvements that are
determined to be a priority by the City.
Major Collector Streets
Major collector streets include Humboldt Road, Glen Parkway, a portion of Monterey Street and a portion
of Visitacion Avenue, which connect several local streets within the residential area of Central Brisbane.
The western portions of both Valley Drive in Crocker Park and Mission Blue Drive in the Northeast
Ridge are also classified as major collectors, as is Monarch Drive and the eastern portion of West Hill
Drive, which connect Crocker Park and the Northeast Ridge subareas.
The challenges for the major collector streets are, as stated above for the minor arterials, to define how
they can be modified to enhance and provide alternative modes of transportation and to secure funding
sources to implement improvements.
Local Streets
Local streets serve most of the residential areas of Central Brisbane and the Northeast Ridge. While the
Northeast Ridge is a recent development and the streets were built to meet modern standards, Central
Brisbane’s existing development pattern poses significant challenges in providing separation between
vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians, due to existing street widths and steep topography. These challenges
increase from the lower Central Brisbane streets to the very narrow upper streets. While separate travel
lanes are limited along those streets, the roadway geometry necessitates low vehicle speeds on these
shared roadways, thus mitigating some of the need for wider roadway sections.
VI.1.2 TRANSIT SYSTEMS
Brisbane is served by the following transit systems connecting to regional destinations:
     •     San Mateo County Transit District (SamTrans)
     •     Caltrain
     •     Local shuttle service

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 9 -
Currently in Brisbane, SamTrans runs bus routes along Bayshore Boulevard seven days a week, and the
Bayshore Caltrain station is located at the northern border of the City. Both the bus line and train lines
generally run north-south. Transfers to reach other destinations off these north-south lines generally
involve long wait times and often there are disconnects between the different modes of transportation.
For example, the Bayshore Caltrain station is approximately 1-½ miles from Central Brisbane, and the
SamTrans bus line serving Central Brisbane currently does not connect to the Caltrain station. The stops
between SamTrans and Caltrain at the north end of Brisbane are approximately ½-mile walking distance
apart. Improvement of these connections and development of a multi-modal station at the northern end of
Brisbane are proposed to be implemented as part of the Baylands development.
San Francisco’s Muni Metro Light Rail System was recently extended to near the northern border of
Brisbane, to the southern edge of San Francisco at Bayshore Boulevard and Sunnydale Avenue.
Connectivity to the multi-modal station is anticipated under the Baylands development.
Private and public commuter shuttles provide service to and from Brisbane’s commercial areas of Sierra
Point and Crocker Park and along Old County Road and San Bruno Avenue to regional transit
connections and to the Daly City Bayshore neighborhood. While these shuttle services pick up some of
the slack in the local transit system, significant improvements are needed on a regional basis to begin to
meet the goals outlined in “Transportation 2030” and Brisbane’s own General Plan. Shuttle scheduling
information may be found on the websites www.commute.org and/or www.samtrans.org
VI. 2 TRAFFIC FLOW, CONVENIENCE AND ACCESS
VI.2.1 LEVEL OF SERVICE
Policy C.1         Maintain a level of service on arterial streets that allows Brisbane residents and
businesses to comfortably and safely travel across town and to gain access to Highway 101.
           Program C.1.a Update the mitigation plan that identifies improvements to Bayshore Boulevard
           and other arterial streets to enhance efficiency and maintain an appropriate level of service.
           Program C.1.b Develop a program of traffic impact fees to fund the mitigations in accordance
           with the impacts of new and intensified development and in coordination with the San Mateo
           County Congestion Management Plan, as applicable.
           Program C.1.c In developing an impact fee program, consider the impacts of any development
           proposal on all affected intersections and street segments in relation to the adopted level of
           service standards.
           Program C.1.d Consider a traffic impact fee program for joint-benefit transportation projects in
           cooperation with adjacent cities.
Policy C.2         The level of service for all arterial streets within the City shall not be less than LOS
"D" except for the intersections on Bayshore Boulevard at Old County Road and San Bruno
Avenue, which shall not be less than LOS "C." The two intersections having LOS "C" shall not be
degraded below that level as a result of increased impacts from other intersections within the City
and such impacts shall be mitigated as necessary to maintain the LOS "C" standard at the
identified intersections.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 10 -
VI.2.2 NORTH-SOUTH AND EAST-WEST CORRIDORS
Policy C.3          Plan for an additional east-west corridor to redirect non-destination traffic away
from Bayshore Boulevard and to provide more direct access to Highway 101.
            Program C.3.a Establish an extension of Geneva Avenue, connecting with the Candlestick
            Highway 101 Interchange.
            Program C.3.b Work closely with Caltrans in the design of the Candlestick Highway 101
            Interchange to assure the best connection with the Geneva Avenue Extension.
            Program C.3.c      Require that all east-west corridor rail crossings are separated (i.e.not at-
            grade).
Policy C.4          Continue to upgrade north-south arterial and collector streets while providing the
appropriate level of service.
            Program C.4.a Require the upgrade of Tunnel Avenue to current codes and safety standards.
            Program C.4.b Study Bayshore Boulevard and, as feasible, respecting its classification as a
            principal arterial, implement traffic calming features, pedestrian amenities and landscape design
            elements.
Policy C.5            Investigate and pursue alternative means of access to and egress from Sierra Point
and investigate additional emergency access alternatives.
Policy C.6          Investigate and pursue traffic calming features for Visitacion Avenue, Old County
Road and San Bruno Avenue to provide for greater pedestrian comfort and safety at street
crossings.
VI.2.1 STREET STANDARDS
Policy C.7 Implement established City street standards to provide for adequate traffic flow and
                safe circulation for both existing and new streets.
            Program C.7.a Consult with Caltrans in regard to street standards when a City street is a
            connector or ramp to a State route.
Policy C.8        For local residential streets in Central Brisbane, continue to require a minimum
                   unobstructed street width of 20 feet, as required by the Uniform Fire Code.
               Program C.8.a Implement the adopted minimum width street standard in the Municipal
                   Code, allowing for the granting of exceptions that meet the required findings.
CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 11 -
Policy C.9           The City Engineer shall consider the following factors during plan review as they
apply to residential, residential hillside, and commercial streets:
                                  •    grade
                                  •    topography
                                  •    average lot frontage size
                                  •    number of lots and potential intensity of development
                                  •    maximum block length
                                  •    maximum length of cul-de-sac streets
                                  •    length of street in relation to number of units served
                                  •    turnarounds
                                  •    parking
                                  •    secondary access
            Program C.9.a Continue to implement street development standards that establish requirements
            for right-of -way dedication, street width, length, turnarounds, and access to parcels.
            Program C.9.b Continue to implement street engineering design and construction standards that
            establish requirements for horizontal alignment and vertical alignment, pavement and pavement
            crown, concrete curb, and structural section design.
            Program C.9.c Continue to implement standards for sidewalks, bikeways, signalization, striping,
            and street lighting.
Policy C.10          Require designs for hillside streets to reflect the topography and to minimize
grading and large retaining walls.
            Program C.10.a Consider incorporation of small scale parking bays, rolled curbs, and other
            means of including parking and providing safe clearance on hillside streets.
VI. 3 TRAFFIC SAFETY
VI.3.1 LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS
Policy C.11          Maintain and improve local residential streets to accommodate safe access for
emergency vehicles and evacuation routes for residents.
Policy C.12          As a part of the budget and capital improvement planning process, consider
opportunities to incorporate safety standards and/or widen hillside streets to current city adopted
standards.
Policy C.13          Develop a prioritized program for improvements to existing substandard City
streets to include such things as street widening, turnarounds and the feasibility of secondary
emergency access, and improving on-street parking.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 12 -
            Program C.13.a Investigate the feasibility of undergrounding utilities to mitigate potential traffic
            hazards, such as downed lines in a fire.
            Program C.13.b Consider opportunities and funding to enhance safety on steep streets.
Policy C.14 Post and actively enforce the 25-mile per hour (mph) maximum speed limit in Central
Brisbane and 15 mph on identified street segments near the schools, and investigate creating speed
limit zones lower than 25 mph in other areas of Central Brisbane where appropriate.
Policy C.15 Promote a public awareness campaign regarding speed limits.
VI.3.2       ARTERIAL STREETS
Policy C.16           Maintain traffic flow and continue to improve arterial streets.
            Program C.16.a Limit and control the number and location of driveways into arterial streets.
            Encourage adjacent properties to develop common access. See also Program C.22.2 in Complete
            Streets section.
            Program C.16.b Use landscaped medians and islands whenever possible to direct and channel
            traffic, and to provide safe separation and visual respite.
VI.3.3       TRUCK ROUTES
Policy C.17           Maintain truck routes to avoid impacts on residential areas.
VI.3.5       STREET SIGNAGE
Policy C.18           Provide adequate signage on all streets including street names on at least one corner
of every intersection and advance warning signs for major entries.
VI.3.6       IMPROVEMENTS FUNDING
Policy C.19           Identify and pursue funding sources to implement circulation improvements.
            Program C.19.a Encourage creation of assessment districts where appropriate, for needed
            circulation improvements.
            Program C.19.b Utilize gas tax, sales tax and other funding sources to implement circulation
            improvements.
CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 13 -
VI.4 COMPLETE STREETS
 The state legislature passed The California Complete Streets Act in 2008, which requires that
jurisdictions plan for “Complete Streets” to address the needs of all users.
Brisbane’s roadway infrastructure has largely already been built, with the notable exception of the
Baylands, a development plan of which is undergoing review at the time of this update of the element.
This Complete Streets section focuses on completing existing streets to meet the needs of bicycles,
pedestrians, and transit users. New streets will also be required to be consistent with the element and
provide for Complete Streets, as appropriate to the context.
VI.4.1 COMPLETE STREETS APPLICABILITY AND DESIGN STANDARDS
Policy C.20 The City shall provide for the development of Complete Streets consistent with
Government Code Sections 65040.2 and 65302 and subsequent applicable Complete Streets
legislation) to meet the needs of all users of “streets, roads and highways”. Such users include
bicyclists, children, youth, families, persons with disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial
goods, pedestrians, users of public transportation, seniors, and first responders.
Policy C.21 Integrate Complete Streets infrastructure and design features, such as sidewalks,
bikeways and transit stops, into street design and construction to create safe and inviting
environments for people to walk, bicycle and use public transportation.
            Program C.21.a Review and where needed, update the City’s engineering design standards to
            implement Complete Streets infrastructure elements.
            Program C.21.b Incorporate Complete Streets infrastructure elements into new streets, street
            retrofits and certain maintenance projects to encourage multiple modes of travel, as appropriate
            to the context and determined reasonable and practicable by the City. Depending on the context,
            these elements may include:
            •    Infrastructure that promotes a safe means of travel for all users along the public right-of-
                 way, such as sidewalks, shared use of paths, bicycle lanes, and paved shoulders;
            •    Infrastructure that facilitates safe pedestrian crossings of the right of way, such as accessible
                 curb ramps, crosswalks, refuge islands, and signals to meet the needs of children, people with
                 disabilities and the elderly;
            •    Street design features that promote safe and comfortable travel by pedestrians, bicyclists and
                 users of public transportation, such as traffic calming features and physical buffers between
                 vehicular traffic and other users;
            •    Inclusion of amenities that improve the comfort and addresses the safety needs of pedestrians
                 and bicyclists, such as, but not limited to, signs, pavement markings, pedestrian-scale
                 lighting, benches, seat walls, bike lockers and racks;

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 14 -
            •   Improvements to public transit and multi-modal connections, to enhance City-wide transit
                access and connections to regional destinations;
            •   Minimizing vehicular ingress and egress points on major arterials and consolidating private
                driveway entries to enhance bicycle, pedestrian and automobile safety along these arterials;
            •   Inclusion of street trees and other landscaping features, to enhance the appearance of the
                streetscape and to encourage pedestrian and bicycle use. Landscaping should use San Bruno
                Mountain native plants where feasible. In any case, plants should be non-invasive and
                drought resistant. (See also the Green Streets section of this element.)
            •   Balance on-street parking as appropriate to the context, to promote the Complete Streets Act
                goals and encourage economic vitality. (See also the Parking section of this element.)
            Program C.21.c Where possible, work with MTC to secure regional funding for Complete Streets
            projects.
Policy C.22 Seek to retrofit existing roadways to create Complete Streets.
            Program C.22.a Identify roadways where retrofits may reasonably be accomplished in balance
            with existing and planned land uses, giving priority to arterial and collector streets and to
            projects that would provide greater connectivity between key areas of the City, such as, but not
            limited to, between the Northeast Ridge, Sierra Point and Central Brisbane.
            Program C.22.b Identify roadways where Complete Streets retrofits may provide for enhanced
            place-making and contribute to the City’s vitality.
            Program C.22.c Seek regional, state, and/or federal funding sources to retrofit roadways to
            create Complete Streets.
Policy C.23 For new multifamily, mixed use or commercial development projects subject to
discretionary review that would affect the public right-of-way, incorporate and implement
Complete Streets elements at each stage of the development process as determined reasonable and
practicable by the City.
            Program C.23.a As part of the design review permit process, require documentation of how the
            routine accommodation of bicyclists and pedestrians will be satisfied.
            Program C.23.b As part of the project design review process, ensure that the project objectives
            and purpose are consistent with current MTC directives on Complete Streets and Routine
            Accommodation.
VI.4.3 PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLES
Bicycle and pedestrian travel has become increasingly popular in recent years in the San Francisco Bay
Area, where the weather is mild, and where there has been an increased accommodation of these modes
into circulation networks throughout the region. These are typically modes used for recreation, school
trips, and short- to moderate-distance commute trips. Since they are non-polluting, require relatively low

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 15 -
cost facilities, and contribute to individual health, they are increasingly becoming valuable alternatives to
automobiles and are critical components in the circulation network in contributing to sustainability. They
are also critical modes for incorporation in the circulation network in providing a sense of place,
especially within city centers.
Given the ties of pedestrian and bicycle access to land use, Brisbane’s General Plan includes the policies
and programs that follow in this section as well as companion policies and programs within the land use
and subareas elements.
Brisbane is currently in the process of creating a bicycle and pedestrian master plan that would enhance
its existing network of bikeways and walkways and where possible provide greater connectivity, or
improve existing bikeways and walkways that are tied to the regional network.
Regional Connections
Policy C.24 Provide input to the City and County of San Francisco and San Mateo County in
regional planning efforts to enhance and expand the regional bicycle and pedestrian networks,
including, where appropriate, amendments to regional bicycle and pedestrian plans.
Policy C.25 Continue to Connect Brisbane’s bikeway and pedestrian system to the County and
regional networks.
            Program C.25.a Continue to apply for Transportation Development Act (TDA), successors to
            TDA, and other funding sources.
Safe Routes to School
Policy C.26 Work with the County Congestion Management Agency, C/CAG, and local schools to
develop priorities and implement Safe Routes to School projects consistent with state and federal
legislation.
            Program C.26.a Continue to identify improvement projects and seek funding for Safe Routes to
            School infrastructure improvements.
            Program C.26.b Continue non infrastructure-related activities that encourage walking and
            bicycling to school, through outreach on the City’s website, informational articles in the local
            City news publications, communications through community leaders, partnering with non-profit
            entities, promoting walk and bike to school days, and supporting partnerships with the schools to
            provide education directly to students and parents on the benefits of walking and bicycling to
            school.
            Program C.26.c Develop and promote a traffic safety education program for the schools.
            Program C.26.d Continue to provide a crossing guard program.
Bicycles
Policy C.27 Maximize bicycle access to all areas of the City, as practicable.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 16 -
            Program C.27.a Identify areas of the City where bikeways may be constructed, as both
            recreational and transportation amenities, with the aim of connecting all areas of the City with a
            network of bikeways.
            Program C.27.b Design and install bikeways to meet best current engineering practices.
Policy C.28 Provide for the safety of bicyclists by dedicating bikeways where practicable, by
installing appropriate signing and striping, and by maintaining the pavement.
            Program C.28.a Install as many bikeways as can safely be accommodated and are economically
            feasible.
Policy C.29 Require new development and redevelopment to plan for and construct bikeways
            and/or bicycle parking facilities, as determined reasonable and practicable by the City.
Policy C.30 All new arterial streets and any existing arterials that are improved should provide for
bicycle transportation.
            Program C.30.a As a part of the budget and Capital Improvement Program development, seek
            opportunities to upgrade existing bikeways and to install new bikeways.
Policy C.31           Provide or require bicycle parking facilities at major destination points.
            Program C.31.a Include bicycle lockers in park-and-ride facilities.
            Program C.31.b         Encourage business and employment centers to provide bicycle-parking
            facilities for their employees.
            Program C.31.c Design and install bicycle-parking facilities to meet best current engineering
            practices.
Policy C.32           Provide public information on bicycle transportation.
            Program C.32.a Promote bicycle use through a public information program, at special events,
            and through City publications.
            Program C.32.b Establish an educational program on safe bicycle use.
            Program C.32.c Make bicycle network maps available.
Pedestrians
Policy C.33 Maximize safe pedestrian facilities and access to all areas of the City, as reasonable and
            feasible.
            Program C.33.a Identify sidewalks, walkways, and trails throughout the City to improve with
            pedestrian amenities as funds are made available; and continue to apply for new grant funding.
CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 17 -
            Program C.33.b Consider opportunities to enhance and expand pedestrian access between
            Central Brisbane, the Caltrain station, Sierra Point Marina and other regional destinations and
            transit connections.
            Program C.33.b As part of the budget and Capital Improvement Program preparation, seek
            funding to upgrade and expand the system of pedestrian sidewalks, walkways and trails,
            especially in conjunction with street improvement projects.
            Program C.33.c For newly designed and constructed sidewalks, disallow automobile parking
            thereon; and for existing sidewalks adjacent to rolled or vertical curbs, encourage residents to
            park such that sidewalks are kept clear for pedestrians in accordance with the Americans with
            Disabilities Act (ADA) width standards.
            Program C.33.d Where practicable and where funds are available, establish and improve mid-
            block and block-end, public right-of-way pedestrian paths, in order to provide direct off-street
            pedestrian access between the upper and lower parts of Central Brisbane.
Policy C.34          Require pedestrian amenities with new development and expansion of existing uses,
            as appropriate.
            Program C.34.a Adopt standard requirements for sidewalk improvements along property
            frontages, taking into consideration constraints imposed by topography, and where sidewalks are
            not appropriate, consider in-lieu fees for new development for funding pedestrian amenities
            elsewhere in the City.
            Policy C.34.b Consider accepting sidewalk improvements beyond the frontage of a development
            site as a means to help mitigate traffic and parking impacts.
Transit
 Brisbane has limited transit service, provided by regional agencies. This includes San Mateo County
Transit District (SamTrans), Caltrain, and local shuttle service.
Given the high cost to construct new, fixed, mass transit systems such as BART, Caltrain and even light
rail, there is an emphasis in this element on seeking to develop improved facilities and connections and
improving the service network on the peninsula, with greater Brisbane service. However, the Baylands
draft Specific Plan also includes plans for a multi-modal transit hub along the proposed extension of
Geneva Avenue. This would include connections for Caltrain, SF Muni light rail, SamTrans, Bus Rapid
Transit and various shuttles.
 Transit options are of regional concern and Brisbane fully supports and is involved with the regional
agencies to address these concerns, as reflected in the policies and programs below.
Policy C.35          Seek opportunities to install and improve transit facilities, establish multi-modal
connections and increase the service network.
            Program C.35.a Continue active participation in the implementation of the San Mateo County-
            wide Transportation Plan to improve circulation systems, to develop alternatives to automobile
            dependence and to make transportation-sensitive land use decisions.
CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 18 -
            Program C.35.b Request more frequent scheduling of Caltrain stops at the Bayshore station as
            warranted by demand.
            Program C.35.c Support, improve, and expand transit to serve the business and residential
            communities and provide connections to major transportation hubs.
            Program C.35.d Cooperate with San Mateo County Transit District (SamTrans), and other
            appropriate agencies, to establish bus rapid transit (BRT) systems where practicable.
            Program C.35.e Cooperate with and provide input to transit agencies to provide increased bus
            scheduling to a greater network of destinations (especially to regional destinations, such as work,
            shopping, entertainment centers and medical facilities).
            Program C.35.f Cooperate with and provide input to transit agencies to provide more
            comprehensive transfer connections with other bus routes outside of Brisbane and with other
            transit systems, such as Caltrain and BART.
            Program C.35.g         Work with SamTrans to install improvements at existing bus stops and
            designated routes.
            Program C.35.h Provide information to citizens on the availability of transit.
            Program C.35.i Require new development that are subject to the City’s transportation demand
            measures (TDM) ordinance to also incorporate measures that facilitate Complete Streets
            compliance measures, such as transit stops, shuttle stops, and bicycle facilities.
Policy C.36 Plan for park-and-ride facilities at the Caltrain Station and other major transit stops.
VI.5 TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT
Transportation management includes both transportation systems management (TSM) and transportation
demand management (TDM). TSM is an approach to congestion mitigation that seeks to identify
improvements to enhance the capacity of existing systems through operational measures. TDM includes
strategies and measures that influence travel behaviors to improve the use of transportation system
resources and the mobility and access for users. The underlying aim is to reduce single-occupant vehicle
trips by offering more and better choices. This is especially effective for large employers to provide such
things as shuttle and carpooling services to employees, offering incentives for employees to take transit,
and incorporating physical infrastructure features, such as bike storage and shower and locker facilities, in
the construction of new buildings or improvements to existing buildings.
Policy C.37          Continue participation in the efforts of subregional and regional transportation
agencies to manage transportation systems.
            Program C.37.a Continue active participation in the Congestion Management Program.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 19 -
            Program C.37.b Continue active participation in the Peninsula Traffic Congestion Relief
            Alliance Joint Powers Authority (Commute.org), as a means to cooperatively encourage residents
            and employees to reduce demand on transportation infrastructure.
            Program C.37.c Provide information to citizens, employers, and employees on the alternatives
            to the single-occupant commute vehicle and the benefits of using the alternatives.
            Program C.37.d Provide local incentives for participation in Transportation System Management
            (TSM) and Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs and continue to implement
            same.
            Program C.37.e Require Transportation System Management and Transportation Demand
            Management measures to help mitigate the traffic and parking impacts of development projects.
VI.6 PARKING
The availability of parking in Brisbane varies by the area and time of day. Drivers seeking to park in some
areas of Central Brisbane may experience difficulties due to narrow roads where street parking is limited
by the width of the street, relatively high density of development, and in certain cases a high level of
automobile ownership, or lack of available on-site parking. On the other hand, some of the commercial
areas may be considered to have an over-abundance of parking, especially during off-peak times.
Accordingly, the policies in the section are aimed at achieving the appropriate balance of parking, given
the uses and the locations.
Included in this section is the continuation of minimum parking standards for new development
throughout Brisbane, but also the establishment of maximum parking standards. This is intended to
minimize paving to address stormwater runoff concerns, heat island effects, glare, and aesthetic concerns.
Policy C.38          Maintain as much on-street parking in residential Brisbane as can be
accommodated safely.
            Program C.38.a Periodically review residential parking requirements in the Zoning Ordinance,
            to maintain parking availability in Brisbane’s residential districts and to ensure consistency with
            the latest adopted Housing Element.
            Program C.38.b Seek means to encourage residents to use their garages for vehicles rather than
            other purposes.
Policy C.39          Improve public parking opportunities in the Central Brisbane business district and
other commercial areas, as appropriate.
            Program C.39.a Consider opportunities to add public parking to underserved areas and
            investigate establishing a public parking lot or lots.
            Program C.39.b Pursue, as feasible and needed, a downtown parking assessment district.
Policy C.40 Maintain an appropriate amount of off-street parking in commercial areas.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 20 -
            Program C.40.a Review the parking regulations for office, commercial and industrial uses and
            consider setting minimum and maximum parking standards where transit alternatives are readily
            available.
Policy C.41 Consider opportunities to add public parking to underserved areas and to provide
parking/staging areas at public trailheads.
Policy C.42 Consider updates to the Brisbane Municipal Code to require parking lot solar canopies
for energy generation and/or parking lot shade trees to reduce heat island effects on commercial
development projects.
VI.7 CIRCULATION AND LAND USE
Land use and circulation are directly related on the local and regional level.
Brisbane will continue its work on a regional level to enhance the circulation system, especially as it
relates to the Priority Development Area (PDA) of the Baylands and the planning of land uses there.
The land use and circulation policies in this General Plan also focus on ways to reduce the negative
effects of automobile traffic at the local level on the City's residents and businesses. In essence, the
policies are aimed at:
     •      Providing for a mix of jobs, housing and commercial services in the City to reduce the number of
            trips outside the community to obtain essential services.
     •      Providing for opportunities for pedestrians and bicyclists to reach all areas of the City and thus
            reduce dependence on the automobile for local trips.
     •      Generating a mix of uses to support transit facilities.
     •      Accommodating uses with differing peak hour trips, to minimize impacts on existing and new
            streets and highways.
     •      Linking the development capacity of vacant lands to potential for provision of local transportation
            and circulation, the provision of transit facilities and participation in transportation systems
            management programs.
     •      Assuring adequate and safe access to properties.
The following policies address the relationship between land use and circulation:
Policy C.43          Consider potential traffic impacts and emergency evacuation in making land use
decisions.
Policy C.44          For vacant subareas without existing infrastructure, require circulation plans and
traffic impact analyses to be submitted as a part of any development application.
Policy C.45 Consider the impacts of transit facilities and Transportation Demand Management
Programs in making land use decisions.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 21 -
Policy C.46          Ensure legal access to properties in making land use decisions.
            Program C.46.a In reviewing building permit, subdivision and other development applications,
            distinguish whether the subject property has access from public streets, private streets, or
            easements. Obtain from applicants evidence of a legal right of access to their properties.
            Require that such access meet applicable standards.
Policy C.47          In conjunction with new development and expansion of existing uses, require that
new streets and any existing private streets serving the property be improved to City standards and
offered for dedication as public streets.
            Program C.47.a Continue to accept offers to dedicate existing private roadways as public
            streets, where they meet City standards.
            Program C.47b Where appropriate, require exactions or impact fees for new development and
            improvements to property to improve substandard streets to minimum safety standards.
            Program C.47.c Investigate requiring secondary access for long cul-de-sac streets.
            Program C.47.d Investigate requiring mid-block turnarounds on all streets with cul-de-sacs
            longer than 500 feet.
            Program C.47.e Investigate requiring that substandard intersections be improved, in conjunction
            with new development, to provide adequate turning radius.
            Program C.47.f Consider an impact fee program to fund acquisition of additional rights-of-way,
            widening of existing streets to provide additional on-street parking and construction of other
            safety improvements.
            Program C.47.g Continue to require parking and safety improvements in conjunction with new
            residential development and major additions or remodels that meet defined thresholds.
            Program C.47.h Encourage the formation of assessment districts where appropriate, for needed
            circulation improvements.
Policy C.48           Monitor land use decisions under consideration by adjacent jurisdictions and their
potential effect on Brisbane's streets. Comment through the public process and request mitigations
as appropriate.
Policy C.49          Monitor regional developments and their effects on Highway 101 and Bayshore
Boulevard to evaluate circulation impacts. Comment through the public process and request
mitigations as appropriate.
CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 22 -
VI.8 GREEN STREETS
Green Streets refers to the inclusion of landscape elements into the street right-of-way to help reduce
storm water runoff by both interception and infiltration of rainwater and biological treatment of storm
water by those landscape elements. The intended results are to help ease the burden, or flow volume, on
storm water systems and to provide for improved water quality for that water that does enter the storm
water systems. The specific landscape elements may take a variety of forms including, but not limited to,
bio-treatment planters, rain gardens, street trees and other plantings.
Since the intent is to address stormwater quality, Green Streets elements may also be used in
demonstrating compliance with the State Water Board provisions for low impact development (LID) and
“Green Infrastructure”, subject to specific state provisions and design criteria where applicable. Low
impact development is aimed at mimicking predevelopment hydrology by minimizing impervious cover,
then bio-treating and infiltrating stormwater close to its source.
Green Streets are also a means to enhance the pedestrian experience of streetscapes and may be used in
conjunction with “road diets”, to reduce existing, excessively wide roadways to provide for traffic
calming and overall safer roadways. Given that, depending on the context, Green Streets may be a
component of Complete Streets, in that these landscape features enhance the pedestrian and bicycle
experience and thereby encourage all modes of travel.
Finally, Green Streets provide other ecological benefits, such as reduced heat island effects, improved air
quality and wildlife islands or corridors.
The following policies and programs address Green Streets and are intended to integrate Green Streets
principles and designs into the roadway network when possible:
Policy C.50 Incorporate Green Streets best practices, as appropriate to the context, for new streets
and street retrofits, to enhance the pedestrian and bicyclist experience, to promote low impact
development (LID) consistent with state water board initiatives to reduce the impacts of
development on storm water resources and to enhance the natural environment. (See also the
Complete Streets section)
            Program C.50.a Continue to evaluate and update the approved plant species list and standards
            for streetscape plantings.
            Program C.50.b Consider where Green Streets retrofits may be incorporated into capital
            improvement projects and seek funding sources for Green Streets projects.
Policy C.51 For new multifamily, mixed use or commercial development projects subject to
discretionary review, as part of the design review permit process, incorporate Green Streets, as
determined reasonable and practicable by the City.
Policy C.52 In the design and approval of a specific Green Street, the following factors will be
considered, as may be applicable:
     •      Context and design intent for the area or site;

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 23 -
     •      Site and environmental constraints such as soil type, sun and wind exposure, presence of
            utilities, view sight lines and view corridors;
     •      On-going water needs and drought tolerance;
     •      Diversity of plantings to reduce the potential for mass die-offs due to pests or disease which
            may impact specific species;
     •      Adequate soil volume and location of the species within a storm water treatment unit, where
            applicable.
VI.9 ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION MODES
Alternative transportation modes in this section refer to alternatives to fossil-fuel vehicles which have not
already been addressed in the Complete Streets section, under the traditional categories of public transit,
biking and walking. Use of alternative transportation modes has a historical precedent in Brisbane with
such things as rail-spur lines for goods movement and the more recent City-sponsored car sharing service.
The programs in this section address continuation of the historic technology of rail lines for goods
movement as well as incorporation of more recent and emerging technologies and sharing-based services
into Brisbane’s circulation network.
Policy 53 Maintain existing and incorporate new alternative transportation modes and
infrastructure into the circulation network as reasonable and practicable.
            Program 53.a Consider revisions to the Brisbane Municipal Code to require vehicle charging
            stations for development projects.
            Program 53.b Encourage the use of electric, fuel cell and other clean energy vehicles and provide
            charging stations at public facilities and encourage installation of charging stations at existing
            private sites, as reasonable and feasible.
            Program 53.c Seek grant funding opportunities and other funding sources to install publicly
            accessible vehicle charging stations and other infrastructure to support and enhance alternative
            means of transportation.
            Program 53.d Encourage the maintenance of existing rail-spur lines to continue their use in
            transporting goods. (See also policies and programs under the Transit section for public
            transportation)
            Program 53.e Monitor and consider new technological advances such as driverless shuttles and
            how sharing based transportation (car and bike sharing) can be accommodated in the City’s
            circulation system.

CITY OF BRISBANE
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Adopted by City Council September 17, 2015, Resolution 2015-38
Page - 24 -
REFERENCES
     1. See also, Brisbane Traffic Management and Capacity Study Update.   Wilbur Smith Assoc.,
            April 1993.
     2. See Chapter X, Community Health and Safety, for more information on circulation-related safety
            and utility issues.
     3. See Brisbane Baylands Draft Environmental Impact Report, Chapter 4.N, State Clearinghouse
            #2006022136, ESA, June 2013.
